---
layout: full_article
title: "MISMATCH ENGLISH EDUCATION IN INDONESIA"
author: "Jos  Bire"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-335 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-335"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-335"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MISMATCH ENGLISH EDUCATION IN INDONESIA Jos Bire, FKIP Undana-Kupang</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak: </span><span class="font1">Tulisan hasil penelitian ini bertujuan menolong guru Bahasa Inggris di Indonesia untuk melihat tujuan pendidikan Bahasa Inggeris dalam beberapa decade sejak kemerdekaan Indonesia dari Belanda di tahun 1945 hingga kini. Tulisan ini berpusat pada data menyangkut tujuan, konten, metode mengajar dan evaluasi pengajaran/pembelajaran Bahasa Inggris sebagai bahasa asing pada kurikulum sekolah menengah atas. Diskusi pada tulisan ini menitik beratkan pandangan ketidak cocokan pada ke empat komponen pengajaran Bahasa Inggris di Indonesia. Delapan kurikulum dikaji pada penelitian ini, kecuali kurikulum terkini, yaitu kurikulum 2006 yang sedang diimplementasikan sekarang ini. Diskusi ini terfokus pada masalah ketidaksesuaian (Mismatch) empat komponen yang tertera dalam kurikulum dalam arti pengimplementasian proses pendidikan Bahasa Inggris pada beberapa decade. Tulisan ini juga dapat berfungsi sebagai katalisator untuk mengarahkan dan manguatkan pemahaman guru-guru Bahasa Inggris dalam membuat persiapan mengajar nanti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract: </span><span class="font1">This writing aims at helping English teaches in Indonesia to view the objective outcome of English language education in Indonesia across the decades since the nation’s independence from the Dutch in 1945. It concentrates on data concerning objectives, content, methods of teaching and the evaluation of teaching/learning English as a foreign language across Senior High School curricula. The discussion emphasizes the evidence of mismatch in the four components of TEFL. Eight curricula are under critical investigation here in the research, except the most recent one namely the 2006 curriculum as it is at present being implemented. The discussion pinpoints a discovery where there has been a case of mismatch in terms of the implementation of English education process across the decades. This may in turn functions as a catalyst to guide and to empower English teachers in their future teaching/lesson plan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1">Objective, Content, Methods, Evaluation of TEFL, Mismatch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This writing deals with the teaching of English for Indonesian Senior High Schools covering a span of 63 years from post independence in 1945 right through to 2008. The country has already implemented nine curricula known as the 1950 curriculum, 1958, 1962, 1968, 1975, 1984, 1994, 2004 and the current one being the 2006 curriculum (Bire, 2003; 2007). When Indonesia first took control of its own education system in 1945, almost all study programs at every level were Dutch oriented. It took five years before Indonesia managed to develop its own educational orientation. Interestingly enough, Indonesia people throughout the archipelago speak and understand English rather than Dutch despite the reality that the nation was colonized by the Dutch for 350 years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The pertinent question in this writing is whether or not there is a case of mismatch in terms of objective and outcome of teaching/learning English as a foreign language in Indonesia. The investigative question is applicable to all the implemented curricula from the 1950 curriculum right through to the 2004 curriculum. The current curriculum, 2006, is excluded in the discussion in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">paper because of its current status of being implemented and will continue to be in operation until 2009/2010 academic year (BNSP, 2006:iii). The materials highlighted are those designed for SMA in relation to: the objective of TEFL, the content of English being taught as a foreign language, methods of TEFL as well as the evaluation recommended in the curricula. The final examination conducted in May 2008 marks the end of the implementation 2004 curriculum.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULA ACROSS DECADES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">There are four major points to be critically investigated in the discussion about the ‘how’ English language being taught as a foreign language in high schools in Indonesia (SMA). They are </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">objective, contents, methods and evaluation. </span><span class="font1">For every curriculum under investigation each of these four points will be highlighted. The success or failure of Teaching/Learning English as a foreign language in SMA will be pinpointed in the discussion on each of these four major points.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>The 1950 and the 1958 SMA English Curricula</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Objective</span><span class="font1">: The 1950 and the 1958 curricula are similarly considered to be old curricula and both equally implement similar approaches to teaching English as a foreign language (TEFL) in Indonesian High School. That being the case both curricula are grouped together under the same sub-heading for the purpose of discussion in this paper. English as a foreign language taught within the context of Indonesian education system in 1950 and 1958 were stated in the 1950 and 1958 curricula (Bire, 1996). These curricula were planned in Jakarta, the Capital of Indonesia, and subsequently implemented at high school (SMA) throughout the country. The objective outcome of the TEFL within these curricula as deduced from teaching/learning materials in the said curricula is to enhance reading skills. The enhancement of reading skills as intended in these curricula is to help Indonesian students to be able to read books written in English language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Contents</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">:</span><span class="font1"> The old curricula, the 1950 and the 1958, consisted of teaching materials which are basically lessons on English grammar. Teachers of English language throughout the country have freedom to develop their own lesson plans on the basis of items listed in the curricula. The main difference between the 1950 curriculum and the 1958 curriculum is that the later contains list of items to be taught where as the former does not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Method:</span><span class="font1"> Method as a deliberate adopted strategy to achieve objective outcome also plays its role in the field of teaching English as a foreign language. There are various methods that could be used in teaching a language and in these curricula the teachers of English as a foreign language in Indonesia used a ‘grammar-translation method’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">…. The method of teaching English used by these instructors though it varied somewhat among them, tended to emphasis the formal study of grammar and the translation of written English passage into the local instructional language which was either Dutch or Indonesian (Murray </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font1">. 1968: 289).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The statement above indicates that the method of teaching English as a foreign language in Indonesia during the period of 1950 and 1958 curricula was grammar-translation oriented. Grammar-translation method was the chosen method to achieve the objective outcome of the curricula which was basically ‘reading oriented’ namely to help Indonesian students to be able to read books written in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Evaluation:</span><span class="font1"> Evaluation at the end of study period, testing students’ English language comprehension after three years of study, reveals that grammar translation method had been the dominant factor in the whole process (Bire, 1996). Even the evaluation does not match with the objective of teaching. The following table shows the four points that are taken into consideration in evaluating the TEFL in the country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning curriculums in 1950 and 1958</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Items of Curriculums 1950 and 1958</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reality</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading ability</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Grammar Oriented</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Grammar-Translation Method</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Evaluation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Grammar</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">On each of the four points tabulated in the table above there is apparent case of mismatch between teaching and the objective of teaching English as a foreign language inherent in both 1950 and 1958 curricula. While the objective of TEFL is the enhancement of reading ability, the method of TEFL applied and the evaluation process were all conducted on the basis of grammar translation approach.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>The 1962 and 1968 Curricula</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The 1962 and the 1968 curricula were known as ‘new curriculum’ and ‘a new modified curriculum’ respectively. Due to the fact that both curricula were labeled within the same category, ‘new’, and both possess strikingly similar process of application, these curricula are grouped together under one sub-heading for the purpose of discussion in this paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Objective:</span><span class="font1"> The 1962 and the 1968 curricula known respectively as ‘new curriculum’ and ‘a new modified curriculum’ have the same objective as that of 1950 and 1958 curricula discussed earlier, namely the enhancement of reading skills. It is intended to help Indonesian graduates to be able to read 90% of books and other materials printed in English that are housed in the libraries throughout the country. This objective outcome is specifically stated in the 1968 curriculum (Depdikbud R.I., a: Bire, 1966).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Contents</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">:</span><span class="font1"> During the period of the implementation of the1962 and 1968 curricula, the government provided text books for high schools. All departments are required to use the materials made available as laid out in the text books (Bire, 1966:103). It was clearly stated that all high school students in all streams, -Humanities, Arts and Science- are required to use the same text books and materials provided by the government. Materials contained in the text books, however, were basically structure oriented. Thus, even though the objective is to enhance reading skills the materials provided were basically structure oriented and therefore, indicates a case mismatch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Methods:</span><span class="font1"> In order to achieve the goals of teaching English in Indonesia, the government preferential option was to favor the oral or the audio lingual approach for TEFL (Bire, 1966:103). Unfortunately, there was no text books yet made available to correspond this methodological approach, this approach was tried only at the senior high school level (Tjokrosujoso, 1944:4). When the text books became available, it was apparent that materials contained in the text books were apparently structure and reading oriented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For the 1998 curriculum in particular where English language as a subject was made obligatory, the curriculum mentioned English as a tool to develop and deepen the students’ knowledge that aimed at:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Educating students to be careful, diligent and systematic and to enable them to use active and passive English for social and cultural department.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Helping students to continue their study at a higher educational institution and enable them to write and read English books; reading skill, however, was the main aim.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Making oral and written international communications easy (Depdikbud R.I., a, 1968: 29).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The quotation above indicates that both the 1962 an the 1968 curricula implement what is known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Direct Method, </span><span class="font1">often referred to as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Salatiga Approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Evaluation:</span><span class="font1"> The evaluation process within this curriculum was based on structure and reading oriented (Bire, 1966). This is due to the fact that the teachers at schools throughout the country were products of the old fashioned curriculum, grammar translation methodological approach. Naturally the way they teach would reflect and replicate what they themselves have learnt. It is noticeable that there were some teachers who chose to use direct method. However, they were faced with difficulties at the end of academic year because materials for final examination was based on structure and reading oriented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning curriculums in 1962 and 1968</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning Curriculums 1962 and 1968</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reality</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading ability</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Grammar/structure Oriented</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Direct Method/ Salatiga Approach</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Evaluation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Grammar and reading oriented</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Table 2 above indicates a case of mismatch between teaching and the objective of teaching English as a foreign language inherent in both 1962 and 1968 curricula. Each of the four points: “objective of TEFL”, contents of TEFL”, Methods of TEFL”, and “Evaluation” in both, 1962 and 1968 curricula should all be directed to its desired objective, “Reading Ability Oriented.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>The 1975 Curriculum</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The 1975 curriculum was endorsed after the evaluation on the previous Indonesian national education program. The endorsement in the government policy was made with the intention to increase the quality of education nationally, an innovational measure in the educational system. This is to respond to the demands and immediate needs within the community. This curriculum was introduced to produce graduates who would be equipped with necessary skills and abilities relevant and appropriately to respond the most urgent and immediate needs within the community. There are five important factors of consideration behind the introduction of the 1975 curriculum:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The result of the analysis of the National Education assessment led the Department of Education and Culture to revise the direction of national education.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The policy of Indonesian Government for National education as stated in the broad outline of the state policy.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The existence of new ideas during the first Five Years Development plan inspired the educational system.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Innovation for efficient and effective teaching-learning learning system.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The complaints for the society about the quality of the school graduates (The General Guide of the 1975 Curriculum in Rudiyanto, 1988)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Convincing arguments that underpin the idea that necessitates the introduction of the 1975 national curriculum were clearly stated in the curriculum itself as a package. Its explanatory manual (Rudiyanto, 1988, Nababan, 1984, Hartoyo, 2006) indicates that the development of the curriculum was intended to enhance Indonesian Educational quality in terms of the students’ ability, knowledge and desire to pursue further and higher education in science and technology relevant for their future field of employment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Objective:</span><span class="font1"> The fundamental aim of teaching English as a foreign language in high schools in Indonesia as clearly stated in the 1975 curriculum itself is to enhance students’ reading ability (Depdikbud, b 1975). It corresponds with the points elucidated by Tomlison (1987:1): “(1). To enable students to develop a reading competence appropriate for the study in the tertiary education and (2). To give students working knowledge of English” This objective was adopted as stated in the light of the importance of English language as the primary foreign language in Indonesia dominating trades, transportation, foreign affairs, science and technology. Alishahbana (1990:315) stated:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile after World War II through the unification of the world by the fast development of air transportation, tremendous expansion of electro-communication and by the spread of printed materials, the English language has spread tremendous as never before and become the first obligatory foreign language in high schools in many parts of the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This has been the case in Indonesia since the independence in 1945 where English was taught as the firt obligatory foreign language in Indonesian high schools (Alishahbana, 1990:320). Furthermore, Nababan (1984:162), in quoting Ministerial Decree number 096/1967, stated that the decree in question makes a specific reference to the function and objective of teaching English in Indonesian High Schools exactly the same as that deliberated by Alishahbana. However, as observed by Nababan, the expressed objective contained in the ministerial decree was not conducive to the desired objective outcome due to the fact that greater and primary emphasis was still on ‘grammar/ structure oriented’. Hence, concerning the functions and objectives of English language teaching in secondary schools it only states that the objectives of English language teaching are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effective reading ability;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ability to understand spoken English;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;writing ability;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speaking ability. (Nababan, 1984, 162).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Contents:</span><span class="font1"> Teaching materials in the 1975 curriculum were prepared in a way that they are contextual and reflect the language level of the students. Each individual teacher is advised to follow the sequential order of topical materials laid out in the curriculum and to match each subtopics of the lesson plan with his/her specific defined objective and or interest. The curriculum materials were described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Information in Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian language) about English grammar and vocabulary.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focused on controlled practice of structure</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on language form</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Text contrived to illustrate language points</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Activities made as easy as possible for the learner</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many activities testing the practice points of a unit</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No use made of authentic materials</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No materials designed to develop communication skills</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No discovery activities</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on increasing the students knowledge of perspective grammar and vocabulary</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation frequently used as aid to learning</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most English texts and examples in semi-formal, neutral expository style</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Topic and linguistic content entirely prescribed by the curriculum</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No existence reading or listening (Tomlinson, 1987: 3)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">On the basis of the description above it is evidently apparent that English language teaching materials in the 1975 curriculum were basically </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Reading and Structure oriented </span><span class="font1">(Bire, 1993: 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Methods:</span><span class="font1"> The teaching of English as a foreign language using the 1975 curriculum follows the ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Eclectic approach’, </span><span class="font1">with special emphasis on the improving of the efficiency of teaching learning process (Rudiyanto, 1988: 52). It means that teachers are required to use a combination of related methods of TEFL. In addition to this, Rudiyanto claims that the curriculum only provides guidelines and but not the details of how to implement the approach. In normal practice in the curriculum would have the following methodological are features:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eclectric</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mixtures of Audio-Lingual, Grammar Translation, Structuralist and Situational Approaches</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on accuracy</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rule and practice oriented</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on formal learning</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Teacher centered</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Learning by listening and reading information about the language</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No exposure to authentic English</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frequent correction in all lessons</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No teaching of communication skills</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frequent use of choral reading aloud and choral drilling</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on class testing</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus on remember knowledge and on imitation (Tomlinson, 1987: 2)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The above reference shows that each teacher tends to interpret the eclectic approach from his or her point of view, knowledge and experience. However, due to the lack of details and instruction about the ‘how’ to implement the eclectic approach, the nation was not able to establish uniformity of lesson plan and strategy of delivery, resulting in each teachers making his/her own strategy consisting of any combination of some of the methodological features stated above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Evaluation:</span><span class="font1"> The 1975 curriculum recommended the type of test that measures the students’ achievements. For this aim, the teachers are advised to follow the evaluation guidelines provided by the department of education and culture, consisting of the elements of the purpose of evaluation and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the kinds of evaluation to be used. The recommended kinds of evaluation are the form of formative, summative, placement and diagnostic tests that comprise the cognitive domains of recall, comprehension and application (Rudiyanto, 1988). Furthermore, tests could be conducted in the form of written essays or objective test which is conducted either orally or in the written form.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The objective test was the highly recommended test in the curriculum. This is varied in form from the multiple choice test, true false statements, matching statements, short answer to question test and completion item test. In relation to the final evaluation, should majority of the students fail, (60% or more) the lesson must be repeated for all students. If there are less than 60% of the students fail, only those who fail may be required to repeat the lesson individually. But if more that 75% of the students passed, then those who fail within that particular group may continue to take next lesson with the provision that they will be given extra attention by the teacher (Depdikbud R.I.b, 1975). The final grade is gained by the average of formative and summative test results.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">During the period of the implementation of the 1975 curriculum both teachers and students became concerned about the stark reality that the level of English proficiency at schools and at universities throughout the country was inadequate, fall short from the objective outcome set out by the government policy. This concern and awareness led to the development of the 1984 curriculum. Among the main critics of the 1975curriculum was the government Department of Education And Culture (Depdikbud):</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dalam kurikulum 1975, ternyata struktur yang menjadi pusat perhatian dan inti kurikulum. Semua penyajian pelajaran berkisar sekitar struktur itu. Untuk mewujudkan pendekatan komunikatif diatas, dalam kurikulum ini penguasaan/ dominasi struktur dilepaskan dan bahasa Inggris disajikan sebagai alat komunikasi secara ilmiah (Depdikbud R.I. c, 1986: 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It appears that in the 1975 curriculum “structure” was the core of the curriculum and was the central focus. The entire lesson plan is about structure. In order to implement the communicative approach the structure dominated lesson plan was abandoned and English is taught as a tool for authentic communication (The writer’s translation).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning curriculum 1975</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning Curriculums 1975</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reality</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading ability</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading and structure Oriented</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Eclectic method</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Evaluation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">-Structure oriented</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Table 3 shows how each of the four items in the 1975 curriculum are interconnected. It is obvious that the aim of teaching was still reading oriented as in the case of previous curricula. The contents of TEFL deviated from its objective namely reading to become reading and structure oriented. Since the Eclectic Method was used in this curriculum deviation from its objective appears greater that it seems. The evaluation is still structure oriented. Therefore, the four points above show a mismatch for the TEFL in Indonesia based on the 1975 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The 1984 and the 1994 Curricula</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The 1984 National curriculum endorsed at the beginning of 1985 consists of four main sources: 1. The 1984 Senior High School National Curriculum, Basis, Programs and Development, covers general ideas of the curriculum, its implementation, the basis, program, the objectives and the development principles of senior high school education.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The instructional guide and the management of the 1984 Senior High School Curriculum deals with the teaching program, curriculum process, administration and supervision.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The second instructional guide for the senior high school counseling career is comprised of an introduction, a basic counseling and a career package.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The basis course outline (BCO) for each lesson comprises of an introduction to the program, some important notes for the implementation of the 1984 curriculum, the structure of the program and the course outlines.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The curriculum is based on a credit system, system that offers two distinctive program courses: ‘Core subjects’ and ‘Electives’. “Core subjects” comprises of 15 subjects which are compulsory for all students and are offered in the first and the second semesters. In the third semester through the sixth semester, some of the subjects were dropped and the students may choose electives which may reflect the students’ areas of interest and or natural talent. The amount of credits that can be gained by students would be the same for all, even for those who dropped some of the core subjects. This is due to the fact that, while they drop some of the subjects on the one hand, they pick up the difference by doing selective subjects on the other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Having completed the first second semesters the students may proceed into the third semester choosing either package A or package B. Package A consists of program streams such as: (i). Physics, (ii). Biology, (iii). Social science, and (iv) Art and Culture. These prepare the students for tertiary education (Depdikbud R. I. d. 1984). Alternately, package B prepares students to enter the workforce after leaving school. While package A was realistic, practical and achievable, the implementation of package B which was designed for students to pursue their education at nondegree institutions or to enter into workforce was unrealistic and doomed to fail due to lack of funds. There is yet another argument opposing the implementation of this curriculum. Nationally, there are less than 50% of high school graduates gained entry into universities (Indonesia, 1990:99). Consequently they have no choice but to plunge themselves into workforce even though being certificated package A stream. The 1984 curriculum recommends English language as a compulsory subject to be taught at senior high schools just as in the case of the previous curricula.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The 1994 curriculum </span><span class="font1">was endorsed in the academic year 1994/1995 in response to the decree of Ministry of Education and Culture No. 061/U/1993 dated 25 February 1993 (Depdikbud R.I. d, 1994). This curriculum applied similar methodological approach, communicative approach, as that of 1984 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Objective</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">The curriculum has only one common objective for all program streams. The students must possess both the willingness and the ability to use English, especially in reading, comprehension, speaking and in writing essays up to 4000 words demonstrating knowledge of complex English sentence structure (Depdikbud R. I. c, 1986). Ideally, the communicative principle implemented in the 1984 curriculum to be based on the goal of learning English (Tomlinson 1987). This means the teacher is to act as a facilitator, an independent participant, an organizer, a guide, a researcher, a needed analyst, a counselor and a group process manager as required in the communicative approach. However, all the aforementioned ideas are considered to be barriers for the English Language teacher in Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The English language teachers in Indonesia have all been educated in the structural behaviouristic Audio-Lingual method of TEFL. They have been ‘indoctrinated’ in the drill method of teaching English that they might feel disoriented if they had to use communicative textbook like </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">In Touch </span><span class="font1">(Nababan, 1984: 161).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The objective of teaching English as a foreign language (TEFL) according to the 1994 curriculum is that: at the end of the secondary education students would have gained skills in reading, understanding, speaking and writing essays in English of self-selected topics that reflect students’ interest and experience as well as a displayed wealth of vocabulary and knowledge of structure. Therefore, the main aim of the TEFL is reading ability that includes only language skills.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Contents</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">The suggested way of presenting materials based on the communicative approach are the group activities, language games and role plays (Savigon, 1983 in Richards et al., 1990: 81). Linguists such as Finnochiaro and Brumfit suggest the presentation of brief dialogue, homework assignments and oral evaluation (Richards et al., 1990: 81). The 1984 curriculum does not contain language games or similar activities. On the contrary, the presentation of structure in this curriculum is similar to the grammar-oriented approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The scope of English materials in the 1994 curriculum contained of integrated skills of reading, listening, speaking and writing with greater emphasis on the reading skill (Bire, 1996: 123). Other aspects of language such as structure, vocabulary, pronunciation and spelling are included in the teaching to support the four language skills that are presented in the scopes of discussions themes in the BCO.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Methods of TEFL</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">A literature review of the national high school basic curriculum shows that the TEFL in Indonesia prior to 1984 was grammar-translation oriented, that is, teaching of English was not communication oriented. The ministry of Education and Culture recognized the inefficiency of the 1975 curriculum and officially implemented a new policy to replace that curriculum. Accordingly, the government of Indonesia changed the practical teaching of English in Indonesia to concentrate more on both form and function in communication. Consequently, the national curriculum ideas, the form and function were implemented (Depdikbud R.I. c, 1986). The 1984 Curriculum that was implemented to replace the 1975 curriculum was based on communicative approach which deals with assumptions, beliefs and ideas developed from a theory of language as a tool of communication (Richards </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font1">., 1990). This approach which is well known and widely used in language teaching is based on ideas from British and American linguists, John Firth (1972); M.A.K. Hallliday, (1970,1973); Dell Hymes, (1972) and John Gumperz, (1972). This approach was chosen as a result of dissatisfaction with the previous approaches.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The communicative approach can be identified by its characteristics as. Firstly, Littlewood (1987: 1) defines the approach as one that demands from learners the ability to use language in real communication. It concentrates on the use and the appropriateness rather than simply on the structures. Secondly, the communicative approach puts greater emphasis on learners’ needs. With this in mind, the communicative approach places a high value on “authentic” language and “authentic” communicative behavior. Thirdly, it focuses on how language is learned and gives weight to sub-conscious as well as conscious acquisition of language. The fourth, it proposes a wide range of teaching and learning activities. Lastly, the teacher’s role is crucial and monitoring the students’ activities. To support the communicative approach, a teacher is expected to be creative in organizing exercises and activities as described in the ten principles to clarify the ideas of the communicative approach by Freeman (1986: 131-135).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are different approaches for the implementation of the communicative approach (i). The communicative approach leads to specific objectives in the domain of reading, writing, listening or speaking (Richards </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font1">, 1990:73), but the 1984 curriculum included two other domains namely structure and vocabulary (Depdikbud R.I. c, 1986). These two are actually belonged in the domain of structural approach (Richards et al, 1990:3-4). In the context of EFL, these two domains belong to the aspect of conscious learning (Dullay et al, 1982: 11; Littlewood in Das, 1985: 1). Hence one can see that the 1984 curriculum, while it is designed to focus on communicative approach, it is in fact still show its roots in the structural approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Method used in TEFL (the 1984 Curriculum)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Methods/ways of teaching</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Language Element</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oral and written exercises</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Structure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Explanation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Exercise</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Questions and answers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Reading</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">11.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Explanation Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Application exercise Demonstration Discussions</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Questions and answers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Vocabulary</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">12.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">13.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">14.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">15.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Dramatization Explanation Exercise Demonstration</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Speaking</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">16.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Task Exercise</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Writing</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The 1994 curriculum was implemented with some modifications in the form, content and presentation. This curriculum is user friendly in helping teachers to be creative in preparing lesson plans and teaching activities. The approach used is communicative, the same as that in the previous curriculum but with more emphasis on language skills rather than on components of language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Evaluation:</span><span class="font1"> The 1984 curriculum recommends the following assessment in the TEFL:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Written test : Objective</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Subjective</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oral</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dramatization</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Role play</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Homework</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Compairing the two types of tests, written and oral tests, written test is favored in comparison to oral test at the ratio of 2:1 (Bire, 1993: 28-29). Even the evaluation recommended in the communicative approach is based on the accuracy and fluency of the language, the recommended tests in the 1984 curriculum, BCO, show that 66% of the whole evaluation is given in a written form. Therefore, the evaluation of the fluency of using the language is overlooked in the curriculum</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">while structure and reading evaluations are favored in the curriculum and in its implementation (Bire, 1993: 34;1996: 131).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The 1994 curriculum used integrative evaluation whereas the 1984 curriculum used discrete evaluation. Even evaluation in this curriculum is considered integrative, listening and speaking skills were excluded and Reading and structure still dominates the evaluation exactly as what took place in the previous curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table5.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning curriculums in 1984 and 1994</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning Curriculums 1984 and 1994</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reality</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading ability</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading and grammar Oriented</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Approach/Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Communicative Approach</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Evaluation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-Reading and grammar</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Table 5 shows a mismatch among the items provided concerning the implementation of 1984 and the 1994 English curricula. The objective is reading ability contents provided TEFL deals with reading and grammar, Approach and method of TEFL deals with communicative approach and the evaluation deals with reading and grammar. There is a match between materials and the evaluation of TEFL, but the object and the approach/ methods of the TEFL are different. Therefore, the teaching of English this decade was considered mismatch.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>The 2004 Curriculum</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Competency- Based curriculum (CBC) for Junior and Senior high schools was utilized when the 2004 curriculum was introduced to replace the 1994 curriculum. CBC started with competencybased teaching/learning assumptions as: a systematic approach to teaching and learning benefits learners and self, learning is personal, teaching profile is first than subject matter follows, teaching is a rewarding process, risks are worth taking, the development takes courage and flexibility process is the most desirable attributes in the process. Due to autonomy granted to regency, regional government take part in curriculum development. Teaching learning process starts with identifying students’ need, developing learners’ basic capabilities, and developing teaching materials based on indicators to be used as guide to prepare examination questions based on students’ competencies. Students’ competencies are continually examined and, therefore, remedial and enrichment teachings are needed for educational acceleration. Thus, this curriculum shows learners’ individual and collective characteristics, it shows learning result orientation, it uses various methods, it uses educative resources and reaches competency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Language teaching in this curriculum is based on CBC by using Communicative Language Competency model (Celce-Murcia, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font1">, 1995), Semiotic social (Halliday, 1978) and integrated literacy Perspective modification based on “Kem’s Model” (2000</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">). </span><span class="font1">Language teaching with these models’ oriented are developed for CBC in Indonesia in its entirety.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The objectives</span><span class="font1"> of teaching/learning English in Indonesia according to the 2004 curriculum are clearly stated in the curriculum document (Depdiknas b, 2003: 14) as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mengembangkan kemampuan berkomunikasi dalam bahasa tersebut dalam bentuk lisan dan tulisan. Kemampuan berkomunikasi melipti mendengar (listening), berbicara (speaking), membaca (reading), dan menulis (writing)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Menumbuhkan kesadaran tentang hakikat dan pentingnya Bahasa Inggris sebagai slah satu Bahasa asing untuk menjadi alat utama belajar</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mengembangkan pemahaman tentang saling keterkaitan antar bahasa dan budaya serta memperluas cakrawala budaya. Dengan demikian siswa memiliki wawasan lintas budaya dan melibatkan diri dalam keragaman budaya.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The above objective statement clearly describes Indonesian intention to develop students’ ability to be able to communicate in English either through oral or written form. The idea imbedded in the objective was the teaching and learning of English should be done through all four-language skills(both oral and written communications).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Contents of TEFL</span><span class="font1">: In the 2004 curriculum, teaching learning activities developed to enlarge students’ continuing skills development are based on “Remedial” and “Enrichment” Programs to alleviate quality of education in the country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Competency</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Competency is considered as knowledge, skills and basic value reflected on attitude and action, Example: rubbish, cigarette butt, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">In thought and words</span><span class="font1">: all should go into rubbish bin:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">In act</span><span class="font1">:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Provide rubbish bin if there is not any</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How do children make rubbish bin from local materials available?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All rubbish around should be collected and put in the right place</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wherever they see rubbish, similar action should be done</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">These concepts are meant to develop students’ ability to do things in various contexts, given enough skills to be competent, have learning outcomes and should be clearly defined with a reachable and measurable working standard (Depdiknas a, 2002) A competency-Based definition related to students’ knowledge, performance at each level and the description of students’ step by step continual development can be described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphasized on either individual or collective students’ competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Variety of learning outcomes oriented</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Various approaches and Methods of teaching</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use all educational resources</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Evaluation is done based of competency based objectives</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some practical principles used in developing the 2004 curriculum as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Competency based model</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language model</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literacy degree of the graduated students</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of language competence from listening to writing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Various language competence Model seen from various perspectives have been experimented in Language Teaching and Learning, however, the 2004 Curriculum applied language competency by Celce-Murcia, Domyei and Thurrell (1996).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discourse Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Actional Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociocultural Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategic Competence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Pedagogically speaking, in English teaching, the above components support the reaching of the main competence, discourse competence. Language experts agree that when one communicates with others either orally or in written form, the speakers/writers are engaged in a discourse (Communication event influenced by a topic being communicated, interpersonal relations among those who are engaged in the communications used in a cultural context).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">One is able to gain Discourse competence, whenever he/she possesses supported competence:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistic Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Actional Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociocultural Competence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategic Competence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The above Supported competences are called indicators and they are inseparable. It means, that when teaching a discourse, all indicators should be included.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Besides the above-mentioned Competence model, Language Model in communication which is also known as semiotic social system (Halliday, 1978) is also being used in the 2004 Curriculum. This shows that in communication, there are at least three important aspects to be considered and they are: content, text and language system.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Content</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language when used contextually influences, decides and interrelates with the language someone chooses to use when he/she creates and interprets a text. In any given context, everybody uses language to do three main functions:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ideasional function</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interpersonal function</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Textual function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Pedagogically speaking, each language teaching should use these three functions to reach a Language teaching and learning in both cultural and situational context. In a teaching learning English, concept of genre dominated all texts in the 2004 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Situational contexts are the topics being discussed in the 2004 curriculum as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">These three points are considered as help for anybody to choose formal, informal, close, distance, etc. they are chosen to help students to be able to communicate with others in any given context, circumstance and situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Text</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Verbal communication activity is a process of creating message either oral or written as a response and an interpretation within a discourse. It shows that a text is a combination of situational context and cultural context to be understood by others in the language context (compare listening and written forms). Therefore, the 2004 curriculum aims at preparing students with good and acceptable language organization </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font1">Depdiknas c, 2003: 5). The English language subject for Junior High School Standard Competency is described as follow: (Understanding various meaning of interpersonal, ideasional, and contextual) language features, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptive</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Narrative</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Spoof/recount</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Procedure</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Report</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anecdote: (Nos. 1-6 plus Nos plus 7-12 for Senior High Schools)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Explanations</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exposition</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussions</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;News Items</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Commentary</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Review (Depdiknas b, 2003)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Talking about Literacy, the 2004 curriculum considers theoretical and practical language teaching/learning for various levels. The following is the example of Teaching/Learning English Literacy by Wells (1987):</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Performative (Speaking for writing and speaking for listening for Junior High)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Functional (Manual reading for daily use for Junior High)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Informational (Accessing knowledge for Senior High)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Epistemic (Transforming knowledge in certain language)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Through the above descriptions, it is hoped that the materials to be developed at schools are materials around the stated genre for literacy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Literacy perspective (Talking and Alphabets) being developed here in the Competency Based Curriculum in modified diagram proposed by “Kern” (2000) who only developed three competencies: Reading, Talking and Writing. In the 2004 curriculum, the four known capabilities are equally developed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The four language skills are treated as integrated learning interaction. Hence, the type of teaching, where each skill being treated independently, is not being suggested in this curriculum. On the contrary, it stands as a challenge for teachers to find out the best way to overcome literacy problem for beginners by offering integrated skills teaching. Therefore, a syllabus designer needs to provide various learning experiences which are based on Competence Model, Language Model, Literacy level and different language skills pertaining to written and spoken language. This is considered to be an extremely difficult task for a language teacher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Methods of TEFL</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">This curriculum is elaborated according to eight basic assumptions about teaching/learning competencies as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that a systematic approach to teaching is beneficial to your learners, your colleges and yourself;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that learning is a deeply personal, individual process, for each of us;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that you teach people first, and subject matter second;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that learning is richer and more reward process if it can be shared with other people;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that risks are worth taking and mistake can be growth points;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that experience only leads to change if it is filtered through reflection;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that development take courage as well as imagination;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that the most useful attribute you can develop as a teacher or trainer is flexibility</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Castling, 1996: 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The above assumptions are taken as basic Curriculum development prepared in accordance with Indonesian context and it’s identified needs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the teaching/learning interaction, it is advisable for teachers to begin teaching activities by identifying learners’ needs so that all teaching/learning activities are focused on the stated objectives and there is no time wasted. There is an interlinking process where each level has a logical connection with the next process. Each teacher starts his/her work with learners’ need analysis that naturally directs the teachers to plan a learning process. This plan directs programmer to present a variety of teaching and the learners can be monitored easily to attain what they want to reach. Then evaluate each level’s affectivity of the cycle. Therefore, the duty of a teacher is to adapt teaching practice starting from identifying learners’ needs, followed by the teaching/learning procedure and then repeat the process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For many people, learning motivation is for socialization in contrast to academic needs or professional work. What they would do will depend very much on their friends, and this is done as their learning points. A teacher needs to observe that the learners are learning, and it is not the teacher who does the learning. Therefore, as a teacher, one need to know each students needs before teaching and the observation should include:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;objective of learning</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;recent knowledge</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;prior knowledge</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;special needs (learning gaps, difficulties, and disabilities)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;personal environment, such as personal working and learning hours</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;willingness to learn (group or individual)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the level of confidence as a learner (degrees of confidence and hope)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their attitude to study</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their hope and expectation from a teacher (Castling, 1996: 10-11).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore, Approach and methods used in this curriculum are flexible, enabling students thereby to enhance their ability to use language in communication (Depdikbud c, 2003; Bire, 2006: 132).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Evaluation.</span><span class="font1"> Evaluating the entire process of teaching/learning is done by monitoring the students’ activity from the beginning to the end. For students’ ability in oral and written product, a checklist is used for a long-term evaluation, while for indicators’ prove, a portfolio is used to monitor the students’ competency. Those who are competent can proceed to the next activities, while those who fail are advised to do remedial. In reality, the valuation that was done nationally related to three skills namely Listening, Reading, Writing excluding Speaking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 6.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning the 2004 curriculum</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Items concerning the 2004 Curriculum</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reality</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Oral and written product</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Reading</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Approach/Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Competency-based Approach</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Evaluation/Final examination</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">- Reading, listening and writing</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The above description concerning objective, contents, approach/methods and evaluation of TEFL in Indonesia based on the 2004 curriculum shows that hard works have been performed and time and money have been well spent for the success of teaching/learning English in this country. However, an argument for the implementation of the 2004 curriculum showed that a mismatch among the above items still happened as it did in the previous curricula two years prior to the implementation the 2004 curriculum. This failure has led Indonesian Educational authorities and experts to take action to apply what is called the 2006 curriculum, which is currently being implemented. Therefore, all Senior High School students who sit for the final examination in the year 2008 are being the last group of the products of the 2004 curriculum. Obviously it is stated that at the 2006 curriculum should be further developed to be used by all schools in the academic year 2009/2010 (BSNP, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The changes of curriculum in the country shows that we are finding out and pin pointing main idea of the curriculum change which is in accordance to an organization of curriculum mentioned as:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">An approach that emphasized context and use, rather than isolated skills, required an integrated approach to curriculum structure, rather than the fragmentary approach of treating different skills on different days of the week. Thus the integrated curriculum becomes a key stone to the growth model. Alongside this and replacing the single-minded lesson plan was an approach of the teacher’s being prepared for the many possible avenues that a lesson might take. Flexibility to structure was the key (Sawyer, 2004: 24)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore, the curriculum used in the country is developed into a way to meet the demand of the community. Reviewing the latest curriculum, the implementation of the 2006 curriculum matches the above suggested approach.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The success and the failure of teaching English as a foreign language in Indonesia after the independence from the Dutch in 1945 showed huge and progressive development from one implemented curriculum to the next. Since the writing deals with mismatch TEFL in Indonesia, the discussion is concentrated on four major points as: Objectives of TEFL, Contents of TEFL, Approach/Methods of TEFL and Evaluation of TEFL in the 1950 curriculum up to the latest one, the 2004 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of TEFL here is classified into five discussions on account of some similarities in the implementations of the curricula and they are as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(i) . Curricula 1950 and 1958</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(ii) . Curricula 1962 and 1968</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(iii) . Curriculum 1975</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(iv) . Curriculum 1984 and 1994</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(v) . Curriculum 2004 and 2006.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Table 7.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TEFL ITEMS ACROSS CURRICULA</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">TEFL Components</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Cur. 1950-58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Cur.1962-68</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Cur. 1975</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Cur.1984-94</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Cur.2004</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Objective of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading Oriented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading Oriented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading ability</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading Ability</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Oral &amp;&nbsp;written Product</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Contents of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Grammar Oriented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Grammar Oriented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading &amp;&nbsp;Structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading &amp;&nbsp;Grammar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Methods of TEFL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">GrammarTranslation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">GrammarTranslation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Eclectic Method</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Com.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Approach</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Com-Based Approach</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">TEFL Evaluation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">GrammarTranslation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">GrammarTranslation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Structure oriented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading &amp;&nbsp;Grammar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Reading, List &amp;&nbsp;writing</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Curriculum 1950 and curriculum 1958 show a mismatch among the four mentioned curriculum items. The objective of TEFL is reading ability, while the content to be taught, methods of TEFL and the evaluation were based on grammar-translation method. The four points mentioned as “Objective of TEFL”, “Contents of TEFL”’ “Methods of TEFL” and evaluation in both the 1962 and the 1968 show a mismatch. All the four points mentioned should be directed to its objective that is “Reading ability Oriented”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Concerning the 1975 curriculum, it is obvious that the aim of teaching was still reading oriented as stated across previous curricula; the content of TEFL for this curriculum shows deviation from its objective of reading into reading and structure oriented; Since Eclectic method was used in this curriculum, deviation from its objective looks broader and its evaluation was based on structure oriented. Therefore, the four points above show a mismatch for the TEFL in Indonesia based on the 1975 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The implementation of 1984 and the 1994 English curricula, the objective is reading ability, the contents provided for TEFL deals with reading and grammar, the approach and methods of TEFL deals with communicative approach and the evaluation deals with reading and grammar. Therefore there is a match between materials and evaluation of TEFL, but the objective and the approach/method of TEFL are different. Hence the teaching of English at this decade was considered mismatch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The description concerning objective, contents, approach/methods and evaluation of TEFL in Indonesia based on the 2004 curriculum shows that hard work has been performed; time and money have been well spent for the success of the teaching and learning in this country. However, an argument for the implementation of the 2004 curriculum showed a mismatch among the above items as happened in the previous curricula. This failure has led Indonesian Educational authorities and experts to take action to implement what is called the 2006 curriculum, which is currently being implemented.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>REFERENCE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Alisyahbana, S. T. (1990) “The teaching of English in Indonesia”. In James Britton, Roberts E. Sheffer and Ken Watson (Eds.) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching and Learning English World wide.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bire, J (1996) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Success and the Failure of Senior High school students Learning English as a foreign language:</span><span class="font1"> An unpublished PhD Thesis, LaTrobe University, Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">-------------- (2003) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perkembangan Kurikulum Bahasa Inggris di Kupang.</span><span class="font1"> Bulletin Penelitian dan Pengembangan, Vol. 4 No. 2, Nop. 2003, Undana Kupang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------(2007) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Inggris untuk anak-anak Kasus NTT.</span><span class="font1"> Jurnal Nusa Cendana Vol. 8. No.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1 (April 2007): 755- 764 Undana, Kupang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">-------------(2007) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Collonial occupations and Indonesian Education,</span><span class="font1"> Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra FKIP Universitas Nusa Cendana Kupang Vol. 11 No. 20 (Juni 2007).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BNSP (2006). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Panduan Penyusunan Kurikulum Tingkat Satuan Pendidikan:</span><span class="font1">Jenjang Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Canale, M. and Merile Swain (1980) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theoretical bases for Communicative Approach to Language Learning and Testing:</span><span class="font1"> Applied Linguistics, 1: 1-39.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Castling, Ann (1996) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Competence-based Teaching and Training.</span><span class="font1"> Macmillan Press, Ltd., London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Das, B.K. (1985) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Communicative Language Teaching:</span><span class="font1"> Anthology 14</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.,</span><span class="font1"> Singapore UP: SEAMEO RELC, Singapore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Depdikbud RI. a (1968) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum Sekolah Menengah Atas (SMA)(General High School Curriculum),</span><span class="font1"> PN. Balai Pustaka, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">---------------b. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum Sekolah Dasar</span><span class="font1"> tahun 1975 (Elementary School Curricula 1975). Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------c. (1986) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikum Sekolah Menengah Umum:</span><span class="font1"> Garis-garis Besar Program Pengajaran (GBPP) Department of Education and Culture, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------- d. (1994) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum Sekolah Menengah Umum:</span><span class="font1"> Garis-garis Besar Program Pengajaran (GBPP) (General High School Curricula 1993)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Depdiknas, RI.a. (2002) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum 2004 SMA dan Madrasah Aliyah</span><span class="font1">: Pedoman Umum, Depdiknas, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------b ((2003) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum 2004 SMA dan Madrasah Aliyah</span><span class="font1">: Pedoman Khusus, Depdiknas, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------- c. (2003) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum 2004 SMA dan Madrasah Aliyah</span><span class="font1">: Standard , Kompetensi Pengajaran Bahasa Inggris, Depdiknas, Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dikbud, (2006) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengembangan Silabus KTSP Mata Pelajaran Bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font1"> Dikbud, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Freeman, D.L., (1986) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching.</span><span class="font1"> New York, Oxford UP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M. A. K.(1970) Language Structure and Language Function in J. Lyons (Ed.) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Horizon in linguistics.</span><span class="font1"> Hamsworth: Pinguin, 140-165.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">---------------(1973) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Exploration in the Function of Languag.</span><span class="font1"> London Edwards Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">---------------(1978) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language as Social Semiotic.</span><span class="font1"> London Edwards Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, D. (1972) On Communicative Competence, in J.B. Pride and L. Holms (Eds.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font1"> Hamsworth: Pinguin, 269-293.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hartoyo (2006) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Grammar in the Teaching of EFL in Indonesia:</span><span class="font1"> Theories and findings, Unnes Press, Semarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kem, Richard (2000) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literacy and Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">LPMP.DIY (2006) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mata Pena:</span><span class="font1"> Majalah Berita Pendidikan Aktual, Vol 2 Tahun II 2006, LPMP DIY, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lado, R. (1964) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Teaching:</span><span class="font1"> A Scientific Approach. MC Grow-Hill, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Littlewood, W., (1981, 1987) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Communicative Language Teaching.</span><span class="font1"> Cambidge UP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muslich Mansur (2007) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">KTS: Pembelajaran Berbasis Kompetensi dan Kontekstual:</span><span class="font1"> Panduan bagi Guru, Kepala Sekolah dan Pengawas Sekolah. Bumi Aksara, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Murray, K. Thomas, B. Sands Lester and M. Brubacker (1968) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strategies for Curriculum Changes: </span><span class="font1">Cases for 13 Nations, Scranton, Pennsylvania, International Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nababan, P.W.J., (1984) The Threshold level for High school English in Indonesia. In A. S. John (Ed.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Trends in English Syllabus Design.</span><span class="font1"> SEAMEO RELC, 183-192, Singapore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richard, J.C. and Theodore, S. Rodgers (1990) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching. </span><span class="font1">Cambridge U. P., Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rudiyanto, R. (1988) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Relationship between Theory and Practice of the 1984 English Curriculum:</span><span class="font1"> A Case Study at a Senior Secondary School in Bali, Indonesia. An unpublished MEd thesis, La Trobe University, Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sawyer, Wayne (2004) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Seminal books on English Teaching</span><span class="font1"> in Reviewing English in the 21<sup>st </sup>Century. Phoenix Education, Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sawyer, Wayne and Eva Gold (2004) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reviewing English in the 21<sup>st</sup> Century</span><span class="font1">. Phoenix Education, Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tjokrosuyoso, H. (1994) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Catatan Perubahan Kurikulum Sekolah Lanjutan dari masa ke masa.</span><span class="font1"> Unpublished Paper, Jurusan Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris FPBS IKIP Malang..</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tomlinson, B.(English Language Adviser 1987) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Teaching of English in Indonesian High Schools.</span><span class="font1"> Unpublished Paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">---------------- (1990) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Managing Change in Indonesian High School</span><span class="font1">” ELT Journal 44/1. January, 25-37.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">19</span></p>