---
layout: full_article
title: "TASK-BASED LEARNING APPROACH IN ACTION: READING FOR ACADEMIC PURPOSES CLASS (A RESULT OF CLASSROOM ACTION RESEARCH)"
author: "Noer Doddy Irmawati Ahmad Dahlan University"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-334 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-334"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-334"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TASK-BASED LEARNING APPROACH IN ACTION: READING FOR ACADEMIC PURPOSES CLASS </span><span class="font1">(A Result of Classroom Action Research)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Noer Doddy Irmawati, Dr.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English achievement of the students of Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta is low. The indicator is the English ability of the students, because English has an important role as an International language in the world. Besides the result of learning RAP of the students shows in average scores of 56-65 (C). The problems which are discussed in this research are: 1) the effort of how to improve the achievement of RAP by using TBL and 2) the evidence that shows as the English achievement of the students in studying RAP. TBL, which is used in the treatment is done into 3 cycles: the first cycle has been done by 4 meetings, the second cycle has been done by 4 meetings, and the third cycle has been done by 4 meetings. All the teaching–learning process of RAP is done by collaboration and creativity in preparing materials.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is a result of CAR which is done in Reading Class A Faculty of Letters UAD Yogyakarta from June up to December 2008. There are planning, preventative steps of performance, observation, and reflection. The data are taken from the real condition that the result of learning process of RAP of the students is low. To get the data the researcher does an observation, an interview, besides asking the students to fulfilling the form, giving test, and analyzing document. Data validity investigation technique which is used in this research is Data Resource Triangulation and Method Triangulation. Informant Review is also used in Data Validity Test. Reliability Estimation to guarantee the reliability of Data are found by Test and Observation. To analyze the data the researcher uses the result of observation that is reflected and the learning result of the students that is achievement. The technique of analyzing the data is Descriptive Statistic Technique and Critical Analysis to know the improvement of the situation in detail and precisely according to the improving of the treatment in each cycle that is the improvement of the 1<sup>st</sup>, the 2<sup>nd</sup>, and the 3<sup>rd</sup> cycles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After having the preventative steps of performance by using TBL in RAP which have been done in the first, in the second, and in the third cycles, there is a significant result. It shows that more than 75% of the students who have got good grade with more than 65 scores. There are 20 of 27 students get good scores: 10 students (37,04%) get the score between 66-79 (B); and 12 students (44,44%) get the score between 80-88 (A), and 5 students (18,52%) get C (56-65). It means that there is a significant improvement of English achievement by using TBL in teaching RAP. The Affective Aspect and the Psychomotor Aspect are also significantly increased, because according to the result of Paired Sample Test, the correlation significant shows below 0,05 (&lt;0,05). The Evaluation Result of TBL Implementation of the 1<sup>st</sup> Cycle, the 2<sup>nd</sup> Cycle, and the 3<sup>rd </sup>Cycle show significantly increased. From 28 Items of the Instrument, the total scale shows in the average 3,36 (1<sup>st</sup> cycle), 4,29 (2<sup>nd</sup> cycle), and 4,71 (3<sup>rd</sup> cycle). The Observation Result of TBL Implementation shows increased, it is proven by the total scale in the average 4,36 (1<sup>st</sup> cycle), 4,5 (2<sup>nd</sup> cycle), and 4,79 (3<sup>rd</sup> cycle). It shows that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">using of TBL is successfully succeed and it can increase the achievement of RAP of the students. The significantly increased of the achievement is approved by the Result of Learning Process of the students from the 1<sup>st</sup> up to the 3<sup>rd</sup> cycle. The improvement of Cognitive Aspect is shown by the result of the test (Pre-Test and Post-Test) that shown: 1<sup>st</sup> cycle is in the average of 67,41 and 75,22. The 2<sup>nd</sup> cycle is 72,41 and 76,27. The 3<sup>rd </sup>cycle shows The result of Pre-Test is 76,62 and Post-Test is 85,30. It means that there is a significant achievement of the ability of students in RAP by using TBL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Key Words</span><span class="font1">: TBL = Task-Based Learning, RAP = Reading for Academic Purposes, CAR = Class Action Research, UAD = Ahmad Dahlan University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In English Department Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta, Reading is a compulsory subject that must be followed by the students from the first semester up to the fifth semester. The purpose of this subject is that the students have the reading for academic purposes (RAP) ability and communicative ability. It means that they have to master the aspect of RAP, the aspect of English: vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation, and the ability on speaking, listening, reading, and writing. This communicative ability is very important in the term of working and studying. In related to the job, there is no opportunity without English as the requirements, it is also for study’s necessity. All applications must be completed by English competence, actively or passively. In related to the study in the university, English communicative ability is very important because students are faced by many sources/books written in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The purpose of studying Reading is that the students are mastering the four abilities in English: speaking, listening, reading, and writing, especially RAP. The emphasize is on RAP because in studying Reading, English has an important role as long as the students study in English Letters Department Faculty of Letters UAD Yogyakarta. The most important role is reading because they have to understand some references which are written in English. RAP is different from reading in general, because in understanding the information from reading some references, students need to master</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">reading ability in high level such as to write Paraphrase, Summary, Generalizations, Hypotheses, Transcoding, etc. In related to this statement, Halliday and Hasan (1976: 226-267) said that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RAP is an advanced course in reading designed to help tertiary-level students familiarize themselves with particular aspects of academic reading such as definitions, generalizations, hypotheses, claims, and evidence. In addition, it familiarizes students with certain aspects of academic discourse. These include syntactic sequences and words that are frequently used in academic discourse, especially sentence-initial grammatical sequences such as: This study attempts to .., The findings of this study state that …, and there is considerable evidence to support that …, and logical connectors and conjunction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The real condition shows that the achievement of Reading is low. The average</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">score of the students shows in 2,431=C+ (AY.2005/2006), 2,937=C+ (AY.2006/ 2007), and 3,126=B (AY.2007/2008). It is caused by five factors, they are (1) the low of input quality, (2) the weakness of English basic ability, (3) the un-relevan syllabus, (4) the conventional of method of teaching and learning, and (5) the difficult of students’ attitude toward English. The following is the exposition of each factor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first factor is the low input quality of the students. According to the result of selection test when they enter the university is low. They get the score between 55-64 from the scale of 100. Score in between 55-64 is not enough to be used to improve the ability of English especially the ability of RAP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The second factor is the low of basic ability of students toward English. Based on class observation it can be found that there are many students who make mistake in their basic stucture such as in the using of to be (is, are, am), pronoun (I, me, us/he, his, him/she, her, hers/they, them, their). They are also weak in arranging simple English sentences. It may also be the effect of their study in Junior and Senior High Schools.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The third factor is the un-relevan syllabus. The syllabus is not relevan to the need of the students. Lecturer tends to teach by emphazising on the stucture and vocabulary rather than on the other aspect of English. If the teacher teach reading, the texts of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">reading are taken from general English. The reading materials are not relevan to RAP. So that the teaching learning Reading in UAD is as the same as the process when the students learn in Senior and Junior High Schools. Actually there must be a course that relates to the university level which proves the need of the students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The fourth factor is the conventional method of teaching and learning. According to the result of the discussion among lecturers, it can be seen that there are some methods used by them which are called conventional methods. Lecturers ask students to read some reading materials, to understand the vocabulary, to answer questions. They never ask students to read some academic reading materials and to be active in the classroom, so that the students become passive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The fifth factor is the difficult of students’ attitude toward English. All students say that English is difficult. The following is the result of an interview with one of them, he says:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”Belajar bahasa Inggris itu susah Bu. Saya selalu takut kalau mau ngomong, saya merasa kurang menguasai kosakata, setiap saya ingat</span><span class="font1"> grammar </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan</span><span class="font1"> structure </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">batallah saya mengucapkan kalimat bahasa Inggris. Kalau sudah begitu Bu, yang ada hanya rasa bosan, malas, dan takut salah. Bagaimana ya Bu?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Start from the reality, the fact, the problem and the causes, the writer purposes a solution, that is teaching RAP by TBL. According to Halliday and Hasan, RAP</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“is an advanced course in reading designed to help tertiary-level students familiarize themselves with particular aspects of academic reading such as definitions, generalizations, hypotheses, and claims with or without evidence. In addition, it familiarizes students with certain aspects of academic discourse. These include syntactic sequences and words that are frequently used in academic discourse, especially sentence-initial grammatical sequences …” (1976: 226-267).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A course in RAP usually includes activities to help students consolidate academic language skills as well as activities to help them discover the main aspects in reading. The Aspects of Academic Reading in RAP is 1) Thesis sentence, 2) Main Idea, 3) Main Idea and supporting details, 4) Reference, 5) Inference/implication, 6) Comparison/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">contrast, 7) Analogy/simile, 8) Definition, 9) Nonlinguistic Information, 10) Generalization, 11) Classification, 12) Description, 13) Hypothesis, 14) Claim + evidence, 15) Argument and its sequencing, 16) Writer’s approach/opinion/intention, 17) Textual Cohesion (Cunningsworth, 1984: 27) and (Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 259).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Talking about TBL, Nunan said that TBL means:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">a piece of classroom work which involves learners in comprehending, manipulating, producing or interacting in the target language while their attention is principally focused on meaning rather than form. The task should also have a sense of completeness, being able to stand alone as a communicative act in its own right (1989a:10).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">His definition consists of pedagogy perspective. Task is followed by the using of communicative language and the activities tent to the meaning than to the form of the language. Further, Nunan (2004: 3,9) said:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“A pedagogical task is a piece of classroom work that involves learners in comprehending, manipulating, producing or interacting in the target language while their attention is focused on mobilizing their grammatical knowledge in order to express meaning, and in which the intension is to convey meaning rather than to manipulate form. The task can develop skills and strategies for using language to communicate meaning as effectively as possible in concrete situasions. It can improve the ability of the students in comprehending as high a degree as possible of linguistic competence”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richards, Platt, dan Weber (1986: 289) said that task is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“an activity or action, which is carried out as the result of processing or understanding language (i.e. as a response). For example: drawing a map while listening to a tape, listening to an instruction and performing a command, may be referred to as tasks. Tasks may or may not involve the production of language. A task usually requires the teacher to specify what will be regarded as successful completion of the task”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Task in this case relates to task which is given to the students and it must be done</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">during the activity in the classroom. Every task is followed by the activity to produce outcome or product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Breen (1987: 23) said that task is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“… any structured language learning endeavor which has a particular objective, appropriate content, a specified working procedure, and a range of outcomes for those who undertake the task, ‘Task’ is therefore assumed to refer to a range of work plans</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">which have the overall purpose of facilitating language learning – from the simple and brief exercise type, to more complex and lengthy activities such as group problemsolving or simulations a decision making”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In related to TBL, Mark McKinnon dan Nicky Rigby (</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www. onestopenglish. com_taskbased.htm/p.1</span><span class="font1">) said that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Task-based learning offers the students an opportunity to do exactly this. The primary focus of classroom activity is the task and language is the instrument which the students use to complete it. The task is an activity in which students use language to achieve a specific outcome. The activity reflects real life and learner’s focus on meaning, they are free to use any language they want”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Krashen (</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.onestopenglish.com_taskbased.htm/p.2</span><span class="font1">) said that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">… in the task-based lessons included below our aim is to create a need to learning and using language. The tasks will generate their own language and create an opportunity for language acquisition. If we can take the focus away from form and structures we can develop our students’ ability to do things in English. That is not to say that there will be no attention paid to accuracy, work on language is included in each task and feedback and language focus have their places in the lesson plans.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Scrivener classifies the way of learning using TBL is as an authentic (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">asli</span><span class="font1">) followed by a structure of task/</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">penugasan</span><span class="font1"> which is proposed by Willis (</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.onestopenglish.com_taskbased.htm/p.2</span><span class="font1">). Every </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">task</span><span class="font1"> will be conducted by: (1) Pre-task activity an introduction to topic and task, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">maksudnya diberikan tugas awal sebagai perkenalan terhadap topik dan</span><span class="font1"> task; (2) Task cycle: Task &gt;&nbsp;Planning &gt;&nbsp;Report; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan</span><span class="font1"> (3) Language Focus and Feedback. So the balance between the smoothness toward the task given and the accuracy toward the feedback of the given task must be noticed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A task is an activity which suggests and asks students to use the language with the emphazise on the meaning to get the aim or the purpose (Bygate, Skehan, dan Swain, 2001: 11). From the teaching—learning point of view, a task is an activity, “susceptible to brief or extended pedagogic intervention”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> which asks and motivates students to use the language actively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TBL is used in this research because TBL can make students using English to do tasks which are given by the lecturers. By using TBL, language input can be intensive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TBL here follows meaningful principle that learning will improve if the subject is relevan to the need of the students. Beside that, by using TBL, students will actively involve in the process of learning, because they have to finish the tasks given. They will do the tasks in groups or individually. By using the language actively the improvement of achievement of reading for academic purposes of the students will increase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Task is given to the students by means of treatment into three cycles. Each cycle has four meetings. In giving the task there is an activity that should be done by the students. Task, which is given to the students will notice three aspects: (1) fluency, (2) accuracy, and (3) complexity. TBL consists of classifying, predicting, inducing, taking note, concept mapping, questioning, personalizing, brainstorming, reflecting, and authentic assessment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Students, in doing the tasks are claimed by active participation, diligent, hardworking, able to communicate, brave to propose opinion, and brave to speak English. The more serious of the students in doing the tasks, the more active they use the language. All the activities give influence to the students in improving the ability of RAP in the cognitive, affective, and psychomotor aspects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of this research will be benefit for the students, the lecturers, and the department. The using of TBL can solve some problems of teaching–learning English especially RAP. It can be used to improve the ability of the students in RAP and to improve the ability in listening, speaking, and writing skills. TBL can improve the bravery of the students in learning English, especially in speaking. The improvement of the ability in RAP means the improvement of the other skills in English. TBL can be used as an alternative model in teaching–learning English. TBL can be used as a mean in overcoming the problems of learning English especially in improvement the achievement of reading skill such as in RAP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">METHODOLOGY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is a classroom action research (CAR) which aims to find the solution of the problems in education and teaching in the classroom/field. CAR is used to improve the quality of teaching–learning that is the reading achievement by using tasks-based learning (TBL). The plot of the research follows the action research spiral model of Kemmis and Mc Taggart (1990: 11), which consists of four processes: planning, acting, observing, and reflecting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The focus of this research is the effort to change the real condition in this time to the prospect condition by recycling principle. The action of the research is done by following three cycles which consists of four meetings for each. Every cycle using evaluation and reflection to find the specialty and the weakness that can be used as the base solution of the following action in the following cycle. Beside that naturalistic approach using participant-observation from the ethnography is also used followed by collaborative, and case methodology characteristics (Belanger, 1992: 37).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CAR has three characteristics, they are beginning, process from cycle to cycle up to the end, in order that there will be the sight effects. The essence of CAR is solving the problems faced in the teaching–learning process and to repair/to correct the system, in order there is some changes, such as improving the low reading achievement of the students of English Letters Department Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is CAR which has three cycles as a whole consists of analysis, fact findings, conceptualize, planning, acting, fact finding addition, evaluating, and reflecting as Sanford (1970: 4) said that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">”Analysis, fact finding, conceptualization, planning, execution, more fact finding or evaluation; and then verification of this whole circle or activities; indeed, a spiral of such circles”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The method of this research is chosen based on Problems and Purpose of this research which demand some informations and the following action based on recycle principle. It needs others opinion and some reflections that can be used to repair/to correct the teaching–learning process in the classroom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is done in English Letters Department Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Jln. Pramuka No. 42 Yogyakarta, Indonesia. It is done from August 2005 up to July 2009. It means that the researcher starts the research from academic year 2005/2006, because she takes the data of the research start at that time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The subject of this research is the students of English Letters Department Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta, Class A = 27 students, who have some different backgound. They come from different part of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The researcher is helped by some English lecturers, partner, observer, the Head of the department, administration laborers, and the Dean of the Faculty, who work together in this research start from doing the planning, acting, observing, and reflecting from the first cycle up to the third cycle by four meetings each. Steps of the Research: 1) Preparation, 2) Planning, 3) Acting, 4) Observing, and 5) Reflecting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this research are Quantitative ang qualitative. The quantitative data are taken from test result, pre-test of the first cycle, the second cycle, and the trird cycle. While the qualitative data are taken from the attitude of the students and the learning intensity. The source of the data is from event, informants, and documents. Event means the process of teaching–learning academic reading by using TBL. Informants here are the students, the lecturers, observer, the Head of the department, the Dean of Faculty of Letters, and the administration laborers. While the docoments are taken from the last score, sheet of paper, administration of the faculty, students’ work/paper, teachig materials, and syllabus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To get the data of this research the researcher uses </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">observation </span><span class="font1">which is done during the teaching–learning process in the class (12 times); </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">interview </span><span class="font1">which is given to 2 lecturers, 5 students, the Head of the Department, 2 administration laborers; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">questionaire </span><span class="font1">is given to the students before and after the actions given; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">test </span><span class="font1">(pre-test and post-test) and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">document </span><span class="font1">is used to get the data of Reading achievement of the students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Techniques of data validity which are used in this research are </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">participation </span><span class="font1">which is done by twelve times meetings in three cycles toward the teaching–learning process, nine times interview with the lecturers, three times interview with the Head of the Department, six times interview with the students; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">persistence observation </span><span class="font1">which is reflected in the field note which portrait the phenomenon and objective condition in the field of teaching–learning process; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">trianggulation </span><span class="font1">which is used in this research is investigation triangulation, data source triangulation and data collecting method triangulation; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">key informant review </span><span class="font1">which is done unformally without schedule; </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">validity</span><span class="font1">: democratic validity, process validity, outcome validity, catalytic validity and dialogic validity; and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">reliability </span><span class="font1">which supports the validity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Descriptive statistic (for the quantitative data) and critical analysis (for the qualitative data) are used in this research. Descriptive is used to describe the reading achievement in every stage of each cycle. While statistic is used to scratch the central tendency, so the Mean (M), Median (Md), Modus (Mo), and principal informal/simpangan baku (SB) will be found. Critical analysis is done by comparing the reality in the field of teaching–learning process with the relevant and suitable theories in order that every mistake can be found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Working Indicator in this research is the result of evaluation and the succeed assessment of the action. Analysis result and interpretation of doing the action become</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the basic of doing the evaluation, determining the succeed or reaching the purpose of the action.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The evaluation step is 1) Teaching–learning implementation and evaluation of every action, 2) Evaluation which is done to know the result of the study before and after the action. Based on the result of the evaluation, modification and well planned of the following cycle are done, 3) The last step is post-action consists of arranging the last draft of the result of the research, final arrangement, copying the paper, seminar the result of the research, and revising the report.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The success of this action research can be seen from the result of teaching– learning process before and after the action given. The changing of learning condition is definited by a clear criteria. There are two kinds of criteria: normative and absolute. The success of this research using normative criteria which consists of 1) Giving intention toward the quality improvement of teaching–learning after the action that is comparing the learning process quality before and after the actions. If after the action, 75% of the students show the good criteria as the same as the indicator, the students are more active and skillful in following the teaching–learning, means that the action is done successfully, 2) Giving meaning to the improvement of the students achievement after the treatment by comparing the improvement of reading achievement and with the minimal standard which is fixed (66). If the result of the achievement above the standard, so it shows that the action is successfully done.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">RESEARCH FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Research Findings</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">ASPECTS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">1<sup>st</sup> Cycle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2<sup>nd</sup> Cycle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">3rd Cycle</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">1. The result of the application of TBL to RAP</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Academic Reading Achievement improves 7,81 point (Pre-Test 67,41 Post-Test 75,22)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Academic Reading Achievement improves 3,86 point (Pre-Test 72,41 Post-Test 76,27), to achieve B level.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Academic Reading Achievement improves 8,68 point (Pre-Test 76,62 Post-Test 85,30)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">2. The stage of Students’ Learning Intensity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The attitude of the students becomes better, such as in their performance, responsibility, leadership toward the improvement of Academic Reading Achievement.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Beside what is reached in the 1st cycle, there are some improvements in the other dimensions: understanding the aspects of RAP, the ability of collaboration , cooperation, socialization, and language aspects.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">It is added by the improvement of other dimensions, such as: sharing ideas &amp;&nbsp;opinion, giving suggestion, discipline, to appreciate time, own self, and others.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">3.Specialty/Benefit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">TBL can be used in Improving Reading for Academic Achievement, Understanding the aspect of RAP &amp;&nbsp;Language.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">TBL can be used in Improving other dimensions, such as: English Speaking ability, professionalism &amp;&nbsp;Motivation.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">TBL can be used as a means in emotional therapy which will give effect to correct the condition &amp;&nbsp;situation of the success of teaching learning process.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">4. Weaknesses</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">All targets of mastering the aspects of RAP and Language could not be reached yet.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">There is pro-contra from the students because of their different opinion when they study RAP.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">There is still influence upon their bad habits, feeling ashamed, afraid and confused in learning RAP.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">5. The way to solve the weaknesses</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Improving self discipline, good communication, hard working, and their responsibility in the process of teaching learning. RAP.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Equalizing perception, opinion, and understanding toward the teaching learning RAP by using TBL.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Trying hard to change the bad habits to be better, to avoid ashamed, afraid, and lazy in learning RAP by using TBL. .</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Discussion</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">CAR is done in English Letters Department Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta, Jln. Pramuka No. 42. The students are from class A, consist of 27 students with different background. They come from several places and cities around Java and Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TBL is applied in teaching RAP. The purpose is to increase the reading achievement of the students. Beside that, the researcher wants to know the students’ intensity toward their study while the lecturer teaches them using TBL. Another aspects to be found: the specialty and the weaknesses of TBL which are implemented in teaching RAP. Based on TBL, students are brought to the reality in facing the real condition, the obstacles, creating the activity and active participation to the process of teaching–learning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TBL is implemented to the 1<sup>st</sup> cycle, 2<sup>nd</sup> cycle, and 3<sup>rd</sup> cycle with four times meeting for each cycle. It is evaluated by using process evaluation, authentic assesment to the result of teaching–learning process. The result of Cognitive aspect, Affective aspect, and Psychomotoric aspect show that there is a significance improvement. In the process of teaching–learning shows that there is improvement in some aspects such as: students’ interest in studying, students’ participation in the group discussion, communication ability, English speaking ability, their bravery in sharing idea, their seriousness, time allotment, effective and efficient in their study. Students’ learning result is also increase which is shown by the result of the tests (pre-test and post-test).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TBL is done in Classroom Action Research by three cycles and 12 meetings, which can be discussed as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The First Cycle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It was happened in the classroom on Tuesday, February 19<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pre-test (60 minutes) was given to the students who followed reading subject. It was continued by giving explanation about the subject given. The second meeting was on Tuesday, February 26<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. The third meeting was on Tuesday, March 4<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. The fourth meeting happened on Tuesday, 11th March 2009 at 10.30–12.00 with the post-test.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of the test showed that the Mean score of 27 students was in the average of 47.26. XY correlation = 0.27. SB = 7.47. Reliability Test = 0.42. The material of the test was said to be valid and reliable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The action in the first cycle was based on the criteria which were prepared in this research. It showed that the result of the observation was in between 3–4, meant that it was fine. The average score was 3,36. The result of TBL observation was in the average score 4,36 so it was good.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The material of the subject which was given to the students: introduction, the explanation of TBL, RAP, the purpose of studying reading by using TBL, the important of group discussion, some reading materials which were taken from reading sources. The concentration of the reading was on the aspect of main idea, main idea and supporting details, inference, reference.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The process evaluation of Affective aspect of Cycle one, the average result of 27 students showed: scale 3,68 for item of students’ interest in the group, scale 3,46 for item of students’ participation in the group, scale 3,05 for item of Communication ability, and the braveness of sharing idea was in the average scale 2,97. It could be concluded that the learning result of Affective aspect was in the fine criteria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The evaluation of learning process of Psychomotoric aspect of cycle one. There were four items that were scored: The skill of using tools was in the average scale of 3,68; Serious in Study and Work was in the scale of 3,46; Using the time effectively was in the average score of 3,05; Working together was in the average score of 2,97. The conclusion is that the learning result of Psychomotoric aspect of the first cycle is in the fine criteria.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Second Cycle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The material of the test was already prepared. It was given in the classroom on Tuesday, March 18<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. Pre-test (60 minutes) was given to the students who followed reading subject. It was continued by giving explanation about the subject given. The second meeting was on Tuesday, April 22<sup>nd</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. The third meeting was on Tuesday, April 29<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. The fourth meeting was given on Tuesday, 6<sup>th</sup> May 2009 at 10.30–12.00 with the post-test.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The observation result of the 2<sup>nd</sup> action showed at the average scale 4,36. The result of evaluation was 4,29. Both of them were in between 4–5, so it was good. The material of teaching–learning subject is texts consist of aspects of comparison and contrast, analogy and simile, definition, and generalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The authentic assesment of cognitive aspect showed the lower score was 54 and the high score was 82. Total score for 27 students was 1956 with the average score 72,41 (B). While the final test showed that the lower score was 56 and the high score was 80. The total score for 27 students was 2059 with the average score 76,27 (B). It showed that there was an improvement of the students’ reading achievement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The learning result of affective aspect showed the average score of students’ attention toward the learning was in the scale 3,97; for Students’ participation in the group was in the score 3,38; for communication ability and sharing ideas were in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">score 3,59. It means that the result is in the good position. It shows there is a significant improvement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The psychomotoric aspect showed the average score of: The skill of using tools was 4; Serious in Study &amp;&nbsp;Work was 3,97; Using the time effectively was 3,05; working together was 3,59. The conclusion is that the learning result of Psychomotoric aspect of the second cycle is in the good criteria. There is a good improvement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Third Cycle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It was happened in the classroom on Tuesday, May 13<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pre-test (60 minutes) was given to the students who followed reading subject. It was continued by giving explanation about the subject given. The second meeting is on Tuesday, May 27<sup>th</sup> 2009 at 10.30–12.00. The third meeting was on Tuesday, June 3<sup>rd </sup>2009 at 10.30–12.00. The fourth meeting happened on Tuesday, 10<sup>th</sup> June 2009 at 10.30–12.00 with the post-test.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The action in the third cycle was based on the criteria which were prepared in this research. It showed that the result of the observation was in between 4–5, meant that it was good. The average score was 4,71. The result of TBL observation was in the average score 4,79 so it was very good. TBL improved the students’ reading achievement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The material of the subject which was given to the students: Classification, Description, Hypothesis, Claim and Evidence, Argument and Its Sequencing, Textual Cohesion, dan Writer’s approach/opinion/intention.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The authentic assesment of cognitive aspect showed the lower score was 54 and the high score was 86. Total score for 27 students was 2069 with the average score 76,62 (B). While the final test showed that the lower score was 56 and the high score was 88. The total score for 27 students was 2303 with the average score 85,30 (A). It showed that there was a significant improvement of the students’ reading achievement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The process evaluation of Affective aspect of Cycle three, the average result of 27 students shows: scale 4,46 for item of students’ interest in the group, scale 4,24 for item of students’ participation in the group, scale 3,95 for item Communication ability, and the braveness of sharing idea is in the average scale 3,81. It can be concluded that the learning result of Affective aspect is in the very good criteria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The psychomotoric aspect shows the average score of: The skill of using tools is 4,46; Serious in Study &amp;&nbsp;Work is 4,24; using the time effectively is 3,95; working together is 3,81. The conclusion is that the learning result of Psychomotoric aspect of the third cycle is in the exellent criteria. There is a significant and a good improvement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The results show the application of TBL can improve the achievement of RAP of the students of English Letters Department of Faculty of Letters Ahmad Dahlan University Yogyakarta in some </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">aspects </span><span class="font1">and dimensions, such as 1) aspects of reading ability, 2) aspects of RAP, and 3) aspects of English: vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation, and improving the </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">dimensions </span><span class="font1">of 1) attitude, 2) professionalism, 3) motivation and interest, 4) communication, 5) ability of cooperation, collaboration, socialization, sharing ideas, opinion, and suggestion, 6) discipline and timing value ability, 7) reading analysis ability, 8) TBL and its processes can be used as an emotional medium.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">How far is the improvement can be described as follow: the result of pre-test increased (1st cycle is 67,41, 2nd cycle is 72,41, and 3rd cycle is 76,62) and the result of post-test increased (1st cycle is 75,22, 2nd cycle is 76,27, and 3rd cycle is 85,30).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of learning also increased, Cognitive aspect is 89,19% (23 of 27</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">students got the score above 66). Affective aspect is also 89,19%. Psychomotoric aspect</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">is 91,89% (24 students got good score above 4).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The improvement of students learning intensity such as: 1) students interest in learning English, 2) learning enthusiasm, 3) responsibility toward doing the tasks, 4) learning result on cognitive, affective, and psychomotoric aspects, 5) speaking effort in English, 6) using time effectively, 7) professionalism awareness, 8) social attitude and socialization, 9) leadership, model, and moral value.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The weaknesses can be described that: 1) it needs a long time, 2) it must be done at the moment together, 3) the result of doing the tasks must be collected at the same time together, 4) it can make the weak students become lazy, bored, desperate, and mysterious passenger of success, 5) task is not well and right done, 6) all the answers are not well discussed, 7) egoism makes others emotional, 8) the use of dictionary confiscates learning time, 9) the difficulty of sharing idea becomes discussion blocks, (10) feeling ashamed becomes communication blocks, 11) it can make a bad atmosphere and the condition of teaching – learning process is not so relax.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Babbage, R., Byers, R., &amp;&nbsp;Redding, H. 1999. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Teaching and Learning</span><span class="font1">. London: David Fulton Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bower, Gordon H. &amp;&nbsp;Hilgard, Ernest R. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theories of Learning.</span><span class="font1"> Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brennan, Robert L. (Editor). 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Educational Measurement</span><span class="font1"> (Fourth Edition). USA: Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, H. Douglas. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching by Principles. An Interactive Approach to Language Pedagogy</span><span class="font1">. Second Edition. New York: A.W. Longman, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bygate, M; Skehan, P; and Swain, M. 2001. Introduction. In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, and M. Swain (Eds.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Researching Pedagogic Tasks</span><span class="font1"> (pp.1-20). Harlow: Pearson Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Burns, A. 1999. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Collaborative Action Research for English Language Teachers</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Carroll, J. B. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Human Cognitive Abilities</span><span class="font1">. New York: Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Crookes, G. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Task Classification: a Cross-disciplinary Review</span><span class="font1">. Technical Report No. 4, Department of ESL, University of Hawai at Manoa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cunningsworth. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluating and Selecting EFL Teaching Materials</span><span class="font1">. London: Heinemann.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ellis, R. 2000. Task-based Research and Language Pedagogy. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Teaching Research, 4</span><span class="font1">(3), 193-220.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Farrell, Thomas S. C. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Planning Lessons for a Reading Class</span><span class="font1">. Singapore: SEAMEO Regional Language Centre.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Galton. Dkk. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Classroom Management</span><span class="font1">. Diakses pada tanggal 27 Juni 2005 dari </span><a href="http://osi.fsn.edu/waveseries/htmlversions/wave11.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://osi.fsn.edu/waveseries/htmlversions/wave11.htm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grellet. 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Academic Reading</span><span class="font1"> – an alternative (p.14-16). New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday and R. Hasan. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reading for Academic Purposes</span><span class="font1"> (p.226-267). London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kemmis, S. and Mc Taggart, R. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Action Research Planner</span><span class="font1">. Third Edition. Victoria: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Landsheere, Viviane De. 1977. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluation in Education,</span><span class="font1"> International Progress – An International Review-Series</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> Oxford, New York: Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lazear, David. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Seven Ways of Teaching</span><span class="font1">. The Artistry of Teaching with Multiple Intelligence. Australia: Hawker Brownlow Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Long, M. H. 1983b. Native Speaker / Non-native Speaker Conversation in the Second Language Classroom. In M. A. Clarke &amp;&nbsp;J. Handscombe (Eds.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">On Tesol '82: Pacific Perspectives on Language Learning and Teaching</span><span class="font1"> (pp. 207-228). Washington D. C.: Tesol.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">. 1985a. A Role for Instruction in Second Language Acquisition: Task-Based Language Teaching. In K. Hyltenstam &amp;&nbsp;M. Pienemann (Eds.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Modelling and Assessing Second Language Acquisition</span><span class="font1"> (pp.77-99). Avon: Multilingual Matters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Martyn. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Effect of Task Variables</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McKinnon, Mark &amp;&nbsp;Nicky Rigby. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Task-Based Learning</span><span class="font1"> (methodology plus).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tersedia pada </span><a href="http://www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/elt_%20taskbased.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/elt_</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/elt_%20taskbased.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">taskbased.htm</span></a><span class="font1"> Diakses pada tanggal 22 Mei 2005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mikulecky, Beatrice S. &amp;&nbsp;Linda Jeffries. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Basic Reading Power: Pleasure Reading, Comprehension Skills, Vocabulary Building, Thinking Skills</span><span class="font1">. New York: Addison Wesley Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Miles, M.B &amp;&nbsp;Huberman, A.M. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Qualitative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook of New Methods.</span><span class="font1"> Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nunan, D. 1989a. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Designing Tasks for the Communicative Classroom</span><span class="font1">. New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Task-Based Language Teaching</span><span class="font1">. A comprehensively revised edition of Designing Tasks for the Communicative Classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pica, T., Kanagy, R., &amp;&nbsp;Falodun, J. 1993. Choosing and Using Communication Tasks for Second Language Instruction. In G. Crookes &amp;&nbsp;S. M. Gass (Eds.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory and Practice</span><span class="font1"> (pp. 9-34). Philadelphia: Multilingual Matters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Porter. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Effects of Tasks on Language Production.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richards, Jack C. dan Rogers, Theodore S. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Robinson. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Type of Tasks</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sanford. 1970. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Concept of Evaluation</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Scrivener. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Task-Based Learning</span><span class="font1"> (methodology plus). Tersedia pada </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http//</span><a href="http://www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/taskbased.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/taskbased.htm</span></a><span class="font1">. Diakses pada tanggal 13 September 2005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Skehan, P. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Framework for the Implementation of Task-Based Instruction</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Applied Linguistics, 17</span><span class="font1">(1), 38-62. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Taggart, McRobin. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Action Research a Short Modern History</span><span class="font1">. Gelong Victoria Australia 3217: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thomas, R.M. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluation the Teaching Materials in Use, Course for Writers of InstructionalDesign</span><span class="font1">. New York: McGraw-Hill Books, Co.,Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wallace, J.M. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Action Research for Language Teachers</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Willis, Jane. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Framework for Task-Based Learning.</span><span class="font1"> Tersedia pada </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http//</span><a href="http://www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/taskbased.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.onestopenglish.com/news/magazine/Archive/taskbased.htm</span></a><span class="font1">. Diakses pada tanggal 12 September 2005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yin, Robert K. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Case Study Research: Design and Method</span><span class="font1">. London: Sage Publication.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">21</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">