---
layout: full_article
title: "SYNTACTIC BEHAVIOUR  OF NOUN IN MUNA LANGUAGE"
author: "Aderlaepe Aderlaepe"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9684 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-9684"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9684"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>SYNTACTIC BEHAVIOUR OF NOUN IN MUNA LANGUAGE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Aderlaepe</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurusan Pendidikan Bahasa dan Seni, Program Studi Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris, FKIP, Universitas Haluoleo Kendari Sulawesi Tenggara Kampus Hijau Bumi Tridharma Anduonohu Kota Kendari, Telepon/Faksimili 0401- 3190006 Ponsel 085338581391 </span><a href="mailto:alaepe@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">alaepe@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This research is concerned with noun in Muna language with the main focus on syntactic aspects particularly its syntactic behaviour. The problem of the research is stated in the form of questions, as follows: (1) What are the kinds of language units function as modifiers of noun in Muna language? and (2) What syntactic functions can be filled by noun in Muna language? The objective of this research is determined based on the problem. Thereby, the objectives are: (1) To describe and explain the language units function as modifiers of noun in Muna language and (2) To describe and explain the syntactic functions which can be filled by noun in Muna language. The research is designed qualitatively, where the analysis is based on the language natural usage of Muna language by its speech community. Data were gathered by using several techniques, namely: (1) observation, (2) interview, (3) note taking, (4) ellicitation, and (5) introspection. The obtained data were analyzed by employing certain techniques, they are: (1) permutation, (2) substitution, and (3) expansion. The results of the research are: noun in Muna language is not only modified by adjective, but also some other language units. Noun in Muna language is modified by: (1) adjective; (2) adverb: negative adverb soano ‘not’ and limitative adverb kaawu ‘only’; (3) demonstratives aini ‘this’, aitu ‘that’, atatu ‘that’, amaitu ‘that’, awaghaitu ‘that’, and anagha ‘that’; (5) possesive; and (6) quantitative: definite and indefinite quantitatives. Definite quantitative as noun modifier in Muna language appears in the form of cardinal number, whereas the indefinite o</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">n</span><span class="font1">e consists of two sub parts: variety quantitative sabhara ‘various’ and totality quantitative bhari-bharie ‘all’. The other results of the research are: noun in Muna language syntacticly can fill the functions of (1) subject of sentence, (2) predicate, (3) object which consists of direct and indirect objects, and (4) complement of sentence that consists of subjective and objective complements. This phenomenon proves the difference of syntactic behavior of noun in Muna and English languages where noun in English language can not fill in predicate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key Words: Muna language, syntactic behavior, noun, demonstrative, quantitative, and syntactic function.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini menyangkut penelusuran nomina bahasa Muna yang difokuskan pada tataran sintaksis khususnya perilaku sintaksisnya. Rumusan permasalahan dinyatakan dalam bentuk pertanyaan, sebagai berikut: (1) satuan lingual apa saja yang dapat berfungsi sebagai pewatas nomina bahasa Muna? (2) fungsi sintaksis apa saja yang dapat diisi oleh nomina bahasa Muna? Tujuan penelitian ditentukan berdasarkan permasalahan yang ada. Oleh karena itu, penelitian ini bertujuan untuk: (1) memerikan dan mejelaskan satuan-satuan lingual yang dapat berfungsi sebagai pewatas bahasa Muna, dan (2) memerikan dan menjelaskan fungsi sintaksis yang dapat diisi oleh nomina bahasa Muna. Penelitian ini didesain secara qualitatif, dengan mendasarkan analisis pada penggunaan bahasa Muna secara alamiah oleh komunitas penuturnya. Data penelitian ini dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan beberapa teknik, yaitu: (1) observasi, (2) wawancara, (3) catat, (4) elisitasi, dan (5) introspeksi. Data yang telah diiperoleh dianalisis dengan menerapkan teknik tertentu, yakni: (1) permutasi, (2) substitusi, dan (3) ekspansi. Hasil penelitian ini adalah sebagai berikut: nomina dalam bahasa Muna tidak hanya diwatasi oleh ajektiva, tetapi juga satuan bahasa lain. Adapun satuan lingual yang dapat menjadi pewatas nomina bahasa Muna adalah: (1) ajektiva, (2) adverbia, yang terbagi atas adverbia negatif soano “bukan” dan adverbia limiatif kaawu “hanya”; (3) demonstratif aini “ini”, atatu “itu”, amaitu “itu”, awaghaitu “itu”, dan angha “itu”; (4) posesif; dan (5) kuantitatif yang terdiri atas kuantitatif tentu dan kuantitatif tak tentu. Kuantitatif tentu sebagai pewatas nomina dalam bahasa Muna muncul dalam bentuk numeral kardinal, sedangkan kuantitatif tak tentu terdiri atas kuantitatif variatif sabhara “bermacam-macam” dan kuantitatif totalitas bhari-bharie “semua”. Hasil lain dari penelitian ini adalah bahwa nomina dalam bahasa Muna dapat mengisi satuan fungsi sintaksis sebagai berikut: (1) subjek kalimat, (2) predikat, (3) objek yang terbagi atas objek langsung dan objek tak langsung, dan (4) komplemen yang terbagi ke dalam komplemen subjek dan komplemen objek. Hal ini membuktikan bahwa fungsi sintaksis nomina bahasa Muna dan bahasa Inggris sangat berbeda karena nomina bahasa Inggris tidak dapat menempati predikat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci : Muna language, syntactic behavior, noun, demonstrative, quantitative, dan syntactic function.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">As a foreign language, English is more difficult to be studied than Indonesian language. The real fact shows that the achievement of students in English is still low whether at high school or university level. English teachers have been trying to develop good teaching methodologies to make the students’ achievement better. Also the materials of learning are always revised, but the results of English teaching in the class is not yet satisfied.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Teaching English as a foreign language should be compared with local languages. However, every language actually owns universal aspect besides the unique ones. The universal aspects of a language is the language elements which exist in all languages in the world, whereas the unique aspect is owned by certain</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">language that differ it from anothers. Thereby, the grammatical aspects of local languages is assumed can be used as </span><span class="font0">a </span><span class="font4">comparison device in studying English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Muna language is the one besides various local languages exist in South East Sulawesi. It is used as a colloquial in daily interaction by Munanese people. The origin of Munanese people occupy the Muna island at southern part of South East Sulawesi. Muna language is also used as a medium of interaction in cultural activities. It functions as literary medium which is expressed through oral literature especially in the forms of folksong, tale, legend, myth, and aphorism. It is in accord with the existence and functions of local language as has been stated by Amran Halim (1976: 147), local language functions as (1) the symbol of ethnic prestige, (2) the symbol of ethnic identity, (3) the means of communication in family and social environment, and (4) the medium to support and to develop regional culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Muna language has several dialects. Rene van den Berg states that there are three dialects, they are Southern, Tiworo, and Standard dialects. South dialect is used at Southern part of Muna main island particularly at Gu and Mawasangka areas, also at Siompu and Kadatua islands. Tiworo dialect is used at Tiworo area which scopes Kambaara and surroundings, include Balu and Maginti small islands. The last one is Standard dialect, it is used at the widest areas, extent from the middle part, at the eastern, at the western, and at the northern parts of Muna island includes Tobea and Renda islands (Berg, 1989: 6-7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research is not a comparative one, but the writer hopes that the results at least can be helpful to the students who learn English especially Munanese students both at high school level and university. The writer expects the results of the research make the students easily to understand English grammar particularly concerns syntactic aspects. Also the results of the research can be used by English teacher at Muna region to minimized the interference occurs to the students who have been learning English as a foreign language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Problem of the research are: (1) what language units can modify noun in Muna language?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(2) what syntactic functions can be filled by noun in Muna language? Certainly these two problems are close related to objectives of the research, they are: (1) to describe and explain the language units which can modify noun in Muna language, and (2) to describe and explain the syntactic functions of noun in Muna language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The writer hopes the out put of the research can be useful as academic resource in teaching and learning English. Concretely, the contribution of the research results are: (1) to enrich the reference of local language subject in this case Muna language that is being studied at elementary school at Muna regency as local curriculum, (2) to be a worth resource to those who want to take a further research on certain aspects of Muna language grammar, and (3) to be a comparative material to English teachers who want to minimize the interference occurs to the students who learn English as foreign language, especially at Muna regency.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHOD OF RESEARCH</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This research is designed descriptive qualitatively. The attention in the discussion is focused on the elements of grammatical system of Muna language on syntactic level. The discussion and explanation of research elements which concerns the research questions are done according to the natural characteristics of data. The elements are the natural usages of Muna language in daily communication by its speech community specificly the grammatical system of syntactic behaviour of noun. Concretely, the elements scope the syntactic functions of noun and the language units which functions as the modifiers of noun in Muna language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data of the research were taken from Munanese society in natural usage of Muna language. The writer only took oral data corresponds to the techniques of data collection. In collecting data, the writer employed certain techniques,as follows: (1) observation: the aim of this technique is finding a number of fact and relevant information related to acquisition of data by participating and involving in speech community of the target language in this case Muna language. Concretely, through this technique the writer involved actively in cosial interaction in the form of dialogue and observed the relevant data, in this case the using of noun syntacticly. This technique certainly could be implemented because the writer him self is the native speaker of Muna language and the member of Munanese society; (2) interview: the writer also interviewed several informants corresponds to the using of noun in Muna language. The implementation of interview is carried out in the form of non formal situation and the writer submitted the question to the informants informally: (3) noting: the activity of noting in this research is done by making a note as the attempt to make a transcription of oral data. This technique is applied when the writer interviewed the informants and involved actively in the dialogue. However, the relevant data are frequently appear accidently in the activity of speaking or dialogue, also in interviewing. Therefore, the writer needs to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">transcript the relevant data which are found in the field; (4) introspection: this technique is very important since the achieved data are perceived mistake. The thing that can be used as a standard is the writer’s knowledge as the native speaker of Muna language. In this case, the writer can introspect all the achieved data concerning the validity of the data; and (5) ellicitation: ellicitation technique is used to check the validity of achieved data by asking the other native speakers, in this case other informants. This technique actually is simmilar to introspection. If in the introspection technique, the writer uses him self to check the validity of data which had been achieved, in the ellicitation, the writer uses another native speakers (informants).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In analyzing the data, the writer also used certain techniques as follows: (1) substitution: substitution technique is done by changing the lingual units which are being analyzed by another units to know whether those lingual units are exist in the same or different group; (2) expansion: expansion technique is done by expansing the language units which are being analyzed with certain device. This technique is used to ensure that the analyzed data are included in the target of research scope; and (3) permutation: permutation technique is implemented by moving the position of being analyzed lingual unit to another position in a certain construction. This technique is based on the syntactic characteristics of word that can change the position from one to another syntagmaticly.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Modifiers of Noun in Muna Language</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Noun in Muna language can be modified by several language units, they are : (1) adjective, (2) adverb, (3) demonstrative pronoun, (4) posesive pronoun, (5) quantitative or number, and (6) article.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Adjective</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The position of adjective as the modifier of noun in Muna language is behind or comes after the noun. Certainly this phenomenon is different from English since the position of adjective is in front of the noun or comes before the noun. As the modifier of noun, the function of the adjective in this case is to give the explanation about noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kalambe pasole fofoguruno we SMA 1 bhaiku . </span><span class="font1">girl beautiful teach who at SMA 1 friend my “ The beautiful girl who teaches at SMA 1 is my friend. ”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aegholi lambu morubu mahono daoa.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1:S buy house small near 3:S market</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">“ I bought a small house near the market.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The three examples above can be seen transparently that in sentence (1), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalambe</span><span class="font4"> ‘girl’ is modified by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pasole</span><span class="font4"> ‘beautiful’; and the in sentence (2), noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">lambu</span><span class="font4"> ‘house’ is modified by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">morubu</span><span class="font4"> ‘small’ The positions of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pasole</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">morubu</span><span class="font4"> are behind or after the nouns. In the phrases of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalambe pasole</span><span class="font4"> ‘beautiful girl’ and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">lambu morubu</span><span class="font4"> ‘small house’, the heads (H) are </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalambe</span><span class="font4"> ‘girl’ and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">lambu</span><span class="font4"> ‘house’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Adverb</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The kinds of adverb which functions as the modifiers of noun in Muna language are negative and limitative adverbs.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Negative Adverb</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Negative adverb in Muna language is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> ‘not’, it is used to negate the noun. It means that the function of modifier is to state the negation. Therefore it is called negative adverb. The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano </span><span class="font4">‘not’ as noun modifier is in front of or before the noun. Pay attention to the examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(3)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aini soano lambu taaka o waru.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">this not house but Art. shop</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ This is not a house but a shop. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(4)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amaku soano dotoro taaka o mantiri.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Father my not doctor but Art. medical staff</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ My father is not a doctor, but a medical staff. “</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the two sentences above, nouns are modified by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> ‘not’ as negative adverb. The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> as a modifier is in front of noun as the head. In sentence (3), negative adverb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> ‘not’ modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">lambu</span><span class="font4"> ‘house’ and the in sentence (4) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dotoro</span><span class="font4"> ‘doctor’ .</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Limitative Adverb</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Limitative adverb in Muna language is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> ‘only’, it is the kind of noun modifier which states the limitation or restriction of the object we speak about, in this case the noun. The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> ‘only’ is behind or after the noun. It is certainly different from the position of negative adverb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> ‘not’. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nefumaano gholeo segholeo o roti kaawu</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3:S eat that day one day Art. bread only</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">“ The food he/she eats in a day is bread only.“</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(6)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Morano kahanda indewi inodi kaawu.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">see who ghost yesterday I only</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ It was only me who saw the ghost yesterday. “</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> ‘only’ in both sentences above is after the noun or behind the noun. In sentence (5), limitative adverb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> functions to modify </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o roti</span><span class="font4"> ‘bread’. Semanticly this sentence means bread is the only food for him to eat every day. The same phenomenon occurs in sentence (6), where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu </span><span class="font4">functions to modify </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">inodi</span><span class="font4"> ‘me’. In this case, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> restricts the person that the other did not see the ghost.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Demonstrative Pronoun</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Demonstrative pronoun functions to point out the object what we speak about. The referring object we aim can be close to, rather far, or more over it is far away from the speaker. In Muna language, demonstrative pronoun is devided in to: (a) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4"> ‘this’, (b) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, (c) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, (d) a</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tatu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, (e) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, and (f) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4">/</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagha</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘this’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4"> ‘this’ in is used to point out a certain object which its position is close to the speaker or the speaker touches it. The distance of the object from the listener can be near or far. It means the position of the object is viewed from the speaker, not from the listener. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(7)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anahi aini fokoanauku.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">child this nephew my</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ This child is my nephew.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(8)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Galu aini pada nogholie amaku.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">garden this already 3:S buy 3:S father my</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ This garden had been bought by my father. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini ‘this’</span><span class="font4"> in both sentences above is behind the noun. This kind of demonstrative functions to modify the noun. Accordingly, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4"> in sentence (7) modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anahi</span><span class="font4"> ‘child’ and in sentence (8) modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">galu</span><span class="font4"> ‘garden’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The position of demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4"> ‘this’ can also in front of noun or comes before noun. Pay attention to the examples bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(9)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aini lambu kaelatehamani.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This house live place our</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ This is the house we live. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(10)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aini anahi meghawano beasiswa</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This child get who scholrship</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ This is the child who gets the scholarship ”</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">aitu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘that’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ is a kind of demonstrative used to point out a certain object which its position is rather far from the speaker, but the distance of the object from the listener can be near or far. If the object is far from the listener, it must be still transparently. It means both of speaker and listener still can visualize (can see) the object. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(11)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Karambau aitu noasoe pisaku</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">buffalo that 3:S sell cousin my</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ That buffalo was sold by my cousin.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(12)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moghane aitu nopongko bhaino</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">man that 3:S kill friend his</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That man killed his friend ”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">amaitu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘that’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Amaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ is used to point out a certain object which the distance is rather far from the speaker and the listener, but they still can see the object. The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaitu</span><span class="font4"> in the sentence is behind the noun or comes after noun. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(13)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kabhongka amaitu nondo dorabue</span><span class="font1">. road that still 3:P make</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“ That road is still being made. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(14)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kapala amaitu naghumulu te Wolio </span><span class="font1">ship that 3:S toward will to Wolio “ That ship will sail to Wolio ”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">By paying attention to the examples above, it can be seen transparently that the position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaitu </span><span class="font4">‘that’ is after the noun or behind the noun.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">atatu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘that’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Atatu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ is a kind of demonstrative that used to point out a certain object which its distance is far away from the speaker and the listener, but both of them still can see the object. The position of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">atatu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ in the sentence is also behind the noun or comes after noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(15)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kabhawo atatu nokositani</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mountain that 3:S has devil</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That mountain is occupied by devil “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(16)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buea atatu nofuma mie</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Crocodile that 3:S eat man</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That crocodile eats people “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">atatu</span><span class="font4"> in both sentences above is the modifier of noun. In sentence (15), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">atatu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ functions to modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kabhawo</span><span class="font4"> ‘mountain’, meanwhile in the sentence (16) functions to modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buea </span><span class="font4">‘crocodile’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">awaghaitu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘that’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ in Muna language is used to point out a certain object which its position is very far from the speaker and the listener. Both of them can not see the object. The object is only visualized by the experience. It means both speaker and listener have seen the object and recognize it well. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(17)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kamokula awaghaitu o bhisa</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Old people that Art. lunatic</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That old man/woman is a lunatic. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(18)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mie awaghaitu kapala sikolaku we SD</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Man that head school my at SD</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ That man is my head master in Elementary School. “</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">By paying attention to the examples above, it can be found that the position of demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ is after the noun or behind the noun. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> in sentence (17) functions to modify </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kamokula</span><span class="font4"> ‘old man/woman’ and in sentence (18) modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mie</span><span class="font4"> ‘man’. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamokula awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that man’ in sentence (17) describes the man is not seen by the speaker and the listener in the time of speaking, but both of them recognize him since they ever seen him before.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nagha</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘that’</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Demonstrative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ is used to point out a certain object which its position is not certain. Both the speaker and the listener only imagine the object. The object can not be visualized for unreal form. The speaker and listener may never see the object.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(19)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O surugaa nagha netaa sepaliha.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Art. heaven that 3:S pleasure very much</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ (in) The heaven is pleasure very much. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(20)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Malaikati anagha nofodhagani.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">angel that 3:S us take care</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That angel takes care us. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The using of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4"> ’that’ in sentence (19) is aimed to point out the unreal object of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">surugaa </span><span class="font4">‘heaven’, and in sentence (20) also to point out the unreal object of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">malaikati</span><span class="font4"> ‘angel’. The using of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagha </span><span class="font4">‘that’ obliges the presence of article </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4">, contrarily the article </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> can not present in the form of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Possesive</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Possesive as modifier in Muna language exist in the suffix forms since its construction attaches or combines to the end of noun. After possesive suffix present to noun constituent, the new derived one consists of two elements, head and modifier. The head is noun and modifier is possessive suffix. The possesive forms correspond to personal pronoun, so it is also called possesive pronoun. Every form of personal pronoun has a certain form of possesive. The relationship between personal pronoun and possesive can be seen in the table bellow:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Person</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Pronoun</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Possesive</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">First Singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Inodi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-ku</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">First Plural Dualist</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Intaidi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">-nto</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">First Plural Inclusive</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Intaidiimu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-ntoomu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">First Plural Exclusive</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Insaidi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">-mani</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Second Singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Ihintu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-mu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Second Plural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Ihintuumu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-umu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Third Singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Anoa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-no</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Third Plural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Andoa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">-ndo</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The position of possesive is behind or after the noun since it attaches to the end of noun. Possesive –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ku</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">inodi</span><span class="font4"> ‘I’ as the first singular person; possesive -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nto</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">intaidi</span><span class="font4"> ‘we’ as the first dualist person; -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ntoomu</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">intaidiimu</span><span class="font4"> ‘we’ as the first plural inclusive; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-mani</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">insaidi</span><span class="font4"> ‘we’ as the first plural exclusive; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-mu</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ihintu</span><span class="font4"> ‘you’ as the second singular person; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-umu</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ihintuumu</span><span class="font4"> ‘you’ as the second plural person; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-no</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anoa</span><span class="font4"> ‘he/she’ as the third singular person; and -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ndo</span><span class="font4"> refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">andoa </span><span class="font4">‘they’ as the third plural person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">These possesives function in giving the explanation about noun which they attach to. Accordingly, these possesives are noun modifiers. Pay attention to these examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(21)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Patuju-nto nopandehaanemo kaew.a </span><span class="font1">aim our 3:S know already rival</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“ Our aim has been known by the rival. ”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(22)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Laa - ntoomu ingka nokelemo.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">River our in fact 3:S dry already “ Our river has been really dried. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(23)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kampo–mani nofopindae pomarinta.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Village our 3:S move 3:S government</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ Our village is moved by the government. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(24)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noafa oasogho kahitela-mu ?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Why 2:S sell corn your</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ Why did you sell your corn ? “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(25)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nehamai gara lambu-umu ?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Where really house your “ Where is actually your house? “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(26)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wa Ani atatue lambu-no.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Wa Ani that house her “ That is Wa Ani’s house. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(27)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Owae nehamai boku-ndo muri?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">2:S bring where book their pupil</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ Where did you bring the pupil’s books? “</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Quantitative</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Quantitative or number is a modifier of noun in Muna language which states the quantity or number of noun. There are two kinds of quantitative, namely definite and indefinite quantitatives.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Definite Quantitative</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The sum of noun that is modified by definite quantitative has been recoginized. In this case both the speaker and the listener know how many the noun since the number of noun has been determined quantitatively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The position of quantitative as noun modofier is in front of the noun, or comes before the noun. Pay attention to the examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(28)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rua ghonu otono taaka nando neada tora otono kantori.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">two number car his but still 3:S borrow again car his office</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ He has got two cars but he still borrows the office’s one. ”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(29)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tolu partai neakuiku</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">three party 3:S recognize 1:S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“There are three political parties which I recognize”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rua</span><span class="font4"> ‘two’ in sentence (28) and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tolu</span><span class="font4"> ‘three’ in the sentence (29) are definite quantitatives or definite numbers and they are used to modify the noun after them. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rua</span><span class="font4"> ‘two’ modofies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otono</span><span class="font4"> ‘his car’ and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tolu </span><span class="font4">‘three’ modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">partai</span><span class="font4"> ‘political party’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>Indefinite Quantitative</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Indefinite quantitative is the opposite of definite one. It is undecided number of quantity, and can not answer the question how many. In Muna language, indefinite quantitative semanticly states ‘the variety’ and ‘the totality’. Thereby, the indefinite quantitative consists of variety and totality quantitatives.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>Variety Quantitative</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Variety quantitative in Muna language is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sabhara</span><span class="font4"> ‘various’. As the modifier of noun, the constituent of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sabhara</span><span class="font4"> functions to modify noun. It explains the noun concerning the diversity. Its position is before or in front of noun. Pay attention to the examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(30)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sabhara liwu padamo nokalahie.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Various country already 3:S visit 3:S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ He has visited various countries. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(31)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Welo dhunia ini sabhara kadadi naandoo.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In world this various animal exist</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ In this world there are various animals. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the words </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sabhara</span><span class="font4"> ‘various’ in sentence (30) functions to modify </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">liwu</span><span class="font4"> ‘country’ where in the sentence (31) modifies </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dhunia</span><span class="font4"> ‘world’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>Totality Quantitative</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Totality quantitative in Muna language is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bhari-bharie</span><span class="font4"> ‘all’. It is one of noun modifier which states the number of noun simultaneously. Its place is also in front of noun. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(32)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bhari-bharie liwu kakalahano sadhia doasiane.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">all country go place 3:S always 3:P like 3:S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ All country he visits, the people always like him. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bhari-bharie kaago nokapihie</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">all medicine 3:S look for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“All kinds of medicines he look for ”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The indefinite quantitative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bhari-bharie</span><span class="font4"> ‘all’ in sentence (32) above functions to give explanation about noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">liwu</span><span class="font4"> ‘country’ such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bhari-bharie</span><span class="font4"> in sentence (33) functions to give explanation or information about noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaago</span><span class="font4"> ‘medicine’. Thereby, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bhari-bahrie</span><span class="font4"> in both sentences are noun modifiers.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>Article</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Noun in Muna language is also modified by article. The existance of article as noun modofier in Muna language can be categorized as a unique aspect of Muna language since we can not find in indonesia language or in many local languages in Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The article in Muna language is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4">. This kind of article always presents in front of noun or comes before noun. Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font1">34)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O bensi ampaitu nohalimo.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Art. premium nowadays 3:S expensive</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ The premium nowadays is expensive. “</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(35)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O kahitela we daoa rua riwu sekilo.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Art. corn at market two thousand one kg</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ The corn at the market costs two thousands rupia each kg. “</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>Syntactic Function of Noun in Muna Language</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>Subject of Sentence</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">According to Verhaar (1999: 166), subject of sentence is an argument exists in the situation which explained by verb/predicate, or has the experiences to the certain thing, or does the activity which is stated by the verb/predicate (Verhaar, 1999: 166).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(36)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O Pomarinta naefofoni gaji taghu tee wise.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Art. government 3:S will increase salary year at face</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“The government will increase the salary next year.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">O Pomarinta</span><span class="font4"> ‘the government’ in sentence (36) is the subject of the sentence since it carries out the activity which is explained by the predicate </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naefofoni</span><span class="font4"> ‘will increase’. On the other hand, the subject of sentence (37) bellow exists in the situation that is stated by verb or the predicate of sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(37)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anahimoelu amaitu nosaki molea.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">child orphan that 3:S ill painful</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ That orphan is seriously ill. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anahimoelu</span><span class="font4"> ‘orphan’ in the sentence (37) above syntacticly functions as the subject of sentence because it exists in the situation which is stated by predicate </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nosaki molea</span><span class="font4"> ‘seriously ill’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark53"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark54"></a>Predicate of Sentence</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Alwi (2000: 326) states that a predicate of sentence is the main constituent of a sentence/clause which presents syntacticly with subject constituent in the left; object and complement constituents in the right. The presence of subject constituent in the left to acompany the predicate is absolutely or obligatory. It means the requirement of a sentence is the presence of predicate and subject constituents. On the other hand, object and complement constituents are not the absolute elements of a sentence. They can either present or not in the sentence. Therefore, the presence of object and complement in the sentence is optional. Pay attention to the examples bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(38)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kalambe awaghaitu guruno wamba Inggirisi te SMP Kontunaga</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">girl that teacher language English at SMP Kontunaga</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“That girl is an English teacher at SMP Kontunaga.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The phrase of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">guruno wamba Inggirisi</span><span class="font4"> ‘an English teacher’ in the sentence (38) above syntacticly functions as the predicate of sentence since its position is at the right side of subject </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalambe awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that girl’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark55"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark56"></a>Object of Sentence</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Object of sentence is the element of a sentence which gets or receives the action/activity which stated by verb or predicate (Verhaar ,1999: 166). Pay attention to the sentence (39) bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(39)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Insaidi taegholi galu indewi.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">we 1:P buy garden yesterday</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ We bought a new garden yesterday. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The constituent of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">galu</span><span class="font4"> ‘garden’ in the sentence (39) above syntacticly functions as the object of sentence since it gets or receives the action of predicate </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">taegholi</span><span class="font4"> ‘bought’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Object can be devided into two kinds, direct and indirect objets. Direct object is a kind of object gets or receives the action or activity done by the subject directly, whereas indirect object gets or receives the activity or action from the subject indirectly (Frank, 1972: 9). The sentence owns indirect object must uses two valencies verb. This case can be understood since the presence of indirect object must be accompanied by the direct one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(40)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amaku nerabu kaghati..</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">father my 3:S make kite</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ My father makes a kite.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(41)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amaku neburi sura so La Ehe .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Father my 3:S write letter for La Ehe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ My father wrote a letter for La Ehe. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentences (40) above only has a direct objects because the verbs in predicate constituents are one valency. The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nerabu</span><span class="font4"> ‘makes’ is one valency, it does not require the presence of second object (indirect object). It is different from sentences (41) because there are direct and indirect objects. The possibility of using indirect objects in these sentences is the using of two valencies verbs in the predicate constituents. Verbs </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">neburi</span><span class="font4"> ‘write’ is two valencies. Accordingly, the objects of sentences must be two, direct object </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sura</span><span class="font4"> ‘letter’ and indirect one </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">La Ehe</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sura</span><span class="font4"> ‘letter’ is categorized as direct object because it directly receives or gets the activity of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buri</span><span class="font4"> ‘write’ done by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaku</span><span class="font4"> ‘my father’. On the other hand, La Ehe is called as indirect object because it indirectly receives the activity of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buri</span><span class="font4"> ‘write’ which is done by the subject </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaku</span><span class="font4"> ‘my father’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark57"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark58"></a>Complement of Sentence</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Complement of sentence is the sentence element which completes the subject or object (Frank, 1972: 9). In this case, the complement of a sentence gives the information or explanation about subject or object. Thereby, there are two kinds of complement, subjective and objective complements. Corresponds to this definition, subjective complement gives the information or explanation about the subject, whereas the objective complement gives the explanation or information about the object of sentence. Look at the examples bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(42) . </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nekapihino o doi.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3:S look for Art. money</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“What he look for is money.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(43)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Insaidi tapili Pak Amir membalino kapala desa</span><span class="font1"> .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">we 1:P chose Sir Amir become who head village</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">“ We chose Mr. Amir as the head of village .“</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">O doi</span><span class="font4"> ‘money’ in sentence (42) above refers to the subject </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nekapihino</span><span class="font4"> ‘what he wants’. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">O doi </span><span class="font4">‘money’ in the sentence functions to give the information or explanation about the subject </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nekapihino</span><span class="font4">. So, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o doi</span><span class="font4"> ‘money’ syntacticly functions as subjective complement. On the other hand, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kapala desa</span><span class="font4"> ‘the head of village’ in the sentence (43) refers to the object of the sentence, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pak amir</span><span class="font4"> ‘Mr. Amir’. Semanticly the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kapala desa</span><span class="font4"> gives explanation/information about </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pak Amir</span><span class="font4">. Thereby, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kapala desa</span><span class="font4"> ‘the head of village in the sentence (43) above syntacticly functions as the objective complement.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark59"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark60"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Noun in Muna language is modified by (1) adjective, (2) adverb, (3) demonstrative, (4) possessive, (5) quantitative/number, and (article). Adjective as noun modifier, it comes after noun or its position is behind the noun; Adverb consist of Negative Adverb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soano</span><span class="font4"> ‘not’ comes before noun and Limitative Adverb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaawu</span><span class="font4"> ‘only’ that also comes after noun; Demonstrative consist of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aini</span><span class="font4"> ‘this’ , </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ , </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">atatu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awaghaitu</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anagha</span><span class="font4"> ‘that’ which their places are after the noun; Possesive exists in the forms of suffixes, where each of them refers to personal pronoun; and quantitative/number consist of definite quantitative and indefinite quantitative. Definite quantitative is the cardinal number whereas</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">indefinite quantitative consist of variety quantitative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sabhara</span><span class="font4"> ‘various’ and totality quantitative </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bhari-bharie</span><span class="font4"> ‘all’. The places of all the quantitatives are before the noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Syntactic functions can be filled by noun in Muna language are: (1) subject, (2) predicate, (3) object (direct and indirect objects), and (4) complement of sentence (subjective and objective complements). However, noun in English language can not fill the constituent of predicate at all, but noun in Muna language can fill the predicate of sentence.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark61"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark62"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Alwi, Hasan et al. 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia Edisi Ketiga</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Berg, Rene Van den. 1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of the Muna Language</span><span class="font4">. Leiden: Summer Institute of Linguistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Frank, Marcella. 1972. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Modern English</span><span class="font4">. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halim, Amran. 1976. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Bahasa Nasional</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kridalaksana, Harimurti. 1985. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Deskriptif Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lyons, John. 1977. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics Vol. 1 &amp;&nbsp;Vol. 2.</span><span class="font4"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mc Manis, C. et al. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Language File</span><span class="font4">. Ohio: The Ohio State University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Moeliono, Anton M. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Muchtar, Muziza. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Nominalisasi dalam Bahasa Melayu Langkat: Satu Kajian Struktur dan Semantis</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Unpublished Thesis. Padang: Fakultas Pascasarjana Universitas Andalas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Quirk, Randolph. 1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Contemporary English</span><span class="font4">. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Robins, R.H. 1967. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sejarah Singkat Linguistik</span><span class="font4">. Terjemahan Asril Mardjohan. Bandung: Penerbit ITB.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sanusi, A. Effendi, et al. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Nomina dan Adjectiva Bahasa Lampung Dialek Abung</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1991. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Jawa</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tarigan, Henri Guntur. 1985. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengajaran Morfologi</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Penerbit Angkasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Verhaar, J.W.M. 1999. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Asas-Asas Linguistik Umum.</span><span class="font4"> Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Yatim, Nurdin. 1992. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Morfologi Kata Kerja Bahasa Muna</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">10</span></p>