---
layout: full_article
title: "FINANCIAL TERMS IN FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR TRANSLATION INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "Putu Shinta Noviaty"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9701 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-9701"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9701"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>FINANCIAL TERMS IN FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR TRANSLATION INTO INDONESIAN</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Putu Shinta Noviaty</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Program Pascasarjana, Universitas Udayana Jalan Nias No. 13 Denpasar </span><a href="mailto:putushinta88@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">putushinta88@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Translating a certain text is rather complex. The aforementioned complexity becomes even more evident when the text deals with specialized subjects such as finance, banking, or accounting. It is interesting and challenging in analyzing financial terms as it contains of specific vocabulary or highly specialized words usually used only by specialists in this case is experts from finance field. The aim of this study is to analyze the techniques applied in translating English financial terms into Indonesian found in financial statement. This paper is a library research where the data is in the form of documents or printed out texts. The method that is implemented in analyzing the data in this study is the qualitative one proposed by Djajasudarma (1993). There were 7 techniques used by translator in translating English financial terms into Indonesian found in financial statements. They are borrowing, reduction, established equivalent, calque, literal translation, modulation and transposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">financial terms</span><span class="font2">,</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">financial statement</span><span class="font2">, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">translation techniques</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Menerjemahkan teks tertentu merupakan sesuatu yang agak rumit. Kerumitan tersebut menjadi lebih jelas ketika berhubungan dengan bidang yang khusus seperti keuangan, perbankan, atau akuntansi. Sangat menarik dan menantang dalam menganalisis istilah keuangan karena mengandung kosakata spesifik atau kata-kata yang sangat khusus biasanya hanya digunakan oleh para ahli dalam hal ini para ahli dari bidang keuangan.Metode yang digunakan dalam penulisan paper ini adalah metode penelitian pustaka dalam mencari referensi yang berhubungan dengan penelitian ini dan metode kualitatif deskriptif dalam menganalisa data. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis teknik yang diterapkan dalam menerjemahkan istilah-istilah keuangan Inggris ke dalam bahasa Indonesia yang ditemukan dalam laporan keuangan. Ada 7 teknik yang digunakan oleh penerjemah dalam menerjemahkan istilah-istilah keuangan Inggris ke dalam bahasa Indonesia. Teknik tersebut adalah </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing, reduction, established equivalent, calque, literal translation, modulation</span><span class="font2"> dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">istilah keuangan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">laporan keuangan</span><span class="font2">, dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">teknik penerjemahan</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Commonly people tend to consider translation as something that anybody can do with the help of dictionaries. In fact, translating a certain text is rather complex. The aforementioned complexity becomes even more evident when the text deals with specialized subjects such as finance, banking, or accounting. In this particular case, when words appear next to specific terms and within a specific context, they contain nuances that must be accounted for in the final translation. In translating texts with certain terms, translators must have knowledge pertaining to the terms itself for example in translating financial statement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Financial statements are records that outline the financial activities of a business, an individual or any other entity. Financial statements are meant to present the financial information of the entity in question as clearly and concisely as possible for both the entity and for readers. (Investopedia, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To review the relevant works is worth doing since they are closely related to this study. The previous work by Novawati (2012), in her research entitled An Analysis of Translation Procedures of Accounting Terms in a Bilingual Textbook for Grade XII of Senior High School Entitled “Accounting 2” analyzed the accounting terms in noun phrase form mostly found in the textbook, translation procedures that the translator used in translating them and to find out the quality of translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The aim of this study is to analyze the techniques applied in translating English financial terms into Indonesian. By conducting this research, some benefits hopefully can be gained, those are: to enrich the analysis of financial terms in English financial statements and their translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">into Indonesian, to give contribution to the development of techniques applied in the field of translation especially about translating financial statements and to give contribution to accountants in practice, parties of finance academics or auditors working in an international</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">context.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The data utilized in this research are the financial terms found in a financial statement of PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 2011</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font2">The data consisting of words and phrases were presented in the SL and their equivalent in the TL. Since it was not conducted in field or some places, this research is a library research where the data is in the form of documents or printed out texts. The data were analyzed based on the classification of problems which mainly focus on the types of financial terms and techniques applied in translating English financial terms into Indonesian. The method that is implemented in analyzing the data in this study is the qualitative one proposed by Djajasudarma (1993).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After collecting the data, translation techniques were analyzed by implementing theory proposed by (Molina &amp;&nbsp;Albir) and supported by Larson (1988) stated that the first meaning components of the terms under concerned are unpacked into its semantic features of components in order to grasp the message of the source language. Larson (1988) also stated that the semantic feature is the type of units, of which the features and relationships are the same in all languages. All have meaning components that can be classified as ‘things’, ‘events’, ‘attributes’ and ‘relation’ In terms of qualitative research method, Aminuddin as quoted by Khaerun (2003:7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">proposed that the qualitative research is the type of research which is emphasizing on giving explanation with the deep comprehension, and can be applied in the particular field of knowledge, such as financial terms in this point.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study applied the two methods of presenting the analyzed data i.e. informal and formal. A description using words is inevitable, so is the use of related symbols, such as tables or diagrammatic forms with mathematical symbols (+, -, /) in this case in terms of meaning component. Both were used since there were presentation of classified data and the techniques of translation</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Translation technique seems to be singled out to “name an act of selecting targetlanguage units, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i.e</span><span class="font2">. an actual operation or manipulation with linguistic material” (Hrehovuik, 2006: 44). Molina and Albir (2002:509), propose eighteen techniques of translation, those are Adaptation, Amplification, Borrowing, Calque, Compensation, Description, Discursive creation, Established equivalent, Generalization, Linguistic Amplification, Linguistic compression, Literal translation, Modulation, Particularization, Reduction, Substitution, Transposition and Variation. However there are some of those techniques applied in translating English financial terms into Indonesian found in financial statements as follow:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Borrowing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This technique is the simplest one. It is used usually when there is a metalinguistic gap in the target language, for example, when a new technique or an unknown concept is introduced.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the selected data analyzed in this study, it is found out that the translator used borrowing technique to translate a financial term below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dividend </span><span class="font2">payments to all shareholders are recognized as liabilities in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">consolidated financial statements in the period when the dividend payments are declared by the Company’s shareholders</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL concept : that part of the money made by a business which is divided among those who own shares in the business (Longman Dictionary)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Pembagian </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">dividen </span><span class="font2">kepada para pemegang saham Perseroan diakui sebagai</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">liabilitas dalam laporan keuangan konsolidasian pada periode ketika dividen disetujui oleh para pemegang saham Perseroan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL concept :Bagian laba atau pendapatan perusahaan yang besarnya ditetapkan oleh direksi serta disahkan oleh rapat pemegang saham untuk dibagikan kepada para pemegang saham atau sejumlah uang yang berasal dari hasil keuntungan yang dibayarkan kepada pemegang saham sebuah perseroan (KBBI)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the strategies applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis proposed by Larson that the first meaning components of the terms under concerned are unpacked into its semantic features of components in order to grasp the message of the SL. In relation with the semantic components, Larson</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1988: 29-33) also stated that the semantic feature is the type of units, of which the features and relationships are the same in all languages. All have meaning components that can be classified as ‘things’, ‘events’, ‘attributes’ and ‘relation’.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">dividend</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">dividen</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Money made by business divided among shareholders</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Recognized as liabilities</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Declared by the company’s shareholders</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the meaning described in the componential analysis, the term dividend is equivalent with the translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dividen</span><span class="font2"> as they share the same meaning components. The TL concept certainly matches with the SL concept in which both means money made by business divided among shareholders recognized as liabilities declared by the company’s shareholders. The strategies applied by translator in translating dividend into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dividen</span><span class="font2"> is ‘naturalized borrowing’ which means the word in source language can be naturalized to fit the spelling rules in the target language.(Molina and Albir:2002). Novawati (2012) stated that this type of translation belong to mix loanword that occurs when the source language is borrowed into the target language with changes in form but without changing the meaning. The naturalized borrowing in this translation is marked by the spelling adaptation process in which there is a reduction of letter /d/ in the Indonesian version. The term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dividen</span><span class="font2"> has been commonly and widely used in Indonesian and therefore the readers are quite familiar with this term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Reduction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The following strategy is called as reduction which means suppressing an information in source language item in the target language item.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data 2</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Capital paid in excess of par value is </span><span class="font2">the difference between the selling price</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and nominal value of the share</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL concept : The difference between the selling price and nominal value of the share ()</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Agio saham </span><span class="font2">merupakan selisih antara harga jual dan nilai nominal saham.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL concept : kekayaan bersih perusahaan yang berasal dari penilaian atau penjualan saham di atas harga / nilai pari</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font2">(media.bpr)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the strategy applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Capital paid in excess of par value</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Agio saham</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Company’s asset</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">The difference between the selling price and the nominal value of the share</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The translator translated capital paid in excess of par value into agio saham. From the component compared, both terms have the same meaning. Both capital paid in excess of par value and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">agio saham</span><span class="font2"> express the difference between the selling price and nominal value of the share. The translator applied reduction technique in which the translator is more likely to reduce in the number of elements that form the source language terms as clearly can be seen in translating capital paid in excess of par value which is translated into agio saham. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reduction</span><span class="font2"> is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">found to be useful as the terms of address are not found in the target language and an explanation is not possible. As clearly stated about the meaning of both terms in source language and target</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language, the translator find the equivalent in which there is no crucial information is dropped or reduced.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Established Equivalent</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">According to Molina and Albir (2002), Established equivalent means using a term or expression recognized (by dictionaries or language in use) as an equivalent in the TL, e.g. to translate the English word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">teacher</span><span class="font2"> as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guru</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: Total employee </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">cost </span><span class="font2">during year 2012 are Rp. 308.623.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SL concept</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: a monetary valuation of effort, material, resources, time and utilities consumed, risks incurred, and opportunity forgone in production and delivery of a good or service. All expenses are costs, but not all costs (such as those incurred in acquisition of an income-generating asset) are expenses. (businessdictionary)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: Jumlah </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">beban </span><span class="font2">karyawan yang terjadi selama tahun 2012 adalah Rp. 308.623 .</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">TL concept</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: penurunan manfaat ekonomi selama suatu periode akuntansi dalam bentuk arus keluar atau berkurangnya aktiva atau terjadinya kewajiban yang mengakibatkan penurunan ekuitas yang tidak menyangkut pembagian kepada penanaman modal (IAI:1994)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the procedure applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Cost</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">beban</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A monetary valuation of effort, material, resources, time and utilities consumed, risks incurred, and opportunity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Forgone in production and delivery of a good or service</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Decreases in economic benefits</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">During an accounting period</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">In the form of outflows or depletions of assets</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the meaning elements of ‘cost’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beban,</span><span class="font2"> both terms do not share same meaning. In target language, ‘cost’ itself is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">biaya</span><span class="font2"> which is apparently different from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beban</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Beban</span><span class="font2"> in target language is equivalent with ‘expense’ in the source language. Based on the meaning componential analysis, it is true that both are an indication of a cash outflow but there is a difference in terms of inflow that can be gained by a company. A cost may or may not be an expense as has been mentioned in the definition of cost itself. Cost will be a cash outflow that may bring benefit for a company. For example: gasoline for delivering service to a customer by Pizza Hut delivery service. Meanwhile, Expense is a cash outflow that will only cost money for a company but do not give any feedback, for example: the taxi fare to a shopping mall for window shopping, it only cost money but do not bring any financial benefit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Literal Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Literal translation is mostly used while dealing with technical texts. However, it is also the basic translation procedure in any kind of translation. According to Molina and Albir (2005), literal translation means translating a word or an expression word for word, e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I will love you</span><span class="font2"> as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">aku akan mencintai kamu</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data 4</span></h2>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: Short term employee </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">benefits </span><span class="font2">recognized in the consolidated statement of financial position consist of prepaid pension expense, employee benefits obligation, pension benefits, post-employment medical benefits, other postemployment and long-term benefits.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SL concept</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: Advantages that you get from a company in addition to the money you earn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Oxford :2005)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Imbalan </span><span class="font2">kerja yang diakui dalam laporan posisi keuangan konsolidasi terdiri dari beban, imbalan pensiun dibayar dimuka, kewajiban imbalan kerja, imbalan pension, imbalan kesehatan pasca-kerja, imbalan pasca-kerja dan jangka panjang lainnya.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">TL concept</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: semua pengeluaran yang dikeluarkan oleh perusahaan untuk pekerja dan diterima dan dinikmati oleh pekerja baik secara rutin, langsung atau tidak langsung/pada suatu hari nanti. (Ruky:2006)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the technique applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">benefit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">imbalan</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Advantages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Given by company</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">In addition to the money earned by employee</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">All expenses given to employee</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the meaning described in the componential analysis, the term benefit does not share similar meaning with the translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2"> itself has broader meaning than the word ‘benefit’. In SL concept, benefit or employee benefit includes all advantages that you get from a company in addition to the money you earn. (Oxford:2005). Meanwhile, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2"> which is equivalent with word ‘compensation’ or ‘remuneration’ means reward for employment in the form of pay, salary, or wage, including allowances, benefits (such as company car, medical plan, pension plan), bonuses, cash incentives, and monetary value of the noncash incentives (Murcko:2013). By analyzing the definition of benefit and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2">, it can be said that benefits that are given to the employees are parts of compensation that the employees deserve to get along their worked time but </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2"> or compensation or remuneration are total payment or compensation received for services or employment including the base salary and any bonuses or other economic benefits that an receives during employment. In the above example, instead of translating benefit into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">keuntungan,</span><span class="font2"> the translator actually could translates it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2">. The strategy applied by translator in translating benefit into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">imbalan</span><span class="font2"> is ‘literal translation’ which means to translate a word or an expression word for word.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Modulation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Modulation means changing the point of view, focus or cognitive category in relation to the source text, it can be lexical or structural (Molina and Albir:2002).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Data 5</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark26"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Non-current liabilities</span><span class="font2">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL concept : A liability not due to be paid within 12 months during the normal course of business. Non-current liabilities are also called long-term liabilities. In accounting, non-current liabilities are shown on the right wing of the balance sheet representing the sources of funds, which are generally bounded in form of capital assets. (readyratios:2013)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark28"></a>TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Liabilitas jangka panjang </span><span class="font2">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">TL concept : semua utang atau kewajiban keuangan yang jatuh temponya lebih dari satu periode akuntansi terhitung sejak tanggal laporan keuangan. (Sudrajat:1999)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the technique applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Non-current liabilities</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Liabilitas jangka panjang</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Liability not due within 12 months</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The term non-current liabilities was translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">liabilitas jangka panjan</span><span class="font2">g. The component between non-current liabilities in source language is the same compared to the component of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">liabilitas jangka panjang</span><span class="font2"> in the target language. Those terms undeniably share</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">same information namely obligation that is not to required to be satisfied within 12 months of the balance sheet date. Pertaining to the technique in translating non-current liabilities into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">liabilitas jangka panjang,</span><span class="font2"> the translator applied modulation technique. Modulation means changing the point of view, focus or cognitive category in relation to the source text, it can be lexical or structural (Molina and Albir:2002). From the data, instead of using word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tidak lancar</span><span class="font2"> as the equivalence of ‘non-current’, the translator prefer to use term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jangka panjang</span><span class="font2"> in the target language. From the word ‘non-current’ which is negative, there is a changing of value when it is translated into the target language become </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jangka panjang</span><span class="font2"> which has positive value. Apparently the way of expressing both terms in the source language and in the target language are different, however the message implied in the word ‘non-current liabilities’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">liabilitas jangka panjang </span><span class="font2">are the same.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Transposition</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">According to Molina and Albir (2002), transposition is changing a grammatical category. Transposition involves replacing one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Data 6</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Transactions denominated in foreign </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">currencies </span><span class="font2">are translated into Rupiah at</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transaction .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL concept : the particular type of money in use in a country . (Longman Dictionary:1998)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Transaksi dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">mata uang </span><span class="font2">asing dijabarkan ke mata uang rupiah dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">menggunakan kurs yang berlaku pada tanggal transaksi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL concept : satuan uang suatu negara (KBBI)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the strategy applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">currency</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">mata uang</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Particular type of money</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Used in a country</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The componential analysis between currency and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mata uang</span><span class="font2"> shows that both of the terms are the same. Both are known as the basis of trade. Currency and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mata uang</span><span class="font2"> are regarded as a generally accepted form of money, including coins and paper notes, which is issued by a government and circulated within an economy. Generally speaking, each country has its own currency. For example, Indonesia has Rupiah as it’s currency. Switzerland's official currency is the Swiss franc, and Japan's official currency is the yen</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font2">However, from the translation of the word ‘currency’ into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mata uang</span><span class="font2"> it can be seen that there is a changing from a word into a phrase. Apparently the word ‘currency’ is a word and translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mata uang</span><span class="font2"> which is a phrase. The change process from a word level into a phrase level in the translation of currency into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mata uang</span><span class="font2"> can be categorized as transposition. This is a category of change process from the source language into target language, such as: a word level became a phrase level, a phrase level became a clause level, and the terms in the source language translated explicitly into the target language (Novawati:2012). However, it does not change the meaning of the message.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Calque</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Molina and Albir (2002) defined calque as a literal translation of a foreign word or phrase. It can be lexical or structural. Here is an example of financial terms in English translated into Indonesian using calque.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Data 7</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark37"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">non-cash transaction</span><span class="font2">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL concept : Investing or financing activity that does not affect the cash inflows or outflows, (Murcko:2013)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark39"></a>TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">transaksi non kas</span><span class="font2">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">TL concept : Transaksi investasi dan pendanaan yang tidak memerlukan penggunaan kas atau setara kas tidak termasuk dalam laporan arus kas. (PSAK:2006)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to identify the technique applied in translating this term into Indonesian, it is necessary to provide the componential analysis of the term and the translation presented below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">non-cash transaction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Transaksi non kas</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Financing activity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">that does not affect the cash inflows or outflows</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">In this example, calque technique is applied by translating ‘non-cash transaction’ into ‘transaksi non kas. Each word is literally translated from English into Indonesian. Novawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2012) stated that his procedure is translated within linear substitution. Transkasi is the translation of transaction and non kas is the translation of non-cash. Indonesian version</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">obviously just borrows the English word and modifies it slightly. The financial term “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Transaksi” </span><span class="font2">in target language was borrowed from “Transaction” (SL) with some changes in writing form. The letter </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“c”</span><span class="font2"> in source language was changed with letter </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“k”</span><span class="font2"> in target language while the suffix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“tion”</span><span class="font2"> in source language was changed into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“si”</span><span class="font2"> in target language. The accounting term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Kas” </span><span class="font2">in target language was borrowed from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Cash”</span><span class="font2"> in source language with some changes in writing form. The letter </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“c”</span><span class="font2"> in source language was changed with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“k”</span><span class="font2"> in target language while letter </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“h”</span><span class="font2"> in source language was lost in target language. In this case, the translator translated the word by modifying the spelling system. The linear substitution marked by looking at the position of the first word in English becomes the second word in Indonesian and vice versa. The meanings of both terms are apparently the same. Both mean investing or financing activity that does not affect the cash inflows or outflows..</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data presentation and discussion of the paper, it can be concluded that from eighteen techniques proposed by Molina and Albir, there are seven techniques used by translator in translating English financial terms into Indonesian found from the data. The techniques are: borrowing, reduction, literal translation, modulation, transposition, established equivalent, calque and equivalence. In this case, the translator tends to preserve the form of each term. However, when differences in language system of the two languages make it impossible to preserve the form, some techniques will be applied, for example: modulation or transposition.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Djajasudarma. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik-Rancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian.</span><span class="font2"> Bandung: Eresco</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Investopedia, 2012. “Financial Statement”. (online), [cited 2012 Sept 1) Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://en.investopedia"><span class="font2">http://en.investopedia</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, M.L. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation,</span><span class="font2"> 2nd Ed., New York: University of America, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Longman . 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English.</span><span class="font2"> 2<sup>nd</sup> ed</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> London: Pearson Education Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Molina Lucía and Hurtado Albir,2002. “Translation Techniques Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach”. (online), [cited 2012 Sept 9] Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://id.erudit.org/iderudit/008033ar"><span class="font2">http://id.erudit.org/iderudit/008033ar</span></a><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novawati Helen,2012. An Analysis Of Translation Procedures Of Accounting Terms In A Bilingual Textbook For Grade Xii Of Senior High School Entitled “Accounting 2” (serial online), [cited 2012 December 14] Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://ejournal.upi.edu/index.php/ELTI/article/view/24"><span class="font2">http://ejournal.upi.edu/index.php/ELTI/article/view/24</span></a><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PT. Unilever,2011. “Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasian PT. Holcim Indonesia Tbk. dan Entitas Anak”. (online), [cited 2012 Jun 1) Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://www.unilever.co.id/Images/Quarterly"><span class="font2">http://www.unilever.co.id/Images/Quarterly</span></a><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Semi, A. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Sastra.</span><span class="font2"> Bandung : Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto, 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik (Bagian Kedua: Metode dan Aneka Teknik Pengumpulan Data.</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">17</span></p>