---
layout: full_article
title: "MODULATION TRANSLATION PROCEDURE  IN TRANSLATING ENGLISH CONTENT WORDS"
author: "Polce Aryanto Bessie"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9699 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-9699"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9699"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">MODULATION TRANSLATION PROCEDURE IN TRANSLATING ENGLISH CONTENT WORDS</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Polce Aryanto Bessie</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">STIBA Cakrawala Nusantara Kupang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jalan Bunga Jati No 88, Oesapa Barat, Kupang, NTT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ponsel 085253000184</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:bessiearyanto@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">bessiearyanto@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This paper aims at examining the linguistic factor which triggers the modulation translation procedure. Furthermore this paper also discusses about the way of applying modulation translation procedure in translating English Content Words into Indonesian. Qualitative method was conducted in collecting data. The data source of this research </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Risk and Creating Value with Microfinance</span><span class="font1"> book, written by Mike Goldberg and Eric Palladini and its Indonesian translation, translated by M. Ramdhan Adhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of the analysis indicates that semantic is the main factor in determining modulation translation procedure in translating content words in English into Indonesian. Besides that, the way of applying modulation translation procedure in translating English content words into Indonesian is by considering the point of view or the implicit meaning in two different sentence structures (either in English or Indonesian).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">semantics, modulation translation procedure, content word</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengkaji faktor linguistik yang menentukan prosedur terjemahan secara modulasi. Penelitian ini juga membahas mengenai cara menerapkan prosedur terjemahan secara modulasi dalam hal menerjemahkan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">content words</span><span class="font1"> dari Bahasa Inggris ke dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode qualitatif deskriptif. Sumber data penelitian adalah buku ekonomi keuangan yang berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Risk and Creating Value with Microfinance</span><span class="font1"> ditulis oleh Mike Goldberg dan Eric Palladini serta terjemahan bahasa Indonesianya yang diterjemahkan oleh M. Ramdhan Adhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hasil penelitian menunjukan bahwa semantik merupakan faktor utama dalam menentukan terjadinya prosedur terjemahan secara modulasi untuk menerjemahkan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Content Words</span><span class="font1"> Bahasa Inggris ke dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Selain itu, cara menerapkan prosedur modulasi dalam menerjemahkan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Content Words</span><span class="font1"> adalah dengan cara memperhatikan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Point of View</span><span class="font1"> atau makna yang tersirat dalam dua struktur kalimat yang berbeda (baik dalam bahasa Inggris maupun dalam bahasa Indonesia).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">semantik, prosedur terjemahan modulasi, kata penuh</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In translating a text absolutely there must be a translation procedure because the translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">procedure enables the translator to get the representative words in conveying the meaning on source </span><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">language into the target language. It means that the translator must obey the rule of the translation procedure itself. The rule refers to the way of applying it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The theory applied in this writing are; first, according to Haspelmath (2002: 149) a content word means that the word can stand alone and have meaning. For example </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">teach</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">book</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">yesterday </span><span class="font1">and the like. Furthermore, the theory of bound morpheme (Haspelmath, 2002: 3) is applied. There are two types of bound morphemes; inflectional bound morphemes and derivational bound morphemes. Inflectional bound morpheme is those which do not change the word class of a base when they attach to. Meanwhile, derivational bound morpheme is those which change the word class of a base when they attach to. Both bound morphemes either inflectional or derivational can be affixes (prefix, suffix and circumfix) and clitic. Prefix is bound morphemes which come at the beginning of a base for example </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ber</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">main</span><span class="font1">. The bold one is prefix in Indonesian while suffix is bound morphemes which come at the end of a base for instance </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">work</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ed</span><span class="font1"> in English. The morpheme </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–ed</span><span class="font1"> at the end of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">worked</span><span class="font1"> is a suffix. The circumfix is two bound morphemes accompany a base (one is at the beginning and another is at the end) for example </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">per</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">main</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font1">. The bound morphemes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">per-an</span><span class="font1"> is circumfix in Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding to the meaning, Kearns (2000: 1) stated that meaning is categorized into several kinds namely lexical meaning, structural meaning, categorematic and syncategorematic expression. Lexical meaning refers to the meaning of the individual words while structural meaning is the way the words are combined. It is closely related to syntactic rules, how words are structured to be a good sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Finally the theory of modulation translation procedure proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet is applied. According to Vinay and Darbelnet in (Hatim and Munday (2001: 150) modulation is a variation of the form of the message obtained by a change in the point of view. In other words, modulation means restructuring a message of source language text in a target language text in different structure but the meaning is not different.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research on modulation translation procedure has been ever done by Sudana (2012) but in his research he was not relying on the reason why a translation procedure occurs linguistically. The expalanation is just based on the definition of modulation but this recent research is supposed as a different one because it focuses on the reason on why a translation procedure comes in translation product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The discussion about modulation is very significant so that this paper aims at defining the factor that triggers modulation translation procedure occurs in translating English content words with inflectional morpheme into Indonesian and also to examine the way of applying the modulation translation procedure in translating English content words with inflectional morpheme into Indonesian.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHODOLOGY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In conducting this research descriptive qualitative method was applied since the objectiveness of this study is closely related to identifying the phenomenon and describing the result of the analysis (Creswell, 2009: 176). Thus it is suitable to use descriptive qualitative method rather than quantitative method. The data sources of this study are the words, clauses and sentences which have content words with inflectional bound morphemes. The content words can be in different word class such as verbs, nouns and adjectives. The content words which undergo morphological process by attaching one or two inflectional bound morphemes were noted. The object of this study is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Risk and Creating Value with Microfinance</span><span class="font1"> book by Mike Goldberg and Eric Palladini (2010) and its Indonesian translation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengelolaan Risiko dan Penciptaan Nilai Melalui Pnedanaan Usaha Mikro</span><span class="font1"> (2011) by M. Ramdhan Adhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed by using idendity method by Bryman ( in Muhammad, 2011: 234) that “...qualitative method can be constructed as a research strategy that usually emphasizes words rather quantifications in the collection and analysis of data and that predominantly emphasizes an inductive approach to the relationship between theory and research...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile the technique in analyzing data was dividing key factor technique (Sudaryanto in Muhammad, 2011: 239). In that technique, the data were classified based on word class. After that the equivalent meaning of English content words and their translations are explained by considering</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the applied theories in this research.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Modulation is one of translation procedures which is proposed by Vinay and Darbelenet (in Hatim and Munday, 2001). It is used because the translator focuses on the point of view of a source language sentence therefore absolutely there will be modulation in terms of meaning structure. Furthermore, I can argue that meaning construction can be in different structure between English sentence and Indonesian sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This translation procedure is very significant in translation because it needs semantic comprehension. The semantic comprehesion that is meant here is meaning reconstruction. It means that the translator must understand well the implied meaning in source language then the representative sentence in target language can be constructed. The target language construction is not depending on the sentence pattern but meaning. Meaning triggers the sentence to be good construction then it is acceptable semantically. This concept can be illustrated in the data below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: It also </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">assesses </span><span class="font1">whether the operation is profitable and whether</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">costs are adequately covered (p. 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Di sini juga </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dinilai </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">apakah operasi menguntungkan dan apakah biaya cukup tertutup</span><span class="font1"> (p. 12).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data (1) above indicates that there is changing in form. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assess</span><span class="font1"> is a transitive verb. It means that it needs an object. Moreover the existence of inflectional bound morpheme </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–es</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">at the end of the word proves that the word is appropriately occurring in the sentence pattern in particular active sentence pattern. It is different from the sentence pattern in target language. The word formation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dinilai</span><span class="font1"> indicates that the object of the sentence is the main focus. In addition, the existence of the prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">di-</span><span class="font1"> at the beginning of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nilai</span><span class="font1"> tokenizes that it is passive construction in Indonesian since prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">di-</span><span class="font1"> means that something undergone by the object of the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dinilai</span><span class="font1">. This concept goes with Kearns (2000) opinion that the prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">di-</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian is indicating that the object is the main topic of a sentence. Furthermore, the finding above is also relying on the statement from Baker (2005: 11) that meaning can be carried by units smaller than the word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It also refers to meaning construction. Meaning construction determines the notion that is denoted in the sentence. Moreover Modulation as a type of translation procedure proposed by Vinay and Darbelenet (in Hatim and Munday, 2001) is relying on the point of view of SL and TL. The sentence construction “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">It also </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">assesses </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">whether the operation is profitable and whether costs are adequately covered</span><span class="font1">” means that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assessing of the company’s operation</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">costs</span><span class="font1"> are the topic of that sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding to meaning operation thus the data (1) is a good example of modulation translation procedure. Meaning operation that is meant here is meaning determines sentence construction not grammatical operation (Payne, 1997: 4-6). It means that it depends on the point of view of source language MEANING. Furthermore, it can be argued that the existence of word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assesses</span><span class="font1"> in SL and the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dinilai</span><span class="font1"> in TL have the same notion. They are in different structure but the meaning is similar. The SL sentence indicates that in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the step of identifying the institution’s unique risk profile,</span><span class="font1"> the activity “assessing” is important to do. Thus the TL sentence is in passive to indicate the importance of doing assessing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data above also proves that Bell’s opinion (1993: 35) about knowledge background of a translator is important in translating because the readability and the accuracy of translation result absolutely occur. The translator must comprehend the linguistics of target language too. Therefore, target language sentences have same value and sense as in source language sentences. This is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">supported by Foley (1997: 171) that Anthropology linguistics also affects in doing translation. If translators know the culture of a language thus they are able to investigate and examine the sense of a word; for example, in doing translation of figurative language, translators have to be able know the background of social life of source language speakers and target language speakers. Furthermore, they can determine the appropriate translation of a figurative language of a source language into target language. The last is translator preference. The preference of a translator also affects translation result. It can be in mode of rendering message in target language. It depends on translator’s knowledge background too.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dealing with this factor there is another illustration that close related to it. We know that modulation appears since there are two sentences which have same meaning. In other words, the different forms have same value or content. In addition, semantics is related to meaning knowledge. Thus in this case this section does not talk about sentence construction but the real main idea that implied in the sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Perhaps people can argue that semantics cannot be separated from syntax but here we have to consider from another aspect. The aspect is how a sentence is rendered into another form which is categorized in the equivalent translation of a source text. In other words, sentence construction is not always constructed based on the sentence pattern’s objective but due to meaning as the basic reason. The data (2) below is a good case in point.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: While rewards, such as interest rate rebates for perfect performances, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">should also be clear </span><span class="font1">(p. 6)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Demikian pula, potongan bunga sebagai penghargaan atas Kinerja pembayaran yang baik </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">juga harus dibuat jelas</span><span class="font1"> (p. 5).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data indicates that the Source Language (SL) has different structure from Target Language (TL). The translation result is involved in modulation technique. The technique is used</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">since the concept of both SL and TL is same. The real one indicated by the clause, ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">should also be clear</span><span class="font1">’ is equivalent to ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">juga harus dibuat jelas</span><span class="font1">’. The forms of the sentence structure are really different. Thus when the source text should be rendered into ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">harus jadi jelas</span><span class="font1">’ thus it does not make sense dealing with the main topic of the sentence, namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">such as interest rate rebates for perfect performance</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore it can be stated that in translation the result of translation should make sense. It does not relate to translation procedure. It means that translation procedure is only the external factor or the part of process of translating (Bell, 1993) but the most important is the sense of the language of TL in conveying the meaning of SL. Furthermore, considering the statement proposed by Bell (1993: 38) that the entity of meaning is the main point in rendering message from source language into target language. Therefore the data (2) is appropriately occurs in modulation translation procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data (2) above is in modulation translation procedure because the SL indicates that the clause </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should also be clear</span><span class="font1"> and its translation </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">juga harus dibuat jelas</span><span class="font1"> rely on the essence of lexical meaning proposed by Baker (2005:12) that,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Lexical meaning is a word or lexical unit may be thought of as the specific value it has in a particular linguistic system and the personality it acquires through usage within that system”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore the Indonesian </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">juga harus dibuat jelas</span><span class="font1"> has similar notion as the English </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">should also be clear</span><span class="font1"> even though they have different category such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">be clear</span><span class="font1"> is an active sturcture but it has same notion with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dibuat</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian. thus finally it is true that the data (2) is in modulation translation procedure and it is triggred by semantics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore the culture of the source language and target language should be concerned by the translator. The culture that I mean here is language structure. The knowledge of constructing sentence in terms of structure also determines representative words in target language. In addition culture is in meaning. This statement is similar to Foley (1997) that knowledge about culture either in source language and target language should be known by a translator. For example; the word</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian (Foley, 1997: 270) are different in context of use. The pronoun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span><span class="font1"> has different usage from pronoun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span><span class="font1">. A servant cannot say to president by saying </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span><span class="font1">. It will be polite if he says </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span><span class="font1">. The contradictive application occurs in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span><span class="font1">. The pronoun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span><span class="font1"> is only used by a president for instance when he talks to his servant. This context is a good illustration of pragmatics effect in translation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the discussion in the previous section it can be concluded that modulation occurs in translation product because of semantic operation. It means that meaning determines the sentence construction in target language not because of grammar a meaning is denoted. Furthermore it is due to point of view of either source language and target language comes as the main target. In addition the way of applying modulation translation procedure is by reconstructing the point of view of source language sentence into target language sentece.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>DAFTAR PUSTAKA</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Baker, Mona. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">In Other Words a Course Book on Translation</span><span class="font1">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bell, Roger. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Translating: Theory and Practice</span><span class="font1">. England: Longman House.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Creswell, John W. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches</span><span class="font1">. 3<sup>rd</sup> Edition. London: SAGE Publications, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foley A. William. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropological Linguistics An Introduction</span><span class="font1">. Massachusetts. Blackwell. Haspelmath, Martin. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Morphology.</span><span class="font1"> America: Oxford University Press Inc., Hatim Basil and Jeremy Munday. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Indtroducing Translation Studies</span><span class="font1">. London: Routledge. Kearns Kate. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font1">. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Payne, E Thomas. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Describing Morphosyntax, A Guide for Field Linguists</span><span class="font1">. New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudana, I Ketut. 2012. “The Equivalence of the Noun Suffixes for People </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–er/-or, -ist,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–an/-ian </span><span class="font1">in the translation of the Novel ‘Eclipse’ into Indonesian” (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tesis</span><span class="font1">). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>