---
layout: full_article
title: "Strategy to Combine Clauses In Waijewa Dialect A Sumbanese Language"
author: "Ni Wayan Kasni"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14136 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-14136"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14136"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">E Journal</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Strategy to Combine Clauses In </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Waijewa</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Dialect</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>A Sumbanese Language</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Ni Wayan Kasni</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters, Warmadewa University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">email:</span><a href="mailto:yan_nik66@yahoo.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">yan_nik66@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Postgraduate Program, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ketut Artawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Wayan Pastika,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A A Putu Putera</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Clause is defined as a grammatical unit consisting of the elements of subject (S) and predicate (P), both with object (O) and adverbial (A), and has the capability of being a sentence. Clauses can be categorized based on (i) the core arguments, (ii) the presence or absence of negative words in predicate, (iii) the categories of words or phrases that occupy predicate function, (iv) its capacity of being a sentence, (v) their functions in sentences. A clause can be combined in two ways, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">first</span><span class="font2"> using coordinate conjunction forming a coordinate construction, and second using subordinate conjunction forming a subordinate construction. This research attempted to analyze the strategy of combining clauses in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Waijewa</span><span class="font2"> Dialect; a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sumbanese</span><span class="font2"> language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research applied qualitative method in which the written data were collected from three key informants and four supporting informants from each district in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Waijewa </span><span class="font2">using four techniques namely; (1) observation, (2) structure-based interview, (3) documentation, and (4) triangulation. The collected data were analyzed using distributional method. The theory used to analyze the data was the language typology theory proposed by Dixon (1994) and 2010) and Comrie (1983).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The result showed that in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Waijewa</span><span class="font2"> dialect clauses could be divided into two; namely, the clauses having verbal predicates and the ones having nonverbal predicates. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Waijewa</span><span class="font2"> dialect has clitic pronouns marking the arguments of the verbs. They showed nominative, accusative, and genitive cases. The coordinate constructions in BSDW could be categorized into two forms such as: (1) syndetic (construction marked by conjunction) and (2) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asyndetic</span><span class="font2"> (without conjunction marker). The forms of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">subordinate clause in subordinate construction were divided into three; namely, (1) relative clause, (2) complementation clause, and (3) adjunct clause. Arguments A and S were relativized by gapping and attaching the prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{a-}</span><span class="font2"> to the V and the relativization of the arguments O, E, locative, and instrument was done by gapping and attaching prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{pa-}</span><span class="font2"> to the V. The complementation clause could be combined using either the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba</span><span class="font2"> ‘that’ or without the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba</span><span class="font2">, verb serialization, relative clause construction, purposive linking with the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{ka}</span><span class="font2"> ‘for’ or without the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2">. The adjunct clause could be combined using either conjunction or without conjunction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: clitic, nominative, accusative, genitive, syndetic, asyndetic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bahasa Sumba dialek Waijewa (hereinaffer abbreviatred to BSDW) is a language spoken in South West Sumba regency especially in North Waijewa, West Waijewa, East Waijewa , and South Waijewa districts . BSDW is a Bima-Sumba subgroup language. It is classified as Central Malayo-Polynesian. According to Syamsudin (1996) the Bima-Sumba language consists of three subgroups, namely (a) the Bima and Komodo language, (b) Manggarai language, Ngada, which consists of Manggarai and Ngada-Lio language, (c) the Sumba and Sawu language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Not many studies of Waijewa dialect have been conducted so far. The previous research was solely focused on the Kambera dialect. Several studies have been conducted among them was the study conducted by Widarsini (1985) entitled “the affinity phoneme of Austronesian ancient language with Kambera dialect and Manggarai”. The other studies were conducted by Ariningsih (1997) entitled “Taboo Words of Sumba Dialects”, Marian Klamer (1998) entitled “A Short Grammar of Kambera”, Sari (1998) entitled “The Phonology of Sumbanese language in East Sumba: Generative and Transformation”, and by Simpen (2008) entitled “Politeness on using language in native Language in East Sumba (dissertation)”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another reason why BSDW was used as the object of the present study was that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">BSDW does not have any written document especially about its grammatical system. So</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">far the grammar book available is only about Kambera dialect. If Waijewa dialect is compared to Kambera dialect, several differences were identified with respect to the clitic pronouns marking the verbal arguments and the other forms of syntactic markers like aspect, modality, definiteness, and the like. A different marking system certainly influences the strategy of combining clauses. Therefore, this research is focused on the strategy of combining clauses in Waijewa dialect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research aimed at analyzing (1) the basic structure of the clause, (2) the structure of the arguments and the valence of the verb, and (3) the strategy of combining clauses in coordinate and subordinate constructions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Material and Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This research is a field research based on post positivism philosophy or interpretative paradigm, meaning that the object cannot be partially broken into some variables. The method used to collect the data was qualitative method. The data were in the forms of written and oral data. The written data were taken from informants through; (1) observation, (2) structure-based interview, and (3) triangulation. The written data were taken using documentation technique. The collected data were then analyzed using distributional method. The result of the analysis was presented formally and informally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The discussion of the strategy of combining clauses in Waijewa dialect is focused on the result of data analysis. Three points are discussed here; they are: (1) the basic structure of the clause, (2) the structure of the argument and the valance of the verb; and (3) the strategy of combining clauses in coordinate and subordinate constructions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The basic clausal structure in Waijena</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The clause in Waijewa dialect can be divided into two; they are: the clause having verbal predicate and the clause having nonverbal predicate. The verbal clauses are in the forms of intransitive and transitive clauses. The clauses having non verbal predicates are the clauses having noun, adjective, number, and adposition as predicates. BSDW has</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">clitic pronouns marking the arguments of the verb. They show nominative, accusative, and genitive cases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nati kaʼbani na - dakura- ga &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;yauwa</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">DEM man &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3SgN - stabbed 1SgA 1Sg</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">That man stabbed me.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nati lakawa na &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;– nego</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">DEM anak 3SgN - dance That girl danced</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The clitic pronoun </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{na-}</span><span class="font2"> is attached to the verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dakura ʼ</span><span class="font2">stab’ in example (1) and the verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nego</span><span class="font2"> ’danced’ functons as the nominative marker of the third person singular. The clitic </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{-ga}</span><span class="font2"> in example (1) functions as the acussative marker of the first person singular.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Structure of the Argument and The Valence of The Verb</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The argument structure of intransitive clause is S - (Pro,NP animate/non animate)-nominative case-intrV. S can also have genitive, accusative, and double markers (nominative and accusative). The S marked with genitive case in interrogative clause relates to the mood of the clause, while the S marked with accusative case in declarative relates to modality or aspect. S is marked like O in imperative when the verb receives more emphasis than the verbal argument. S is marked in accusative case in the nominal predicate clause because, semantically, S does not control the activity. The S which has double markers (nominative and accusative) shows that the speaker is certain about the situation expressed in the clause.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Examples</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Youʼwa neʼe – ngga rio.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">1Sg ASP – 1SgA mandi I am taking a bath.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(4)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kako-mi yemmi!</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Go-2PlN 2Pl</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">You , go</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">( &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Youʼwa guru – wa – ngga</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">1T guru – P.def – 1TA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I am a teacher</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(6)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pirra mba ammi – nggu?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">QW ASP datang – 1SgPOS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When did you come?.‘</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(7)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wai-na &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;na-malau-na</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Leg-3SgPOS 3SgN-long-3SgA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">His legs are long</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentences (3—5) show that S is marked with accusative case while sentence (6) shows that S is marked with genitive case. The S in (7) has double markers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The structure of clause transitive is A - nominative case - trnV- accusative case/Def.EMP – (O (Pro/NP)). A can also be marked with genitive, accusative, or double markers (nominative plus accusative). The A marked with genitive case in interrogative sentence relates to mood and the status of the clause as a subordinate one in relative construction. The A marked with accusative case relates firmly to aspect or modality. A is marked simultaneously with nominative and accusative when the speaker is certain about the situation expressed by the clause. The argument O has different marking system. The marking system of O is closely related to definiteness or non definiteness. Pronouns are considered definite so they are marked with accusative case. The O realized by NP definite may be marked with accusative or definite emphasis. The NP indefinite is not marked with accusative case.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(8) &nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Appa pa – woi – mu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ne pasara dana.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">QW Rel</span><span class="font1">o </span><span class="font2">– buy – 2SgPOS DEM market AP ‘Waht did you buy in the market ?.‘</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(9)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Na ata pa – pamai – nda &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;na – kendu bana.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">DEM perso Rel</span><span class="font1">o </span><span class="font2">– panggil – 3PlPOS 3SgTN – run &nbsp;ASP</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘The person who called me has run away.‘</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(10)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Neʼe-ndi a -gezo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pare</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">ASP-3PlN 3PlN-polish rice</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">They are polishing rice.‘</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(11)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Na lakawa na – kaula – ngga youʻwa.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">DEM boy 3SgN –calll – 1SgA 1Sg ‘That boy called me.‘</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The valence increasing in BSDW is done through the process of causative and applicative. The valence reducing is done through reciprocal and anti causative</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">Morphologically, causative is marked by the prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{pa-}</span><span class="font2"> before the intransitive verb of adjective. The anti causative is marked by prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{ma-}</span><span class="font2"> before the transitive verbs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">todi </span><span class="font2">‘close and ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bukke</span><span class="font2"> ‘open’. The meaning of reciprocal is marked by the clitic </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{pa-}</span><span class="font2">on the verb after the nominative marker showing plural person. .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coordinate and Subordinate Construction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Coordinate construction in BSDW can be categorized into two forms such as: (1) syndetic (construction marked by conjunction) and (2) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asyndetic</span><span class="font2"> (without conjunction marker). The subordinate clause is divided into three namely, (1) the relative clause construction, (2) the complementation clause, (3)the adjunct clause. The arguments A and S in relative constructions are relativized by gapping and attaching the prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{a-} </span><span class="font2">before the PRED. The relativization of the arguments O, E, locative, and instrument are done by gapping and attaching the prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{pa-}</span><span class="font2"> before the PRED. Possessor is relativized using the resumptive pronoun strategy. The complement clause comes after the primary verb B or after the secondary verb type A, B, and C. The table below shows the semantic type of the verb and the types of complement clause in BSDW.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Primary Type B</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Type of clause</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">attention</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">eta</span><span class="font2"> ’see’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">fact and activity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">rengge</span><span class="font2"> ’dengar’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">fact and activity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">thinking</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pangeʼda </span><span class="font2">’think’/’consider’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">fact and activity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pande</span><span class="font2"> ’know’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">fact, potential</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">deciding</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pata ʼdecideʼ</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">fact, potential</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">liking</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mbei</span><span class="font2"> ’like’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">potential, activity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">5</span></p></td><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">speaking</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tekki</span><span class="font2"> ’say’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">fact</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">patuka</span><span class="font2"> ’ask’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">potential</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">roru</span><span class="font2"> ’persuade’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">potential</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Secondary type</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Type of Clause</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mulai</span><span class="font2"> ’begin’ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba</span><span class="font2"> ’finish’ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nungnga</span><span class="font2"> ’try’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">potential and activity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">B</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mbei</span><span class="font2"> ’want’ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kambu</span><span class="font2"> ’plan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">potential</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">C</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> ’force’ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ngai</span><span class="font2"> ’let’</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">potential</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The complementation clause can be combined using the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba</span><span class="font2"> ‘that’ or without the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba,</span><span class="font2"> verb serialization, relative clause construction, purposive linking with the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> ‘for’ or without the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka.</span><span class="font2"> The adjunct clause can be combined using conjunction or without conjunction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Novelties</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Some novelties found in the research are as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Waijewa dialect is a limited affix language. Being a limited affix language does not mean that the language is not capable of expressing various meanings in a clause structure. The limited affixes are optimally used to convey many various meanings in the clause using the same marker to express different meanings in different structures.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based on the word order, the clausal structure in Waijewa belongs to SVO type.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BSDW is a head-marking language, that is, the language which is rich in morpho-syntactic marking on the (verbal, nominal, adjectival) predicator; the pronominal, aspect, definite emphasis or modality clitic together with predicate constitute the nuclear clause.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Waijewa has three paradigms of clitic pronouns namely, nominative, accusative, and genitive. Those clitics mark person, number, and morphological case in the clause structure.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BSDW belongs to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NP drop</span><span class="font2"> language because the clitics are the predicate arguments and the NPs are optional. Verb plus pronominal marker already constitute a complete clause. The full NPs are included only for emphasis or disambiguation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Typologically, BSDW belongs to fluid S, in which S is marked like A; however, S can also be marked like O. S is marked like O in nominal predicate because S is identical with the situation expressed by the predicate; thus, S in that situation is non active or does not control the activity. S is marked by O in verbal predicate when the structure emphasizes modality, the verb, or aspect of the verb.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion and Suggestion</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data analysis it was found that BSDW clause could be divided into two namely, the clause having verbal predicate and the clause having nonverbal predicate. BSDW has clitic pronouns marking the arguments of the verbs. They show nominative, accusative, and genitive case. BSDW is regarded as NP drop since the clitic pronouns may already constitute a complete clause without the appearance of the NP as their hosts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The argument structure of intransitive clause has the pattern S - (Pro,NP animate/non animate)- nominative case-intrV. S can also have genitive, accusative, and double markers (nominative and accusative). The structure of transitive clause is A -nominative case - trnV- accusative case/Def.Emp – (O(Pro/NP)). A can also be marked with genitive, accusative case, and double markers (nominative plus accusative). The marking system for O is closely related to definiteness or non definiteness. The valence increasing in BSDW is done through the process of causative and applicative. The valence reducing is done through reciprocal and anti causative</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coordinate construction in BSDW can be categorized into two forms such as: (1) syndetic (construction marked by conjunction) and (2) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asyndetic</span><span class="font2"> (without conjunction marker). The subordinate clauses found in subordinate construction are (1) relative clause construction, (2) complementation clause, (3) adjunct clause. Argument A and S are relativized by gapping and attaching prefix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">{a-}</span><span class="font2"> before the PRED and the relativization</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">of argument O, E, locative, and instrument is done by gapping and attaching prefix {pa-} before the PRED. Possessor is relativized using resumptive pronoun strategy. Complementation clause can be combined using the conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ba</span><span class="font2"> ‘that’ or without conjunction, verb serialization, relative clause construction, purposive linking with conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> ‘for’ or without conjunction. The adjunct clause can be combined using conjunction or without conjunction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Waijewa dialect seems interesting to be investigated because it is rich in language phenomena. Being a language without written document, many problems need to be observed such as phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics. This gives other researchers opportunities to explore the phonology and morphology of Waijewa especially about clitics and affixes. On syntax level, the things which need to be deeply observed are complex predicate and verb serialization. It is hoped that further research on Waijewa can be used as a complete document to avoid the language from becoming extinct.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acknowledgements</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this opportunity, I would like to express my gratitude and thanks to those who have contributed in one way or another to this research, especially Prof. Drs. Ketut Artawa, M.A., Ph.D. as the main supervisor, Prof. Dr. I Wayan Pastika, M.S., as cosupervisor I, Prof. Dr. A.A.Putu Putera, M.Hum., as co-supervisor II, and the board of examiners: Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, Prof.Dr.I Nyoman Suparwa, M.Hum, Dr. Ni Made Sri Satyawati, S.S, M.Hum, Dr. Ni Made Dhanawaty, M.S., and Dr. I Nyoman Kardana, M.Hum., for their critical comment and suggestions for the improvement of this research. Remaining errors are all mine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Aikhenvald, Y. Alexandra.2006. “Serial Verb Construction in Typological Perspective”. Dalam : Alexandra Y Aikhenvald, dan RMW Dixon ed., </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Serial Verb Contructions</span><span class="font2"> : a Cross-Linguistic Typology. Oxford: University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alsina, Alex, Joan Bresnan, Peter Sells. 1997. “Complex Predicates: Structure and Theory”. Dalam : Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, Peter Sells (Ed) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Complex Predicates</span><span class="font2">. Standford, California : CSLI, hlm. 1-2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Andrews, Avery. 1997 “Complex Predicates and Nuclear Serial Verbs”, Dalam : Marriam Butt dan Tracy Holloway King, ed. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Preceeding of the LFG97 Conference</span><span class="font2">. CSLI Publication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Antara, I Made. 2001. “Keintian Argumen dan Keselarasan Pemarkahan Bahasa Mauta” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Arka, I Wayan. 1998. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Voice Grammatical Relations in Indonesia: A New Perspective. </span><span class="font2">Dalam Merym But dan Tracy Holloway King, ed. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Proceedings of The LFG 98 Conference</span><span class="font2">. Available from URL: &nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www-csli.Stanford.edu./publications</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brisbane: CSLI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Artawa , Ketut. 1994</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. “ Ergativity and Balinese Syntax”</span><span class="font2"> (disertasi) : Australia : La Trobe University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ariningsih, Ni Nyoman. 1997. “Kata-Kata Tabu Bahasa Sumba Dialek Kambera: Sebuah Telaah Linguistik Historis Komparatif” (skripsi). Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Basrowi, Suwandi. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Memahami Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Butt, Miriam. 1997. ”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Complex Predicates in Urdu”.</span><span class="font2"> Dalam : Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, Peter Sells, ed., </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Complex Predicates</span><span class="font2">. Standford, Califonia : CSLI, hlm. 107-150.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budasi, I Gede. 2007. ”Relasi Kekerabatan Genetis Kuantitatif Isolek-Isolek Sumba di NTT: Sebuah Kajian Historis Komparatif” (disertasi). Yogyakarta: Universitas Gajah Mada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bungin, Burhan. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Kualitatif: Komunikasi, Ekonomi, Kebijakan Publik dan Ilmu Sosial Lainnya. J</span><span class="font2">akarta: Kencana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Comrie, Bernard. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Universals and Linguistics Typology.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crystal, David . 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics</span><span class="font2">. New York : Basil : Blackwell Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Ergativity</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dixon, R. M.W. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basic Linguistic Theory</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Djawa, Alex. 2000. “Rekonstruksi Protobahasa Kambera-Loli-Kodi-Lamboya di Sumba, Provinsi NTT” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dunung, I Wayan. 1998. “Pelesapan Subjek dalam Bahasa Bali” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fitrayanti, Budi. 1998. “Pemakaian Bahasa dalam Kehidupan Masyarakat Berbahasa Sumba di Kota Waingapu” (skripsi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frawley, William. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics Semantics</span><span class="font2">. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Haspelmath, Martin. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Morphology</span><span class="font2">. London: Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hopper, Paul.J. 1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ergative, Passive, and Active in Malay Narrative</span><span class="font2">. Dalam Bambang Kaswanti Purwo, ed., </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Serpih-Serpih Pasif dalam Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta : hlm. 146-149.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jauhari, Edy. 2000. “Pasifisasi dan Alternasi Argumen Inti Bahasa Bima” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kapita, Oe H. 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Sumba/Kambera-Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. Ende/Flores: Arnoldus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kapita, Oe H. 1976. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat Sumba dan Adat Istiadatnya</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kapita, Oe H. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Sumba Timur dalam Dialek Kambera</span><span class="font2">: Ende-Flores: Offset Arnoldus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kasni, Ni Wayan, 2008. ”Pelesapan Pada Konstruksi Koordinatif Bahasa Inggris dalam Novel Crystal” (tesis). Denpasar : Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Katamba, Francis. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology.</span><span class="font2"> London : MacNillam Press Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klamer, Merian, 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Kambera.</span><span class="font2"> Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kosmas, Jeladu, 2000. ”Argumen Aktor dalam Bahasa Manggarai dan Pemetaan Fungsinya” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kosmas, Jeladu. 2008. ”Klausa Bahasa Rongga:Sebuah Analisis Leksikal Fungsional” (disertasi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kridalaksana, Harimurti, 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Linguistik. Jakarta</span><span class="font2"> : PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kroeger, Paul R. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analyzing Syntax: A Lexical-Functional Approach</span><span class="font2">.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lapoliwa, Hans. 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Klausa Pemerlengkapan dalam Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mahsun, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bahasa</span><span class="font2"> . Jakarta: PT Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Marpaung, Theolina F. 1997. ”Kedudukan dan Fungsi Bahasa Indonesia pada Masyarakat Kota dan Desa di Sumba Timur, Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Timur” (skripsi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meleong, Lexy. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Miles, Matthew B. dan A. Michael Huberman.1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Data Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">. (Tjetjep Rohendi Rosidi,Penj) Jakarta: UI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Onvlee, L, 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamberas (Oost-Soemba)- Nederlands Woordeboek</span><span class="font2">. Dodrecht-Floris Suchtelen van BCCMM. 1921 Endeh (Flores)-Weltervreden.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Palmer, F.R, 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: A New Outline.</span><span class="font2"> London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Partami, Ni Luh, 2001. “Relasi Gramatikal dan Perelatifan Bahasa Buna”(tesis). Denpasar:Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Purwo, Kaswanti Bambang, 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Deiksis dalam Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta:PN Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Putra, Anak Agung Putu, 2007. “Segmentasi Dialektikal Bahasa Sumba Di Pulau Sumba: Suatu Kajian Dialektologi” (disertasi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">. , 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of The English Language</span><span class="font2">. New York: Longman Group Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sari, Ni Luh Siwi. 1998. “Fonologi Bahasa Sumba Timur: Analisis Generatif Transformasi” (skripsi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saeed, John I. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sedeng, I Nyoman, 2000. “Predikat Kompleks dan Relasi Gramatikal Bahasa Sikka” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shibatani, Masayoshi. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">”On the Form of Complex Predicates : Toward Demystifying Serial Verbs”.</span><span class="font2"> Dalam Johannes Helmbrecht dkk. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Form and Function in Language Research</span><span class="font2">. Berlin: Moulton de Gruyter</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Simpen, I Wayan. 2008. “Kesantunan Berbahasa pada Penutur Bahasa Kambera Di Sumba Timur” (disertasi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Soetarto, B.t.t. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Budaya Sumba I</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta : Proyek Pengembangan Media Kebudayaan, Dirjen P&amp;K.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sri Satyawati, Made. 2009. “Relasi Sintaktis Bahasa Bima” (disertasi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suciati, Ni Luh Gede. 2001 ”Aliansi Gramatikal dan Diatesis Bahasa Tetun Dialek Fehan” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto, 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Predikat Objek dalam Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta:Djambatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">------------, 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta : Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">------------, 1993. Metode dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Dutawacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sugono, Dendy, 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pelesapan Subjek dalam Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sugiyono, 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kuantitatif Kualitatif dan R&amp;D.</span><span class="font2"> Bandung: ALFABETA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Syamsudin, A. R. 1996. ”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kelompok Bahasa Bima-Sumba:Kajian Linguistik Historis Komparatif</span><span class="font2">” (disertasi). Bandung: Universitas Padjajaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Van Valin, Robert D.Jr.2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Exploring the Syntax-Semantics Interface.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: CUP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Verhaar, J. W. M., 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Linguistik. Yogyakarta</span><span class="font2">: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yuda, I Wayan, 2010. ”Fungsi Gramatikal Argumen Inti dalam Sistem Terpilah Bahasa Kolana” (tesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yuliana, 1998. “Kedudukan dan Fungsi Bahasa Sumba di Sumba Timur” (skripsi). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zaim, M, 1993. “Pelesapan Frasa Nomina pada Konstruksi Koordinatif Bahasa Inggris” (tesis) Jakarta: Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>