---
layout: full_article
title: "TERMS OF ADDRESS AND POLITENESS USED TO ADDRESS CUSTOMERS AT GET MORE DISC 3 AND GET MORE DISC 4"
author: "Ni Nengah Aseptari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TERMS OF ADDRESS AND POLITENESS USED TO ADDRESS</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>CUSTOMERS AT GET MORE DISC 3 AND GET MORE DISC 4</span></h1>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Ni Nengah Aseptari</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Abstract:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tulisan ini berjudul istilah-istilah dalam menyapa dan sopan santun yang digunakan dalam menyapa pelanggan di toko Get More Disc 3 dan Get More Disc 4. Analisis ini menggunakan analisis lapangan yang dilakukan di toko tersebut masing0masing. Hasil analisis menemukan bahwa beberapa penjaga toko menggunakan sapaan yang bersifat resmi jika antara penjaga toko dengan pelanggan sudah mengenal satu sama lain. Sedangkan mereka akan menggunakan sapaan yang tidak resmi atau memanggil langsung dengan nama pelanggan, jika antara penjaga toko dan pelanggan sudah mengenal satu sama lain. Sapaan resmi tersebut antara lain adanya penggunanaan Miss., Sir, atau pun Ma’am. Sementara itu, sopan santun yang digunakan oleh penjaga toko terlihat pada adanya ucapan selamat pagi atau selamat siang dan menawarkan bantuan kepada pelanggan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: ucapan sapaan, sopan santun dan toko DVD</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness is very important principle in language use. We must consider other’s feeling. Politeness may be defined as taking account of the feelings of others (Holmes: 1992: 296). People have to speak politely and need to pay attention to the social values of society. Politeness is universal that is it can be observed as a phenomenon in all cultures. Being polite may also be a matter of choosing the right words. Politeness can not only be shown in people’s way of behavior towards each other but particularly in the use of language and specific linguistic devices in speech acts like request, refusals, apologies, thanking as well as greeting and parting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness is appropriate expressed as the practical application of good manners or etiquette and also one way of showing appreciations of one person to another but difficult to be concerned. It is difficult to learn because it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">involves understanding not just the language but also the social and cultural values of the community; therefore being polite is a complicated business in any language. When we have a conversation with other people, we try to avoid confrontation and uncomfortable feeling or make them upset by what we said. We have to speak politely to people but at the same time, we have to know the social distance of the hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the background of the study given above, the problems arouse are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What address terms are used to invite the customers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the politeness can be expressed through those address terms?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two aims of this writing which are related to the problems. The aims are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate the address terms used by the shop attendants to invite the customers.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the kind of politeness used by shop attendants to the customers.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method explains how to do the research. It can be defined as the procedures on the data used in writing a paper, which is in this case include determination of data source, method and technique of collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this study was taken from the conversations between the shop attendants and the customers in daily service procedures at Get More Disc 3 and Get More Disc 4, which is located at Legian Kelod Street and at Laksmana Street Seminyak Kuta-Bali. The research took 3 months and the respondents are the shop attendants and the customers who visited the shop and do shopping in that shop. In each shop consist of 4 shop attendants, but for the primary data in this research I took only 2 shop attendants from each shop. And they are who have been worked for three years, which each of them have different educational background.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this study was collected by using the observation and documentation method. The method in collecting data used the following technique, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Observing the object of research and understanding the conversation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">between the shop attendants and the customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The data collected by seeing, hearing and note taking.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classifying the data, in this case the address terms using by shop attendants from their conversation with the customers.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Collected data in this study was analyzed descriptively. From 16 data, only 4 data was used for the research. After the data were collected, they will identify according to the scope of discussion of this paper. Analysis of the data is supported by examples that obtain the conversations between the shop attendants and the customers. The collected data was analyzed by using descriptive method. In addition, the collected data was selected based on the need of the research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data that have been analyzed was classified according to the type of politeness strategies that proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978). After classified to the type of politeness, the data were categorized according to the theory of Braun (1988) which shows the forms of address are words and phrases used for addressing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis: Opening Statement</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kind of address terms used to invite customer</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Names Terms: Names terms are belong to the nominal repertory of address in all kinds of language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinship Terms: are terms for blood relation and for affine. When a Kinship terms are used for addressing someone who is not related to the speaker in one way or other, this is called a fictive use of a Kinship</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">terms</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Title: In many languages there are forms of address which correspond to English </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mr./Mrs</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstract Noun: Abstract noun are form of address which originally referred some abstract quality of the address, for example: in addressing a Queen in the kingdom use </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Your) Honor, (Your) Grace, (Your) Majesty.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The express of politeness of the shop attendants to the customers</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive politeness</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown and Levinson (1978) proposed that positive politeness is used to satisfy the the positive face of the H by approving or including him as a friend or as a member in a group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I’m good, thank you. May I help you, Ma’am?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence above tells us that the shop attendant attend the customer needs. By offering some help showed that the shop attendant aware to the customer interest.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative politeness</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Negative politeness is oriented towards the H’s negative face and emphasized avoidance of imposition on the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I’m sorry, Sir. It is fix price. We have no deal for games.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence above took place at Get More Disc 4 and it showed us that the shop attendant explained to the customere that there was no deal for the games.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness strategies that are mostly used in those conversations are greeting, giving and asking information, offering something, ending conversation and thanking. However, only title and term of endearment were found in the conversation between the shop attendants and the customers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness and address terms have an important role to invite the customers. Even though, for the address terms theory only theory of title and terms of endearment were found, but those are gave an important impact to invite the customer. Both shops, Get More Disc 3 and Get More Disc 4 used the polite words to address and greet the customers. Both positive and negative politeness’s have important impacts to the customers. Sometimes, by saying the polite word it can be a way to invite someone for buying your product and they feel that other person give them some respects.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Alita Juli Udayani, Made.2010.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politenes and Address Terms Used by Shop Attendants at Surfer Girl’s Shop</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Braun, Friederike.1998.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font1">. New York. Mounton de Gruyter Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown. P and Levinson. S. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Universal in Language Usage : Politeness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Phenomena</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bungin, S.Sos., Msi., Prof. Dr. H. M. Burhan. 2009. Penelitian Kualitatif. Jakarta: Kencana &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prenada Media Goup.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Coates, Jennifer. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistic Account of Sex Differences in Language: Women, Men, and Language</span><span class="font1">. London and New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Elice Aprilia Primanda Mimba, Wayan. 2020. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Strategies Used by Women Found in a Movie “Pretty Woman”.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Harry Faisal Gunawan. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Function Used in The Bargaining Between Shopkeeper and Tourist at Sanur</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. 1992. An Introduction to Sociolinguistic. London: Longman Lakoff, Robin. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman’s Place</span><span class="font1">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Journal Article. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness and Forms of Address, Vol.10, No.3, 145-168</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Canada : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University of Toronto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Surya, I Gusti Gede Agung.2010.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">English Language Used by The Shop Attendants in Mini Mart &nbsp;&nbsp;Poppies</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar:Udayana University</span></p>