---
layout: full_article
title: "MARKED  PERSONAL NAMES: AN ANTROPONIMIC STUDY OF BALINESE  STUDENTS’ NAMES IN DENPASAR"
author: "Ni Made Iwan Indrawan"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14138 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-14138"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14138"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">E-Journal of Linguistics</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MARKED PERSONAL NAMES:</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>AN ANTROPONIMIC STUDY OF BALINESE STUDENTS’ NAMES IN DENPASAR</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Made Iwan Indrawan Jendra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Religious Literature and Language Education Department, Faculty of Dharma Acarya State Hindu Dharma Institute e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:iwanindrawan73@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">iwanindrawan73@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">I Made Suastra </span><span class="font0">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:suastra@fs.unud.ac.id"><span class="font0">suastra@fs.unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Aron Meko Mbete e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:aronmbete@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">aronmbete@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3"> Indonesian Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I Ketut Darma Laksana e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:darmalaksana@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">darmalaksana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3"> Indonesian Department, faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The research aims to account for the Marked Balinese Students’ Personal Names. Four research problems are studied, namely (1) the criteria used to distinguish the marked names (NDMBmk) and the unmarked ones (NDMTBmk), (2) the functions of the markedness, (3) the factors that influence it, and (4) the ideologies that operate behind it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The markedness of personal names reflect a relation between the arbitrariness in language uses and the extralinguistic factors influencing it. In the context of Balinese, the tradition, legal practices, and the globalisation may affect the arbitrariness. In order to determine NDMBmk, criteria of markedness was constructed. According to the criteria, structurally, NDMBmk consist of at least five elements, as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Anak Agung Arim Kasunu Arya Penarungan</span><span class="font3">. Behaviorally, they may consist of names not derived from Balinese and/or Sanskrit, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Giovani</span><span class="font3"> on </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I Gede Adeyaka Giovani</span><span class="font3">, adopt a foreign spelling system as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Chrisna</span><span class="font3"> on </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ni Putu Chrisna Wulandari</span><span class="font3">, or use no markers of Balinese ethnics or caste as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yunisari Wira Putri</span><span class="font3">. Out of 698 sampled names, NDMBmk are found 54. Besides denoting, the marked elements also function to distinguish personal identities, to shape the existence of the name holder, to connote particular perception, and to reflect the changing era. The factors influencing the markedness are the need to express something new, a wish to acculturate, to raise status or keep a distance socially, and to demonstrate a linguistic expertise, or when seeing from the concept of imagery, the factors are the imagery on something new and on social status or distancing. The ideologies behind the phenomenon are globalist, nationalist, and the casteless-Balinese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keywords</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">markedness, criteria, personal names, Balinese, function, factor, ideology</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Names are designed not only to function as personal identities but also as social identities. An observation to the Bandung Christian Maranatha University Graduation Book of 2004/2005 reveals that some names of the graduates do not reflect any recognized socialethnic identities, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Vianne, Monique Christianty, Handy, Fanny Novianrie Silvianna, </span><span class="font3">which look different from the names of the students studying at Hindu Education Department of students of IHDN Denpasar that relatively reveal the social-ethnics of the students, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sumaryo, Putu Ayu Linda Kumala Sandi, I Wayan Suteja, Fiktor Tomanussa, Lukas Layuk</span><span class="font3">. Unlike the IHDN students’ names, the names of the Maranatha graduates seem to be closer to names of foreigners, foreign singers, TV stars, movie stars, sport stars, and so on. In order to have an appropriate account on the relation between names and the social identities, criteria on markedness is to be constructed. The criteria can be used to identify marked names among the unmarked (common) ones. Basically the marked names are names that are distinctive when compared with the common ones in the society. They are more noticeable in their context. As for the Balinese names, the criteria should be capable of distinguishing the marked Balinese personal names from the unmarked ones.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Although the present research is limited to include only names of Balinese students, the markedness should not be regarded as a phenomenon exclusively found in the area; there is no such a correlation between the two. The limitation is set here merely for a reason that the study originally emerged after some daily observation to students’ names, besides reasons of some technical conditions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study the focused problems are formulated as follows: (1) what are distinctions between the marked Balinese students’s names (NDMBmk) and the unmarked ones like; (2) what are the functions of the marking elements in such names; (3) what are factors that affect them; and (4) what are the ideologies behind the markedness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This research adopted phenomenological and qualitative approach (Spradley, 2006; Sugiono, 2007; Idrus, 2007; Moleong, 2008). Using the approach the marked names was seen as a cultural as well as semiotic product and process. Students’ names were sampled purposively to find the ones that were structurally and behaviorally distinctive. The distinctive names were used as base-data in determining and then constructing a criteria of markedness. In addition, other data related to the backrground were collected through interviews with the name-designers, namely the parents of the students. All data were gathered and then analyzed qualitatively to have the accounts for the functions, factors, and ideology related with the marked names.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Distinctions between the Marked Balinese Student’s Names and the Unmarked</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Names are normally made according to the tradition. However, marked names suggest that at times they may not be made in accordance with the traditional system. The criteria for distinguishing marked from unmarked names can be derived from the theory of </span><span class="font1">2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">linguistic markedness that propose three subcriterion, namely structural, behavioral, and frequency. The structural criterion proposes that a marked name consists of at least five component names, which is more than the average number in its context. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Anak Agung Arim Kasunu Arya Penarungan</span><span class="font3">, for example, is classified as a marked name as it consists of five component names, namely </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Anak Agung</span><span class="font3"> (1), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Arim</span><span class="font3"> (2), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kasunu</span><span class="font3"> (3), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Arya</span><span class="font3"> (4), dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Penarungan</span><span class="font3"> (5). In accordance with the behavioral criterion, a marked name is the one that is either showing a distinctive linguistic resource for its given name, e.g. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ni Made Intan Maggie Setiari</span><span class="font3"> is marked as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Maggie</span><span class="font3"> is derived from a foreign (uncommon) language resource, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ni Putu Chrisna Wulandari</span><span class="font3"> is marked for </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Chrisna</span><span class="font3"> is spelled to follow a foreign name-spelling system, in which “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ch = /k/”</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Agus Suryanata,</span><span class="font3"> as it lacks of the functional component. Referring to the frequency criterion a marked name should not be found to come into sight more frequently than the unmarked ones. In other words, the names regarded be distinctive structurally or behaviorally are the ones that are found less frequently than those names regarded to be common. The calculation found that from 698 sampled names, there are 12 names with distinctive structure, 19 with distinctive language, 18 with distinctive spelling, and 5 with distinctive function. These numbers suggest that in accordance with the frequency criterion, names such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Anak Agung Arim Kasunu Arya Penarungan, Ni Made Intan Maggie Setiari, Ni Putu Chrisna Wulandari</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Agus Suryanata,</span><span class="font3"> are indeed marked Balinese names.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Functions of the Markedness of the Components on Balinese Students’ Names</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to the Balinese naming system, a full name should consist of at least a given name, which is classified to be functionally absolute and other components, namely the gender marker (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I/Ni</span><span class="font3">), classified to be functionally neutral, the caste/the ethnic marker (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ida Ayu/Bagus, I Gusti/Anak Ayu/Agung, Dewa/Desak,</span><span class="font3"> etc.), the birth order/</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sudrawangsa </span><span class="font3">marker (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Wayan/Made/Komang/Ketut,</span><span class="font3"> etc.) classified to be important, penting, and the clan marker (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Manuaba, Adnyana,</span><span class="font3"> etc.), classified to be optional. The theoretical analysis suggests that in addition to denote, to differentiate personal identities, and to establish the existence of the name holder, marked names also have specific functions to make them distinctive contextually. The distinctive spelling behavior of “ch = /k/” as in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Chrisna</span><span class="font3"> for example, functionally connote ‘modernized’, ‘westernized’ ‘developed’, and ‘smart’ identity. Whereas the uncommon names with no ethnic/caste marker such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Agus Suryanata</span><span class="font3"> may functionally connote either ‘not-a-Balinese’ or ‘not-a-Sudrawangsa’ depending on the context of the designation and use of such names. Marked names also reflect the changing culture and ages. Borrowing an Italian name such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Giovani</span><span class="font3"> as found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I Gede Adeyaka Giovani</span><span class="font3"> for example, has this function; the name reflects a generation that faces different ages from the one with names such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Gejer, Mongkeg, Linuh, Sariani, Susila, Wijaya,</span><span class="font3"> and so on. The foreign component in Balinese names like this indicates that there have been more sophisticated experience and perception among today’s Balinese. This also suggests a reflection of a global imagination and expectation. However, this function may not be entirely obvious until the changing generation of such name-holders is completed. In addition to be seen from this perspective, the functions of the marked names may also be accounted by adopting the theory of language functions. Based on the theory, the distinctive components in the marked names may suggest some functions that are dominant.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors Influencing the Markedness on Balinese Students’ Names</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the theory of language choice and borrowing-words, the factors that are found to influence the distinctive structure and behaviors found in the Balinese students’ names include the need to express something new, hope for acculturation, raising status, social distancing, and showing linguistic expertise. Borrowing </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Windy</span><span class="font3"> as in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ni Made Windy Raesa</span><span class="font3"> forinstance, may be influenced by the factor of fulfilling the need to express something new. Such a name can be also theoretically influenced by a wish to acculturate a culture associated with the targeted language. The wish is especially obvious when the targeted culture is considered more prestigious. Choosing western names such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Windy, Giovani, Dicky</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> or adopting English spelling as found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Chrisna, Ary, Arich,</span><span class="font3"> suggest the presence of this factor, in addition to the factor of raising the social status and creating a social distance. In this case, by putting a name such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Dicky</span><span class="font3"> as in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I Made Pasek Dicky Arianta</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> the name holders are expected to be of the higher status as well as of creating a social distance. In addition to this, theoretically, such names may also be related to the factor of showing a linguistic (English of other foreign language) expertise. A name with no ethnic/caste marker can be associated with the raising and distancing-social-status-factor too. Based on the questionnaire and the interview, the name </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tri Permana Putra</span><span class="font3"> for instance, is seen to fulfill the expectation for distancing from the common Balinese identities, whereas the names such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yunisari Wira Putri</span><span class="font3"> may be associated with the expectation for distancing from the ones marked according to the traditional caste system.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Besides these sociolinguistic factors, the factors influencing the marked names may also be accounted from the perspective of cultural linguistic, namely by adopting the concept of imagery. The imagery factor is closely related to the sociolinguistic factors. The wish to acculturate for example, is regarded to be one with the imagery of acculturating, and the expectation to raise a status is associated with the imagery of having a higher social status. In general, the factor influencing the markedness in a Balinese name is not one but more than one. In this case, there is a dominant factor among the supporting factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Ideologies behind the Marked Balinese Students’ Names</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The ideological power behind the marked names can be traced through interpretation of the connotations implied by the distinctive structures and behaviors of the names (Barthez, 1972; Strinati, 1995). The interpretation should consider the contexts in which such names are located. These include the Balinese speech community and the global language and cultural contacts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Theoretically, there are two types of ideologies namely neutral and critical ideologies (Thompson, 1984; Threadgold, 1986) that in turn can be associated with three types of connotations, namely personal, social, and universal connotations (Hort, Rinehart and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Winston &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.cdschools.org/542320926134633527/lib/542320926134633527/12_connotation"><span class="font3">http://www.cdschools.org/542320926134633527/lib/542320926134633527/12_connotation</span></a><span class="font3"> s.ppt, Tuesday, 10 Januari 2012). A personal connotation is associated with a neutral ideology. The name </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Anak Agung Arim Kasunu Arya Penarungan,</span><span class="font3"> for example, is structurally connoting personal expectation for being designed out of a pure personal idea. An interview with the name maker suggests that the unusually “long” name was made to reflect his “long-time” personal struggle and imagination in expecting the birth of his first child (the name holder). Unlike the neutral ideologies, critical ideologies tend to be hidden and only when questioned during interviews and seeked further they might be uttered. Names with foreign language elements, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Putu Roby Adhitya Sapanca</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Made Dwi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ary Mahendri, Ni Putu Chrisna Wulandari,</span><span class="font3"> etc. represent a universal connotation therefore associated with a critical ideology. The ideology that works behind such names is a “global” (modern) one. It supposedly penetrates the imaginations and perceptions of the makers as a false-cosciousness or myth and may hyperconnote ‘a more intellectual identities’. A social imagination with its social connotation is found as an important element of a different critical ideology that works behind the other type of marked names. NDM </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Khrisna Agung Sankara,</span><span class="font3"> for example, has no obvious elements functioning as the marker of Balinese people. Such names connote ‘not a Balinese’ or ‘Indonesian’ and formed out of a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nationalist</span><span class="font3"> ideology. Whereas NDM that demonstrate similar distinctive behavior, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yunisari Wira Putri</span><span class="font3">, actually connotes ‘not a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sudrawangsa’</span><span class="font3"> and associated with the critical ideology of “egalitarianism of caste” (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wangsapada</span><span class="font3">). It is an ideological reaction towards the ideology of caste brought to the island during the Majapahit occupation around the 14 century and manipulated during the Dutch colonization (Kerepun, 2007). In the present time the ideology seems to be held to some degree in the form of discrimination in using elements of name, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Agung, Bagus, Gusti,</span><span class="font3"> etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Theoretically, this research has found a new approach named socionymy. The approach blends sociolinguitiscs and antroponymy in studying various problems of personal names pressumably considered to reflect social and linguistic changes in modern societies. The research has also found a criteria that can be used to analyze markedness in names. With the structural, behavioral, and frequency criterion, the criteria is theoretically applicable for analyzing distinctive names found in any speech communities. Methodologically, this reserach has suggested a way for interviewing informants, named “the Hidden-Recorded-Cellphone- Interview”. The method is best conducted by a closely related person to the informant, who unexpectedly does a free-conversational interview recorded with a cellphone. Finally, the field study has also found that the “old” ideological caste system of Balinese people is actually held to some degree up to now. Instead of pursuing the democratic living idealism of the society, the present official administrators (the Civil Documentation Service and Local State Court) maintain the limitation for Balinese ethnics in choosing elements for their personal names as some elements are traditionally still regarded as exclusively belonging to particular groups. In conducting such policy, the administrators seem to suggest that the old caste Balinese system is still held firmly by some traditional Balinese, therefore the idea should be honored.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion and Suggestion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conslusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This research seeks to account for the relation between the arbitrariness in choosing and designing personal names and some extralinguistic factors affecting it. The conclusions drawn after the analysis are as the following.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The marked Balinese names, as sampled into the Balinese students’ names, are the names that show distinctiveness in their contexts that can be distinguished from the unmarked ones by applying the criteria of name markedness. Among the marked Balinese students’ names, a degree of markedness can be meassured to which the structurally distinctive names are the mostly marked and the functionally distinctive ones are the least unmarked. Between the two, the names with distinctive language resources are more marked than the ones with distinctive spellings.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Besides having ordinary functions, such as denotating, identifying, and establishing individual existences, (Ullmann, 1977; Mill, Evans in Martinich, ed., 1996; Thornborrow in Thomas and Wareing, ed., 1999), marked names demonstrate distinct functions, namely, connotating and reflecting age-changing. Based on the theory of language functions (Halliday, 1973, 1986) the functions of the markedness can be explained to have, among others, ideational, emotical, interpersonal functions.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The factors affecting the markedness of the Balinese students’ names can be explained by using the theory of borrowing words (Haugen, 1969; Weinreich, 1974, Wardhaugh, 1976; dan Grosjean, 1982 and Malinowski, Thurnwald in Poerwanto, 2008) and cultural linguistics (Palmer, 1990). The factors are the need to express new things, the wish for an acculturation, the desire to raise or keep a social status/distance, as well as the intention to demonstrate a language expertise. Based on the theory of imajery, the factors are namely the imagery of somehting new and the imagery of social status/distance. The research also concludes that one case of marked names is caused by more than one factor, though one of them should be a more dominant one while the others are supporting.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theoretically, (Althusser, 1969, 1971 in Hall dkk., ed., 201; Thompson, 1984; Threadgold in Threadgold dkk., ed., 1984; Fairclough, 1995) the ideologies that work behind the marked Balinese names can be identified through analyzing the contextual uses of languages by the Balinese people, interpreting their imaginations, expectations, and the connotations (Barthez, 1972; Strinati, 1995) implied by such names. Through these ways, three ideologies have been identified to work behind the markedness of Balinese students’ names, namely global/modern (capitalist/borguise) ideology (e.g. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ni Putu Chrisna Wulandari</span><span class="font3">) national (ethnic equality) ideology (e.g. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Agung Krisna Sankara</span><span class="font3">), and “caste equality” ideology (e.g. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yunisari Wira Putri</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">).</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Balinese parents should consider the social connotations as well as the spirit of maintaining the local linguistic and cultural resources, when choosing names for their children, besides having to regard the formal regulation. Bali governmental agencies should be impartial in applying the regulation for people in designing names, for which they should also regard the state ideology (Pancasila) as the highest foundation and consider the outdated traditional caste-discrimination, which is still preserved through the naming system, to be reformed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acknowledgments</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A lot of people, whose names that unfortunately cannot be put here, have contributed to this research to whom I would express heartedly gratitudes. Among them that I should not forget include Prof. Drs. I Made Suastra, Ph.D., as the supervisor, Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, as the co-supervisor I, Prof. Dr. I Ketut Darma Laksana, M.Hum. as the cosupervisor II, who all have shared knowledge, spare time, and saved energy for the possibility of it. This has also benefited a lot from Prof. Dr. Made Budiarsa, M.A., Prof. Dr. Drs. Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, M.A., Prof. Drs. I Ketut Artawa, M.A.,Ph.D., Prof. Dr. Ni Nyoman Padmadewi, M.A., Dr. Ni Made Dhanawaty, M.S., and Dr. Frans Made Berata, M.Hum., as the examiners, whose comments, corrections, complaints, and criticism contributed positvely to extend the study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Agyekum, Kofi. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Sociolinguistics of Akan Personal Names</span><span class="font3"> (Nordic Journal of African Studies &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15(2): &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;206–235 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2006) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(13 Mei 2010,</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-files/vol15num2/agyekum.pdf"><span class="font3">http://www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-files/vol15num2/agyekum.pdf</span></a><span class="font3">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anandakusuma, Sri Reshi. 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Bali.</span><span class="font3">Denpasar: CV Kayumas Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Antara. I Gusti Putu. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sistem Tatanama Orang Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Singaraja: Yayasan Kawi Sastra Mandala</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astika, I Nyoman, dkk.. 1992. “Penamaan Orang dalam Masyarakat Bali di Desa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Darmasaba” (laporan penelitian) Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Atmaja, Nengah Bawa. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ajeg Bali: Gerakan, Identitas Kultural, dan Globalisasi. </span><span class="font3">Jakarta:LKIS</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Barhez, Roland. 1972. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Membedah Mitos-mitos Budaya Massa</span><span class="font3"> (terjemahan Ikramullah Mahyuddin). Yogyakarta: Jalasutra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bawa, I Wayan dan I Wayan Cika &nbsp;ed.. &nbsp;2004, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dalam Perspektif</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan.</span><span class="font3">Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Beratha, Ni Luh Sutjiati. 1993. “Bahasa Bali dan Identitas Sosial: Sebuah Studi Kasus” Dalam Tjok Rai, Sudharta dkk. ed.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan &nbsp;&nbsp;dan Kepribadian Bangsa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar: Upada Sastra, (hlm 176)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">___________________. 2009. “Peran Semantik dalam Penerjemahan</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font3"> (Dalam Wayan Windia, dkk., ed. Pemikiran Kritis Guru Besar Universitas Udayana Bidang Sastra dan Budaya) Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana, hlm 36-51</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chalker, Sylvia and Edmund Weiner. 1998. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Dictionary of English Grammar. </span><span class="font3">Oxford. Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Comrie, Bernard, 1976. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Aspect: An Introduction to the Study of Verbal Aspect and Related Problems.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Croft, William. 1990. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Typology and Universals.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Crystal, David. 1987. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: Cambridge Univeristy Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Diantha, Made Pasek &amp;&nbsp;Pasek Eka Wisanjaya. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kasta dalam Perspektif Hukum dan HAM.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Udayana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Donnel, Kevin O’. 2009, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Postmodernisme.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Djajasudarma, Fatimah HJ. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik: Ancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian.</span><span class="font3"> Bandung: Refika Aditama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Djojosuroto, Kinayati. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Bahasa: Buku yang Mengulas tentang Bahasa dari Paradigma yang Substansial hingga Contoh Analisis Praktis</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Publisher</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Duranti, Alessandro. 1997. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Anthropology.</span><span class="font3">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Echols, John M. dan Hassan Shadily, 1996.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Inggris-Indonesia:</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eco, Umberto. 1976. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Semiotika: Siginifkasi, Komunikasi, Teori Kode, Serta Teori Produksi Tanda.</span><span class="font3"> (Diterjemahkan oleh Inyiak Ridwan Musir). Bantul: Kreasi Wacana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Erom, Kletus. 2008. “Sistem Pemarkahan Nomina Bahasa Manggarai dan Implikasinya dalam Budaya Sistem Penamaan Guyub Tutur Manggarai” (Disertasi) Denpasar: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Evans, Gareth. 1996. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Causal Theory of Names”</span><span class="font3"> Dalam Martinich, A.P., ed. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Philosophy of Language.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fairclough, Norman, 1995. Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language. New York: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fought, Carmen. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Ethnicity.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gautama, Wayan Budha. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Uger-uger Pasang Aksara Latin basa Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: C.V. Kayumas Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ghandi, Maneka. 1992, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Book of Hindu Names.</span><span class="font3"> New Delhi: Penguin</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Givon, Talmy. &nbsp;1984. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Syntax: A Functional-Typological Introduction</span><span class="font3"> (Volume I).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">____________, &nbsp;1990. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Syntax: &nbsp;A &nbsp;Functional-Typological Introduction</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Volume II</span><span class="font3">)</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goring, Rosemary. ed. 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Wordworth Dictionary of Beliefs and Religions: A Comprehensive Guide to World-wide Faiths.</span><span class="font3"> Hertfordshire: W&amp;R Chambers Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gosvami, Srila Gopala Bhatta.1999. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sat Kriya Sara Dipika.</span><span class="font3"> Mayapur: The Bhaktivedanta Academy</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grosjean, Francois. 1982</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Life With Two Languages: An Introduction to Bilingualism. </span><span class="font3">Hardvard: Hardvard University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday, MAK.1973. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Explorations in the Functions of Language.</span><span class="font3"> London: Edward Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">_____________, 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-semiotic Perspective.</span><span class="font3"> Victoria: Deakin University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hartley, John. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Commuication, Cultural, and Media Studies.</span><span class="font3"> (terjemahan Kartika Wijayanti. Yogyakarta: JalaSutra)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hall, Stuart dkk.. ed.. 2011. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Budaya Media Bahasa: Teks Utama Pencanang Cultural Studies 1972-1979</span><span class="font3"> (terjemahan Saleh Rahmana) Yogyakarta: Jalasutra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hickerson, Nancy Parrot. 1980. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Anthropology.</span><span class="font3"> Sydney: Holt, Rinehart and Winston</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hodge, Robert dan Kress, Gunther, 1988.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Social Semiotics.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Basil Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hoed, Benny H., 2011. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika dan Dinamika Sosial Budaya.</span><span class="font3"> Depok: Komunitas Bambu</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S.. 2005.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hung Ng, Sik dan James J Bradac. 1993.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Power in Language: Verbal Communication and Social Influence:</span><span class="font3"> London: Sage Publications</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Idrus, M. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial: Pendekatan Kualitatif dan Kuantitatif</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: UII Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jafar, Syamsinas. 2004. “Sistem Sapaan Bahasa Bima: Kajian Makna Penghormatan dan Solidaritas” (disertasi). Denpasar: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jendra, I Wayan. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik: Teori dan Praktek.</span><span class="font3"> Surabaya: Paramitha</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Juniarta, I Wayan. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bungklang Bungkling.</span><span class="font3"> Ubud: Museum Pendet Bale Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kellner, Douglas. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Budaya Media: Cultural Studies, Identitas, dan Politik: Antara Modern dan Postmodern</span><span class="font3"> (terjemahan Galih Bondan Rambatan).Yogyakarta: Jalasutra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kerepun, Made Kembar. 2004.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Benang Kusut Nama Gelar di Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: CV Bali Media Adhikarsa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">____________________, 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mengurai Benang Kusut Kasta: Membedah Kiat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pengajegan Kasta di Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Panakom</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kramsch, Claire.1998.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Culture.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Laksana, I Ketut Dharma. 2004. “Etnolinguistik”. (Dalam Bawa, I Wayan dan Cika, I Wayan Cika., ed. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dalam Perspektif Kebudayaan.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana (hlm. 44-51)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________________, 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tabu Bahasa: Salah Satu cara Memahami Kebudayaan Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Udayana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Luria, Harriet, et al. ed., 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Linguistics in Context.</span><span class="font3"> New Jersey: Lawrence erlbaum Associates, Publishers</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mackey, William F.. 1960. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“The Description of Bilingualism”</span><span class="font3"> (dalam Fishman, Joshua A. (ed.), 1972) Paris: The Hague</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mahsun. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bahasa: Tahapan Strategi, Metode, dan Tekniknya</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: PT Raja Grafindo Persada</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Martinich, A.P. ed.. 1996. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Philosophy of Language.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Matthews, Peter. 1997. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Linguistics.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mayr, Andrea. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Power: An Introduction to Institutional Discourse.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Continuum</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mbete, Aron Meko.2003. “Linguistik Kebudayaan: Rintisan Konsep dan Beberapa Aspek Kajiannya</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">”(</span><span class="font3">dalam Bawa, I Wayan dan I Wayan Cika, ed., 2004, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dalam Perspektif Kebudayaan</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana. (hlm 16-34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">________________2009. ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dan Budaya Lokal Minoritas: Asal-Muasal, Ancama Kepunahan, dan Ancangan Pemberdayaan dalam Kerangka Pola Ilmiah Pokok Kebudayaan Universitas Udayana.’</span><span class="font3">(dalam Tim Editor BPMU, 2009: 83-110.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pemikiran Kritis Guru Besar Universitas Udayana Bidang Sastra dan Budaya) Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moleong, Lexy.2008.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif: Edisi Kedua</span><span class="font3">. Bandung. Rosdakarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mulyana, Deddy. 2004.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Komunikasi Populer: Kajian Komunikasi dan Budaya Kontemporer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bandung: Pustaka Bani Quraysi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ilmu Komunikasi: Suatu Pengantar</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: PT Remaja Rosdakarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________, Jalaluddin Rakhmat, ed. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Komunikasi Antarbudaya: Panduan Berkomunikasi dengan Orang-orang Berbeda Budaya.</span><span class="font3">Bandung: Rosdakarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Munsyi, Alif Danya. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Menunjukkan Bangsa.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: KPG</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Muysken, Pieter. 2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingual Speech: A Typology of Code Mixing.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nababan, P.W.J., 1984. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">O’Donnel, Kevin. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Posmodernisme.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Palmer, Gary B. 1996. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Toward a Theory of Cultural Linguistics.</span><span class="font3"> Austin: University of Texas Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pastika, I Wayan. 2004. “Antropologi Linguistik vs Linguistik Antropologi vs Sosiolinguistik</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.”</span><span class="font3"> (dalam Bawa, I Wayan &amp;&nbsp;I Wayan Cika., ed. 2004.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dalam Perspektif Kebudayaan.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana. (hlm: 35-43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Parthasarathi, M.S., 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sri Vishnu Sahasra Naamam</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Seribu Nama Visnu.</span><span class="font3"> (terjemahan Suwariyati) Surabaya: Paramita</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Phillipson, Robert. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Imperialism.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hipersemiotika: Tafsir Cultural Studies atas Matinya Makna. </span><span class="font3">Yogyakarta: Jalasutra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">_________________, &nbsp;2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Post-realitas: Realitas Kebudayaan dalam Era Post-metafisika.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Jalasutra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Poerwanto, Hari. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan dan Lingkungan dalam Perspektif Antropologi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Prabhupada, Sri Srimad A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Krsna The Reservoir of Pleasure </span><span class="font3">(Krsna Sumber Kebahagiaan). Hanuman Sakti</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Puterawan, N, 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Babad Bali Baru: Sejarah Kependudukan Bali.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Manikgeni</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Putra Yadnya, Ida Bagus. 2004. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Menuju Linguistik Kebudayaan sebagai Ilmu: Sebuah</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perspektif Filsafat Ilmu</span><span class="font3">” (Dalam Bawa, I Wayan &amp;&nbsp;I Wayan Cika. ed. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa dalam Perspektif Kebudayaan</span><span class="font3">Denpasar: Penerbit Universitas Udayana. (hlm 52-70)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk, Randolph. 1985. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A University Grammar of English</span><span class="font3">. Essex: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Richards, Jack dkk..1985 </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Longman Dictionary of Applied Linguistics.</span><span class="font3"> Essex: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rosidi, Ajip.2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bus Bis Bas: Berbagai Masalah Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya Santoso, Riyadi. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Sosial: Pandangan terhadap Bahasa.</span><span class="font3"> Surabaya: Pustaka Eureka</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sapir, Edward. 1921</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Language</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sarma, Mukhunda Madava. 1985. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Unsur-unsur bahasa Sanskerta dalam bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar: Wyasa Sanggraha</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sastra, Gde Sara. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Calon Pandita dan Dharmaning Sulinggih</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Wiku Sesana). </span><span class="font3">Surabaya: Paramita</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shan, Wareing &amp;&nbsp;Thomas Linda, ed. 1999. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Society and Power.</span><span class="font3"> London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shastri, Satya Vratdkk., 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sanskrit Words in Southeast Asian Languages.</span><span class="font3"> Mumbai: Somaiya Publications</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sibarani, Robert. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Antropolinguistik: Antropologi Linguistik, Linguistik Antropologi. </span><span class="font3">Medan: Penerbit Poda</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sobur, Alex. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Komunikasi</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: Penerbit PT Remaja Rosdakarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Soethama, Gde Aryantha. 2004 </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Basa Basi Bali</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Buku Arti</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Spooner, Alan, 2005, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Oxford Colour Thesaurus.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press Strinati, Dominic. 1995. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Popular Culture: Pengantar Menuju Teori Budaya Populer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Diterjemahkan oleh Abdul Mukhid) Yogyakarta: Bentang Budaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suaradnyana, I Ketut. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Arti Sebuah Nama”</span><span class="font3"> (Widyaswara No 0852-7768, 2007) Denpasar: Universitas Dwijendra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suarjaya, I Wayan. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Upacara Mediksa Pasek Sanak Sapta Resi.</span><span class="font3"> Surabaya: Paramita</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suastra, I Made, 2001. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language Change: A Sociolinguistic Study of Balinese in Urban Setting</span><span class="font3">.”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika</span><span class="font3">, Maret, 2001. Denpasar: Program Studi Magister (S2) Linguistik Universitas Udayana Bali, hlm. 113-124</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">____________, 2009. “Bahasa Bali sebagai Simbol Identitas Manusia Bali” </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika</span><span class="font3">, Maret 2009. Denpasar: Program Studi Magister (S2) dan Doktor (S3) Linguistik Universitas Udayana bekerjasama dengan Masyarakat Linguistik Indonesia (MLI), (hlm. 12-22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudaryanto. 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik : Bagian Pertama Ke Arah Memahami Metode Linguistik.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta : Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">__________, 1990. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Menguak fungsi Hakiki Bahasa.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">_________. 1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Tehnik Analisis Bahasa</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudharta, Tjok Rai dkk. ed.. 1993.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan dan Kepribadian Bangsa.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Upada Sastra</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudjiman, Panuti dan Aart van Zoest. 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Serba-serbi Semiotika.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sugiarto, Eko. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kreasi Nama-nama Hoki untuk Buah Hati Anda.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Prestasi Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sugiono. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Alfabeta</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">_______ 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Pendidikan : Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&amp;D.</span><span class="font3"> Bandung : Alfa Beta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sunardi, St. 2002. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Negativa</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Kanal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suteja, I Nyoman, 2007. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sikap Bahasa Kelompok Mahasiswa Etnis Bali terhadap Pemakaian Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font3"> (disertasi) Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sutjaja, I Gusti Made. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Concise Balinese Dictionary: Balinese-Indonesian-English, English-Balinese-Indonesian.</span><span class="font3">Singapore: Tuttle</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suyanto, Bagong &amp;&nbsp;Sutinah, ed. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Sosial: Berbagai Alternatif Pendekatan.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Kencana Prenada Media Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thompson, John B. 1984. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Ideologi : Kritik Wacana Ideologi-Ideologi Dunia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(terjemahan Haqqul Yaqin) Yogyakarta: IrciSod</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Threadgold, Terry, et al. ed..1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics, Ideology, Language</span><span class="font3">. Sydney: the Sydney</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Association for Studies in Society and Culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Trask, R.L. &amp;&nbsp;Peter Stockwell. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Linguistics: The Key Concepts, Second</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Edition</span><span class="font3">. New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Trenholm, Sarah &amp;&nbsp;Arthur Jensen, 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpersonal Communication.</span><span class="font3"> California: Wadsworth</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Titib, I Made. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Menumbuhkembangkan Pendidikan Budhi Pekerti pada Anak: Perspektif Agama Hindu.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Bali Post</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Triguna, Yudha, 2002. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kasta”</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sarad, Majalah Gumi Bali No 23/</span><span class="font3"> Februari 2002: 47) Denpasar: Yayasan Gumi Bali, hlm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Trudgill, P.1974. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics: An Introduction.</span><span class="font3"> Great Britain: Pelican Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ullmann, Stephen, 1977. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: An Introduction to the Science of Meaning</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: BasilBlackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Van Patten, Bill &amp;&nbsp;Benati, Alesandro G, 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Key Terms in Second Language Acquisition. </span><span class="font3">New York: Continuum</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, Ronald, 1976. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Context of Language.</span><span class="font3"> Massachusetts: Newbury House Publishers</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wareing, Shan. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">What is Language and What does it Do?” (</span><span class="font3">dalamWareing, Shan &amp;&nbsp;Linda Thomas. ed. London: Routledge (hlm.1-15).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Warna, I Wayan dkk.. 1978. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bali-Indonesia.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Dinas Pengajaran Daerah Tingkat I Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________________. 1978. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ejaan Bahasa daerah Bali yang Disempurnakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar: Dinas Pengajaran Propinsi Daerah TK I Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Weinreich, Uriel. 1974, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language in Contacts: Findings and Problems:</span><span class="font3"> Paris: The Hague: Mouton</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wiana, Ketut dan Raka Santeri. 1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kasta dalam Hindu: Kesalahpahaman Berabad-abad.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Yayasan Dharma Narada</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wickers, Andrian. 1989. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bali A Paradise Created.</span><span class="font3"> Singapore: Periplus</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Widiastuti, Rr Jenny.2003.”Makna Nama bagi Orang Cina Warga Negara Indonesia di Kota</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yogyakarta” (tesis). Yogyakarta: Universitas Gadjah Mada</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Williams, Raymond. 1988. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society.</span><span class="font3"> London: Fontana Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Windia, Wayan, dkk. ed.. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pemikiran Kritis Guru Besar Universitas Udayana. </span><span class="font3">Denpasar: Udayana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Winford, Donald. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Contact Linguistics</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yendra, I Wayan. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kanda Empat Rare: Mewujudkan Keluarga Bahagia Selamat Sekala-Niskala.</span><span class="font3">Surabaya: Paramita</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Zoest, Aart van. 1978. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotiek, Overteken, hoe ze werken en wat we ermee doen</span><span class="font3"> ( Diterjemahkan Ani Soekawati, 1993). Jakarta: Yayasan Sumber Agung</span></p>
<p><a href="http://halilintarblog/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://halilintarblog</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3">com</span></p>
<p><a href="http://id.omg.yahoo.com/news/ubah-imej-miyabi-ganti-nama-pauline-anve-"><span class="font3">http://id.omg.yahoo.com/news/ubah-imej-miyabi-ganti-nama-pauline-anve-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">f55c30c4bf.html,</span></p>
<p><a href="http://id.omg.yahoo.com/news/berharap-hoki-saiful-jamil-ganti-nama-khjx-0000347929.html"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://id.omg.yahoo.com/news/berharap-hoki-saiful-jamil-ganti-nama-khjx-</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://id.omg.yahoo.com/news/berharap-hoki-saiful-jamil-ganti-nama-khjx-0000347929.html"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">0000347929.html</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.rogerdarlington.me.uk/useofnames.html%23Introduction"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.rogerdarlington.me.uk/useofnames.html#Introduction</span><span class="font3">,</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.devari.org/2007/12/22/ketika-nama-orang-bali-di-inggris-kan/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.devari.org/2007/12/22/ketika-nama-orang-bali-di-inggris-kan/</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.teacher.org.cn/doc/ucedu200608/ucedu20060815.pdf"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.teacher.org.cn/doc/ucedu200608/ucedu20060815.pdf</span><span class="font3">)</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.cdschools.org/542320926134633527/lib/542320926134633527/12_connotations.ppt"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.cdschools.org/542320926134633527/lib/542320926134633527/12_connotation</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.cdschools.org/542320926134633527/lib/542320926134633527/12_connotations.ppt"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">s.ppt</span><span class="font3">/</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.denpasarkota.go.id/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.denpasarkota.go.id/</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-files/vol15num2/agyekum.pdf/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-files/vol15num2/agyekum.pdf/</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.balipost.co.id/mediadetail.php?module=detailberitaminggu&amp;kid=19&amp;id=8177"><span class="font3">http://www.balipost.co.id/mediadetail.php?module=detailberitaminggu&amp;kid=19&amp;id=8177</span></a><span class="font3"> Orti Bali| BP</span></p>
<p><a href="http://majalah.tempointeraktif.com/id/arsip/1989/05/27/AG/mbm.19890527.AG22803.id.ht"><span class="font3">http://majalah.tempointeraktif.com/id/arsip/1989/05/27/AG/mbm.19890527.AG22803.id.ht</span></a><span class="font3"> ml</span></p>
<p><a href="http://jerosetia.blogspot.com/2009/04/kasta-di-bali-kesalahpahaman-yang-sudah.html"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://jerosetia.blogspot.com/2009/04/kasta-di-bali-kesalahpahaman-yang-sudah.html</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.thatsweird.net/facts11.shtml"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.thatsweird.net/facts11.shtml</span><span class="font3">d</span></a><span class="font3">ala</span><a href="http://netverum.blogspot.com/2009/02/nama-asli-selebritis-dunia.html"><span class="font3">m</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://netverum.blogspot.com/2009/02/nama-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://netverum.blogspot.com/2009/02/nama-asli-selebritis-dunia.html"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">asli-selebritis-dunia.html</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">13</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">14</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">