---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TRANSLATION OF SITUATIONAL IMPLICIT MEANING FOUND IN TWILIGHT NOVEL AS TRANSLATED INTO TWILIGHT"
author: "Ni Made Ari Listiani"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9710 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-9710"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-9710"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE TRANSLATION OF SITUATIONAL IMPLICIT MEANING FOUND IN</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>TWILIGHT</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> NOVEL AS TRANSLATED INTO </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TWILIGHT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Ni Made Ari Listiani</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Perwakilan BKKBN Provinsi Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jl. Sumandang IA No. 9 Batubulan, Gianyar</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">HP 081 246 201 32</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:arilistiani2010@gmail.com"><span class="font1">arilistiani2010@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1"> ; </span><a href="mailto:ari_listiani2006@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">ari_listiani2006@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This research aims to analyze the situational implicit meaning in English and its translation in Bahasa Indonesia. The data was taken from the situational implicit meaning found in English novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> (Meyer: 2005) and its translation in Bahasa Indonesia with the same title, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight </span><span class="font1">(Meyer: 2009).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the result of the study, it can be taken conclusions that the situational implicit meaning can be categorized into four types of implicit meaning, i.e. situational implicit meaning due to the relationship between speaker and addressee; time and place where the communication took place; presupposition which brings to the communication; and the cultural background of the speaker and of the addressee. Translation procedures implemented by the translators including: literal translation, borrowing, transposition and equivalence. Equivalence procedure was the most frequently applied procedure in translating implicit situational meaning. This suggests that the orientation of the translator is TL oriented. Based on the analysis of the context of situation and context of culture, translation of situational implicit meanings on the data had provided the best possible translations which are acceptable and natural to the TL text readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">situational implicit meaning, context of the situation and cultural</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis makna implisit situasional dalam bahasa Inggris dan terjemahannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Data makna implisit situasional diambil dari novel berbahasa Inggris yang berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> (Meyer: 2005) dan terjemahannya dalam bahasa Indonesia dengan judul yang sama, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> (Meyer: 2009).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa makna implisit situasional dapat dikategorikan ke dalam empat tipe makna implisit, yaitu makna implisit situasional karena hubungan antara pembicara dan lawan bicaranya, waktu dan tempat di mana komunikasi terjadi; presuposisi yang ada dalam komunikasi, dan latar belakang budaya pembicara dan lawan bicaranya. Prosedur penerjemahan yang diimplementasikan oleh penerjemah meliputi penerjemahan langsung (Literal Translation), borrowing, transposisi dan kesepadanan (Equivalence). Prosedur kesepadanan adalah prosedur yang paling sering digunakan oleh penerjemah dalam menerjemahkan makna implisit situasional. Ini menunjukkan bahwa penerjemah berorientasi pada bahasa sasaran. Berdasarkan analisa konteks situasi dan konteks budaya, penerjemahan makna implisit situasional memiliki kesepadanan yang berterima dalam bahasa sasaran, yaitu bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">makna implisit situasional, konteks situasi &amp;&nbsp;budaya.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark8"></a>I</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Situational context and cultural context have a fundamental impact on translating activities. Situational context determines translators’ choice of ideational meaning of words in order to express the information appropriately. It also plays an important role in manifesting characters’ status, identity, temperament and interpersonal relations, so the translator should choose the appropriate expression to fit the expectation of readers for the roles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson (1998: 41), stated that the implicit meaning is classified into three type: Referential meaning, Organizational meaning, and Situational meaning. Therefore, to limit the research problems, this research will be focused on situational implicit meaning. Larson (1998: 35 ) argued that communication situation deals with who the speaker (the writer) is, who the audience is, the traditions of the culture, etc. Larson (1998: 42) divided situational implicit meaning into several type including the relation between the speaker and the addressee; time and place where the communication took place; presupposition which brings to the communication; and the cultural background of the speaker and of the addressee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are three research questions that are discussed in this study, they are: (1) What types of situational implicit meanings occur in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> novel? (2) What procedures of translation are applied on the translation of situational implicit meaning found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> novel and it’s translation into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1">? (3) What are the equivalence of situational and cultural context of English situational implicit meaning found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> and its Bahasa Indonesia translation?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In line with the problems of the study, this study aims at identifying the types of implicit situational meaning occur in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> novel, investigating the translation procedure applied on the translation of situational implicit meaning found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> novel and its translation into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight,</span><span class="font1"> and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">explaining the equivalence of situational and cultural context of English situational implicit meaning found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> and its Bahasa Indonesia translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is expected to be able to contribute to the application of translation theory especially regarding situational explicit meaning. In addition, this research contributes to the application of theory of procedures of translation and equivalence of context of situatuiand context of culture in translation. This research is also expected to be helpful on further research with similar field of study</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>RESEARCH METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This study belongs to qualitative research. It is charachterized by the observation on the forms comprising implicit situational meaning on SLT and their translation in TL text found in selected data source (Bodgan and Biklen,1992:2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study are the forms containing implicit situational meaning on the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight </span><span class="font1">novel and its Bahasa Indonesia translation into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To collect the data, this research applied observation method proposed by Sudaryanto (1993: 133). The method is implemented through doing a thorought observation to the data source. To support the method, note taking technique will be applied in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This method of study can be categorized as qualitative-descriptive method since it is aimed at describing systematically, factually and accurately the characteristics and correlation that occur among the phenomena based on the theory applied in this sudy (Djajasudarma, 1993 :10).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of analysis in this study is presented formally and informally as proposed by Sudaryanto</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(1993:145), i.e. with the presentation of statistical features such as the use of tables and abbreviation and also with the presentation using words to describe the finding.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Three theories was combined to conduct the analysis, i.e. Meaning Based Translation (Larson: 1998), Procedures of Translation (Vinay and Dalbernet in Venuti: 2000) and Register Analysis – Context of Situation and Context of Culture (Halliday: 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data that had been collected was firstly classified based on the four types of situational implicit meaning proposed by Larson (1998), i.e. the relationship between the speaker and the addressee, time and place where the communication took place, presupposition which brings to the communication, the cultural background of the speaker and the addressee. Then, to answer the second problem, the data was analysed based on the procedures on translation by applying the theory proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet in Venuti (2000). Register Analysis proposed by Halliday (2006) was applied to analyse the equivalence of situational and cultural context of English situational implicit meaning found in Twilight and its Bahasa Indonesia translation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Situational Implicit Meaning due to the Relationship between Speaker and Addressee</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The relationship between the speaker and the addressee will determine the choice of vocabulary used by the speaker/author. The factors of sex, age and social status might be managed by several ways. The translator can conduct the process of this management through the certain pronunciation, words, and grammar in the formal speech, informal speech, and casual speech. The following example contains situational implicit meaning due to the relationship between speaker and addressee:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">&quot;You can sleep, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">sweetheart</span><span class="font1">, I'll &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kau bisa tidur sekarang, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Sayang</span><span class="font1">, aku</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">carry you,&quot; Edward soothed me. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;akan menggendongmu,” Edward</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">(Meyer, 2005: 215)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">menenangkanku. (Sari, 2005: 476)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Implicit meaning: Implicit meaning:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sweetheart</span><span class="font1"> refers to Isabella (Bella) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sayang</span><span class="font1"> refers to Isabella (Bella)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Swan Swan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Vinay and Dalbernet’s theory of procedures of translation, the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sweetheart</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sayang</span><span class="font1"> can be categorized as equivalence translation because the translator apply the most acceptable and natural terms in TL that had similar meaning with the SL term.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Register analysis:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Field: </span><span class="font1">The SL and TL </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">inner context fields</span><span class="font1"> of the Data are both verbal conversation between Isabella (Bella) Swan and her boyfriend, Edward Cullen. In SL, the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sweetheart</span><span class="font1"> was the term of address used by Edward Cullen to his girlfriend. In TL, the term was translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sayang.</span><span class="font1"> Regarding </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context of field</span><span class="font1">, the SL text were fictional written dialogue in Standard English. Meanwhile, the TL text waerefictional written dialogue in Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tenor: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The inner context tenor</span><span class="font1"> is the interaction between Isabella (Bella) Swan, the main character of the story, and her boyfriend, Edward Cullen. Power relation between participants is equal (couples). Since they are a couple, they had a relatively high frequent contact with high affective involvement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The outer participants of the ST text and TL text is different, so </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context tenor</span><span class="font1"> is changed. The author of the SL text is English speaker and the target readers are those who speak English. Meanwhile, the TL text was translated by Indonesian and intended for Indonesian reader especially young</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesian people. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sweetheart</span><span class="font1"> is a common terms of endearment used by someone to refer his/her lover. In Bahasa Indonesia, the translator translated it into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sayang</span><span class="font1"> , which also a term of endearment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mode : </span><span class="font1">The inner mode of the SL and TL on Data. a are both in the form of dialogue performed by tow lovers, Isabella (Bella) Swan and Edward Cullen. The outer modes are both written – narrative story.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Situational Implicit Meaning due to Time and Place Where the Communication Took Place</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">According to Larson (1998), the time of the writing of the SL text and the location or the place of the original writing will affect the translation. He also suggest that a translator should make every effort to be faithful to the historical facts and information of the SL text. The situational implicit meaning due to time and place where the communication took place can be found on the following example:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></h2>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">He walked to </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the light board </span><span class="font1">on the wall over my head, and turned it on. (Meyer, 2005: 28)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Explicit Meaning:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Light</span><span class="font1"> :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the force that makes things visible; source of light</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;easy to lift or move</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Board</span><span class="font1"> : a flat and thin piece of wood or other stiff material used for particular</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Ia berjalan ke </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">papan pembaca foto rontgen </span><span class="font1">di dinding atas kepalaku, dan menyalakannya. (Sari, 2009: 74)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Explicit Meaning:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Papan</span><span class="font1">: a wide and thin hard material such as wood or metal</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pembaca</span><span class="font1">: reader</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Foto</span><span class="font1">: A representation of a person or scene in the form of a print or transparent slide</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rontgen</span><span class="font1">:</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">purpose</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">A tool used to portray using X-rays that can penetrate the body parts</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Implicit meaning: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Implicit meaning:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">A an electrical medical device contains A an electrical medical device contains</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">white LED/lamp inside of it used to white LED/lamp inside of it used to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">view an X-ray photo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;view an X-ray photo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Theory of Procedures of Translation by Vinay and Dalbernet (in Venuti; 2000), the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the lightboard</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">papan pembaca foto rontgen</span><span class="font1"> describe the same concept by different stylistic and structural means. So, it belongs to equivalence procedure.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Register Analysis:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Field : </span><span class="font1">The SL and TL </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">inner context fields</span><span class="font1"> of the Data are both verbal conversation between Isabella (Bella) Swan and dr. Carlisle Cullen after an accident she experienced at school. She had a pretty hard bump on her head that made her to have head X-ray. When the doctor came to examined her, he read Bella’s X-ray photo with a medical device that is medically called X-ray view box. The SL text used the terms </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the lightboard</span><span class="font1"> and the TL text used a more explicit form </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">papan pembaca foto Rontgen. </span><span class="font1">Regarding </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context field</span><span class="font1"> of the analysed text, both SL and TL text are fictional. The SL text is written dialogue in Standard English, while the TL text is written in Bahasa Indonesia. The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the lightboard</span><span class="font1"> in SL text is used due to presupposition of the concept of X-ray view box, i.e. the author assumed that the reader shared the similar concept of X-ray view box, including the physical appearance and the function of the medical device. Meanwhile, the TL text used </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">papan pembaca foto Rontgen</span><span class="font1"> to refer to this device.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tenor : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The inner context tenor</span><span class="font1"> is the interaction between the main character (Isabella (Bella) Swan)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and her boyfriend’s stepfather dr. Carlisle Cullen. Since it was the first time they meet, the power relation between participants is not close. The outer participants of the ST text and TL text is different, so </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context tenor</span><span class="font1"> is changed. The author of the SL text is English speaker and the target readers are those who speak English. Meanwhile, the TL text was translated by Indonesian and the TL text itself is intended for Indonesian reader In this case, the translator have to provide the equivalent concep of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lightboard</span><span class="font1"> in Bahasa Indonesia. Based on the context of situation, Isabella (Bella) Swan was at the hospital to treat her minor injuries due to the accident he experienced at her school. She also have a pretty hard bump on her head at he accident that made her to have head X-ray. The conversation between Bella and dr. Carlisle Cullen occured when dr. Cullen examined Bella. He needed to read the X-ray photo of her head. It was narrated that the doctor turned on a medical device called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lightboard</span><span class="font1">. Then, dr. Cullen said “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Your X-ray look good”. Lightboard</span><span class="font1"> in this context of situation refers to a certain medical device that is used to help the doctor to read X-ray photo known as X-ray view box. To transfer the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lightboard</span><span class="font1"> into Bahasa Indonesia, the translator preferred to express it explicitly in order to be able to transfer the message accurately by descibing the function of the device i.e</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. papan pembaca foto Rontgen (a board which is used to read X-ray photo</span><span class="font1">). By translating </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lightboard</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">papan pembaca foto Rontgen</span><span class="font1"> by applying equivalence procedure, the translator can transfer the message of the SL text appropriately by providing the most equivalent expression in Bahasa Indonesia and acceptable to Indonesian culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mode: </span><span class="font1">The inner mode of the SL and TL data are both in the form of dialogue performed by Isabella (Bella) Swan and dr. Carlisle Cullen. While, the outer modes are written – narrative story.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Situational Implicit Meaning due to Presupposition Which Brings to the Communication</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Presuppositions are what is taken by the speaker to be the common ground of the participants in the conversation (Brown and Yule: 1983). When a person says something, the meaning of that sentence exists within the context of what else is in the person's head that provides meaning. When two people are trying to communicate, and their presuppositions are not known to each other, that's when misunderstanding takes place. The following are the expression contain situational implicit meaning due to presupposition which brings to the communication found on the data source :</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">“Thank you.” My voice was fervent with</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">“Terima kasih.” Suaraku benar-benar</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">gratitude</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span><span class="font1">”That’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">twice now</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">tulus. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Sudah dua kali kau</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(Meyer, 2005: 81)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">menyelamatkanku.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Sari, 2009: 187)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Explicit Meaning:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Explicit Meaning:</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twice</span><span class="font1"> : two times</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah</span><span class="font1"> : (adverb) indicating perfect</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Now</span><span class="font1">: at the present time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">tense; something that has been done</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dua kali</span><span class="font1">: twice</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kau</span><span class="font1">: second person personal pronoun</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Menyelamatkanku</span><span class="font1"> : safe me</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Implicit meaning:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Implicit meaning:</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">This is the second time that you saved me</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">According to Vinay and Dalbernet’s Procedures of translation, the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dua kali </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kau menyelamatkanku?</span><span class="font1"> belongs to borrowing procedure. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice</span><span class="font1"> is explicated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dua kali </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kau menyelamatkanku?</span><span class="font1"> By adding information that it was the act of saving Bella’s life that were done twice by Edward. In this case, the same situation is described in different stylistic means.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Register Analysis:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Field: </span><span class="font1">The SL and TL inner context fields of the data are both verbal conversation between Isabella (Bella) Swan and Edward Cullen. On the previous story it was told that Bella went to Port Angeles with her classmates, Jessica and Angela. It was getting dark when she realized that she got lost in an empty street where she met four brats at the corner of the street. The brats had nearly harrased and raped Bella when she was locked at the dead-end. At the same time Edward read the brats’ thought from distance and then drove his Volvo to the spot to save Bella. After the incident Bella was very thankful to Edward and said that he had saved her twice. On the previous Chapter (Chapter 3) it was told that Edward had also saved Bella’s life when Tyler’s van nearly hit her to death on an accident at their school.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context field</span><span class="font1"> of the analysed text, both SL and TL text are fictional. The SL text is written dialogue in Standard English, while the TL text is written in Bahasa Indonesia. The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> in SL text is used due to presupposition, i.e. the author assumed that the reader had shared similar information regarding how Tyler’s van had nearly killed Bella at the accident at her school’s parking lot and Edward had saved her at the last seconds before the van crashed her. It was the second time for Edward to save Bella when he came to save Bella from the rape done by the brats in Port Angeles. In Bahasa Indonesia, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">that’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> was translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah dua kali kau</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">menyelamatkanku,</span><span class="font1"> which was more explicit in terms of forms as it stated clearly </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">that Edward had saved </span><span class="font1">Bella twice. But in terms of meaning it still left something implicit, i.e. there must be the first time that Edward saved Bella’s life. The translator also had presupossed that the reader had already shared the information about the first rescue action done by Edward to Bella when she had a terrible accident with Tyler’s van.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tenor: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The inner context tenor</span><span class="font1"> of SL and TL text are both the interaction between the main character (Isabella (Bella) Swan) and her classmate, Edward Cullen. Although at this moment they had not been a couple, but the power relation between they were close as they were close friends. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The outer context tenor</span><span class="font1"> is changed since the outer participants of the ST text and TL text is different. The author of the SL text is English speaker and the target readers are those who speak English. Meanwhile, the TL text was translated by Indonesian and intended for Indonesian reader. The translator have to adjust certain content or style of language in order to be able to transfer the message of the SL text properly. In this case, the translator preferred to describe the implicit meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> into a more explicit one </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah dua kali kau menyelamatkanku</span><span class="font1">. Literally, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> means that something had been done at the second time when the expression expressed. It does not provide further information about what kind of thing that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">that</span><span class="font1"> refers to. If it is translated literally into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sudah dua kali sekarang,</span><span class="font1"> the target reader probably will not be able to catch the meaning implied in the SL text. To transfer the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That’s twice now</span><span class="font1"> into Bahasa Indonesia, the translator preferred to express it explicitly in order to be able to transfer the message to the TL target reader properly by using the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sudah dua kali kau menyelamatkanku</span><span class="font1"> in which </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kau menyelamatkanku (Edward saved Bella’s life)</span><span class="font1"> stated clearly what the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">twice</span><span class="font1"> refers to in SL text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mode : </span><span class="font1">The inner mode of the SL and TL data are both in the form of dialogue performed by Isabella (Bella) Swan and Edward Cullen, her classmate who then became her boyfriend. While, the outer modes are written – narrative story.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Situational Implicit Meaning due to the Cultural Background of the Speaker and of the Addressee</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">For the different cultural aspect, the translator has to be aware of the sets of beliefs, attitudes, values, and rules which they are shared in some group of people (Larson, 1998: 470). Then, it is the translator’s job to hel the TL text reader understand the content and intent of the SL text. The following are the analysis of data containing situational implicit meaning due to the cultural background of the speaker and of the addressee:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">No, I think you’re very good at telling scary stories, though. I still have </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1">, see? (Meyer, 2005: 61)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Tidak, kupikir kau sangat mahir menceritakan kisah-kisah seram.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Bulu kuduk</span><span class="font1">ku masih </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">berdiri</span><span class="font1">, lihat, kan? (Sari, 2009 : 139)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Explicit meaning :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Goose</span><span class="font1"> : a large duck with a long neck</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bump</span><span class="font1"> : a small lump</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Implicit Meaning:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The bumps on a person's </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">skin</span><span class="font1"> at the base of body </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">hairs</span><span class="font1"> which may reluctantly develop when a person is </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">cold</span><span class="font1"> or experiences strong emotions such as </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">fear</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nostalgia</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">pleasure</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Explicit meaning :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bulu</span><span class="font1"> : short and soft hair on human body (except on the head) or animal </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kuduk</span><span class="font1"> : the back of the neck or the nape</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Berdiri</span><span class="font1"> : stand</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Implicit Meaning:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The thin hairs that grow around the nape and usually stand when a person is </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">cold</span><span class="font1"> or experiences strong emotions such as </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">fear</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nostalgia</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">pleasure</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">According to the theory of Procedures of Translation proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet in Venuti (2000:84), the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu kuduk berdiri</span><span class="font1"> in Bahasa Indonesia applies equivalent procedure as the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1"> is an unknown concept in TL. So, the translators have to describe the same situation by different stylistic or structural means that can be considered as being the closeset equivalent, i.e. by using the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu kuduk berdiri.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Register Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Field : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inner context field</span><span class="font1"> are both about the casual conversation between the main character of the novel, Isabella (Bella) Swan and her childhood friend, Jacob Black. Isabella (Bella) Swan was in fear after Jacob Black told her a legend of his tribe about werewolfs and vampires where Cullens family were belong to vampires. Both vampire and werewolf are related to something horror and human life threatening. It shocked Bella and made her scared. Concerning </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the outer context field,</span><span class="font1"> both the SL and TL text are fiction. The SL data is in the form of written dialogue in Standard English, while the TL data is a written dialogue in Bahasa Indonesia. Due to the difference of cultural backgound of the SL and TL language, the expression used in both text are different. The SL text used expression that fits with social and cultural backgound of the story setting, ie. US, while the TL text used expression that fits with social and cultural background of the target reader, ie. Indonesia. The fear experienced by Bella is expressed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1"> or a reflex change on her skin that medically is known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kutis ansterina</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font1">The translator translated it into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu kudukku berdiri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tenor : </span><span class="font1">The participants of the ST text and TL text is different, so the tenor is changed. The author of the SL text is English speaker and the target readers (addressee) are those who speak English. They presumably share the same cultural context. Both the writer and the reader are familiar with the myth of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">vampires and werewolves that are usually associated with horror. Meanwhile, the TL text was translated by Indonesian and the TL text itself is intended for Indonesian reader. In order to meet the expectation of the target reader, the translator have to adjust certain content or style of language. In this case, the translator have to provide the equivalent concep of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1"> in Bahasa Indonesia. So, the translator used the term </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu kuduk berdiri</span><span class="font1"> to translate </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps.</span><span class="font1"> Both </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">goose bumps</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu kuduk berdiri</span><span class="font1"> express exactly the same human body reaction of a cold temperature or the experiences strong emotions such as </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">fear</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nostalgia</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">pleasure</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mode : </span><span class="font1">The mode are both in the form of spoken dialogue performed by Isabella (Bella) Swan, the main character and her. While, the outer modes are written – narrative story.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data analysis and discussion, the conclusion was drawn out as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The types of situational implicit meaning found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1"> novel can be categorized into situational implicit meaning due to the relationship between speaker and addressee; time and place where the communication took place; presupposition which brings to the communication; and the cultural background of the speaker and of the addressee.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In translating the situational implicit meaning some procedures of translation had been applied. The procedures applied were literal translation, borrowing, transposition and equivalence. Based on the result of the study, the most frequently applied procedure of translation is equivalence procedure. It indicates that the orientation of the translator is TL text oriented. She attempted to provide the most natural and acceptable forms to the readers of the TL text.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The situational and cultural equivalence of the SL and TL text had been well built up as the translator had provided the best possible translation which awere acceptable and natural to the TL</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">text readers.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, Gillian &amp;&nbsp;Yule, George. (1983) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (DA)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Djajasudarma</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, Fatimah.</span><span class="font1"> 1993</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Metode Linguistik Ancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Refika Aditama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday,M.A.K.1978. Languageas Social Semiotic.London : Edward Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday,M.A.K.,&amp;Hasan,Ruqaiya.1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language,context,and text: Aspects of language in a social-semiotic perspective</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M. A. K. Aand Webster, Jonathan. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Computational and Quantitative Studie</span><span class="font1">s. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hockney, D. J. Et al. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Contemporary research in philosophical logic and linguistic semantics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation- A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence</span><span class="font1">. Ney</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">York: University Press of America. Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer, Stephenie. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font1">. New York: Little, Brown and Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer, Stephenie. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font1">. Hertforddshire, England: Prentice Hall International Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">About Translation</span><span class="font1">. UK: Multilingual Matters Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. 1993. Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa Pengantar Wacana Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguistik. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Lingustik Bagian Pertama</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada. University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Venuti, L. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font1">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>