---
layout: full_article
title: "VISUAL AND VERBAL COMMUNICATION ELEMENTS IN THE CELINE DION’S VIDEO CLIPS"
author: "Kadek Suliani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>VISUAL AND VERBAL COMMUNICATION ELEMENTS IN THE</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>CELINE DION’S VIDEO CLIPS</span></h1>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Kadek Suliani</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tulisan ini berjudul unsur - unsur komunikasi visual dan verba dalam video clip Celine Dion. Analisis ini menggunakan unsur – unsur komunikasi verba dan visual serta menemukan hubungan antara unsur – unsur visual, penyajian verba dan arti lagu dalam video clip Celine Dion. Hasil analisis menemukan bahwa penggunaan unsur – unsur komunikasi visual dan verba dalam musik video clip tergantung pada isi dari video clip itu sendiri. Video clip yang mempunyai cerita di dalamnya, menggunakan lebih banyak unsur – unsur komunikasi visual dan verba dari pada clip yang tidak mempunyai cerita. Ditemukan juga bahwa hubungan antara tanda visual, penyajian verba, dan arti dari lirik lagu dalam video clip memainkan peran penting dalam menyampaikan pesan dari lagu tersebut kepada penonton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">visual, verba, komunikasi, arti, lagu, video clip</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Communication becomes one of the basic elements in the social interaction since the beginning of human culture. I’m addition to the verbal sign, one of the key elements of communication is the verbal sign, because it can convey lots of values through its representation. The understanding of visual sign cannot be achieved through the understanding of its definition only, because it also contains some important points, they are principles of visual communication and its basic elements.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For many years, live music becomes one of the most popular entertainment events used by the musicians to express their musical talent in front of the public. As technology grows, people not only watch the music lively but the music industry provides music in video clip. For people to watch it in television or in VCD and DVD packages as well as on the internet through </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font1">. It is usually called music video clip. The music Video clip of the musician can be one of the best ways for the fans from all over the world to watch the show.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 .) What kinds of visual and verbal communication elements are used in the Celine Dion’s video clips?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2 .) What is the meaning of lyrics based on each verbal communication in video clip?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 .) To observe the use of visual and verbal communication elements in the Celine Dion’s video clips.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2 .) To find out the song messages related to the representation of visual and verbal communication elements in the Celine Dion’s video clips.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research method adopted to conduct this study is divided into three, namely the determination of data source, method of collecting data and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data sources were taken from two music video clips from pop singer named Celine Dion. The titles and the singers as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 .) Celine Dion’s video clips “My Heart will go on “</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2 .) Celine Dion’s video clips “ All by my Self “</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Those music video clips were chosen because the Celine Dion’s video clips entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My Heart will go on</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">All by my Self</span><span class="font1"> are very interesting to analyze and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My Heart will go on</span><span class="font1"> was theme of soundtrack of Titanic movie, these lyric songs to make touch of someone’s heart and fillings. These video clips use lot of visual and verbal communication elements that are related to this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In collecting the data, both library and online research were applied. This is in further elaborated below</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Library Research</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Library research was used to obtain information about visual communications elements and verbal representation. It is relevant to be used in the Celine Dion’s video clips for revealing the lyrics meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Online research was used to collect the data that were relevant to the visual communication elements used in the Celine Dion’s video clips. The data were collected from the music clips of the Celine Dion and through note taking to get information on the use of visual communications elements in Celine Dion’s video clips.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">First, the theories of Dyer about the classification of the visual communications elements is used in the Celine Dion’ video clip and analysis of the conceptual meaning of lyric on each Celine Dion’s video clips is based on Leech’s theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Then, the analysis is continued with the relation between the lyrics meaning and the visual communication elements in the Celine Dion’s video clips.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis : Opening statement</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Visual Communication Elements Used in “My heart will go on” Video Clip</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 .</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">) </span><span class="font1">Appearance can be related to the following :</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age : the age of people is crucially the focus of identification and an important factor in how we view the visual representation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gender : the display of characters’ gender refers to conventionalized portrayals of culturally established correlated sex.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;National and racial : These characteristics are usually related to, stereotypical views of other people.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hair : The colour, length, texture and style of a person hair are important qualifiers of their overall appearance. This is a potential symbol in cultural communication.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body and size : The body and size may be presented in such a way to convey exhibitionism, narcissism, power and superior status.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Looks : looks are related to overall class, age, style, and impression created by a character.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4 .) Manner is a behavior of emotion at any one time and can be divided into the following:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expression : the face and facial expression are particular focus of attention in visual</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">representation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eye Contact : the attention of the actor is significant whether it will be directed towards audience / camera.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pose &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: it can be static or active and sometimes corresponds to expression.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clothes &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: These are obviously extremely important carrier of the meaning in the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">clips based on their uniform.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5 .) Activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Body gestures, movement and posture can be related to what the actor is doing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Touch : it can be illustrated by the finger brought to the mouth or face, grasping, finger to the finger with actors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body Movements : It is related to what the actor is doing. It can be playing guitar or piano, searching the ring in the garden, etc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positional Communication : the relationship between actors and actors, actors and subjects are extremely significant and are shown by their position within the frame of picture.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6 .) Props : Props can be selected because they help in presenting visual communication elements in visual sign. Some props occur so frequently that they have gained a conventionalized or symbolic value.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7 .) Setting can be divided into :</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Outdoor : Generally looks real</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indoor : Can vary from looking extremely natural to highly contrived or even surreal.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">8 .) Analyzing Photographs or images consists of the following :</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus and depth of Vision : these two elements can clear and crisp, misty, to emphasize picture and fade way.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Close up : to show the object larger that life appearance.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lighting and Colour : for making a dramatic or mysterious atmosphere.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cropping : cutting up a picture to have an attention into certain part of object.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Camera angle : to produce a different moods and unusual effect for control of the connotation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Special effect or montage : to give the picture the impression of dynamism and excitement.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of the “My Heart will go on” Song Lyric</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">First Stanza:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Every night in my dreams”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: Every night when I’m sleeping I have dreams.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I see you, I feel you”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: It looks like that I can see you and feel you”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“That is how I know you go on”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: It is the way I know that you are here with me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">With it is describing love story in the cruise Ship, when the woman met a man and was falling in love each other. The singer sings her song in the beginning, she looks calm, she is not sad because she always dreams him every night, in her dreams she always sees him and feels him that he always beside her, that is why she knows that his heart is for her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second Stanza:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Far across the distance”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: Even it is far away.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“And spaces between us”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: And there is a distance between you and me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“You have come to show you go on”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: You still come and tell me that you are still here beside me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Although spaces and the long distance separated them, meaning that they are from different classes, the woman upper class and the man lower class, he always comes and wants to see her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of the ”All By My Self” Song Lyric</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">First Stanza:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“When I was young”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: It was long time before I am today.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I never needed anyone”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: I could live by myself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“And making love was just for fun”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: I am never serious loving someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Those days are gone”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: But those times are in the past and wasting time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Livin’ alone”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: I live without any companions now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I think of all the friends I’ve known”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: I am thinking all of my friends that I’ve known before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“When I dial the phone”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: I try to contact them by phone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Nobody’s home”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning: There was nobody at home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first stanza, is describing situation a long time ago in indoor place, when the woman was still young, she never cared with other people, she did not need other and she was thinking that she could live without others, then she make up her face in her room, her activity and love was just for fun, and nothing to do for her future life. She realized and regretted that it was wasting time during her life. Now she was alone in living room, she is lonely even she has</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">friends but her friends also did not care of her, because she never need anyone, so she fells loneliness.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This study discussed the visual and verbal communication elements used in the Celine Dion’s video clips. Specifically, it was intended to analyze the lyric meaning related to the visual sign representation in the Celine Dion’s video clips. The visual communication elements were classified into five categories such as: appearance, manner, activity, props and setting, and analyzing visual picture or images. And the analysis of the lyric meaning, It can be concluded that visual communication and verbal presentation have important role in conveying the song message. It will be easier to understand what the clip wants to convey if the visual sign and verbal presentation are supported with the text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Brent. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Journal of the Semiotic Society of America</span><span class="font1">. Available from :</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.google.com"><span class="font1">www.google.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Carina. 2009. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotic analysis on my Chemical Romance Video Clips”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar : English Departement, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chandler, Daniel. 2000</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Semiotics for Beginners</span><span class="font1">. Available from :</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/s4B/semiotic.html"><span class="font1">www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/s4B/semiotic.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dion, Celine.2009. My Heart will Go On. Available from : </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1">www.youtube.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">----------------.2006. All By Myself. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1">www.youtube.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dwiyani. 2003.”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of visual Communication Elements Use in the Cranberries’ Clips”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar : English Departement, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer, G. 1993</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font1">. London: Methuen &amp;&nbsp;Co.Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Semantics</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta : UNS Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Savannah. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ Verbal and Visual Messages of Lighthouse Family Video Clips”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Departement, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeller, Jorg.2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dynamic Sign Structure in visual art</span><span class="font1">. Denmark: Aalborg University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Available from : </span><a href="http://www.international-jounal-of"><span class="font1">www.international-jounal-of</span></a><span class="font1"> –axiology.net/articoler/nr7/art03.pdf.</span></p>