---
layout: full_article
title: "THE INFLUENCE OF VARIATIVE METHOD STUDY TO EFFICACY OF STUDENT COMPREHEND ITEMS OF ENGLISH"
author: "Nur hidayah"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE INFLUENCE OF VARIATIVE METHOD STUDY TO EFFICACY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">OF STUDENT COMPREHEND ITEMS OF ENGLISH</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By : Nurhidayah</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Background</span><span class="font0"> : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Inggris kini telah menjadi bahasa yang merupakan kebutuhan penting warga dunia, bagaimana tidak, Bahasa inggris yang notabenenya dipakai sebagai bahasa internasional tentunya adalah bahasa yang paling sering digunakan dan dibutuhkan saat kita berhubungan dengan orang luar negeri,mulai dari urusan diplomasi,urusan Bisnis,Study Student Exchange bahkan untuk pembantu rumah tangga pun diwajibkan pula untuk dapat mengerti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode</span><span class="font0"> : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian yang dilakukan menggunakan metode evaluative dimana dua kelas yang akan dibedakan cara pengajarannya yang akan dilakukan selama dua hari dimana untuk tiap kelasnya terdiri dari 40 orang dari SMP II Kepungdengan 3 aspek pengetesan yaitu vocabulary,grammar, dan penyebutannya (pronounciation) dan test akan dilakukan 2 kali di awal dan diakhir materi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil</span><span class="font0"> : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The values that are taught in class A varied higher than B class being taught monotonically, this suggests that the varied teaching is very useful in improving students' ability to understand and remember the material provided. Kata kunci: English, Teaching, Variatif.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preliminary</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">English has become the language is an essential requirement citizen of the world, how could you not, you see that English language which is used as an international language course is the language most commonly used and is needed when we deal with people abroad, ranging from diplomatic affairs, business affairs, Study Student Exchange even for maids were also required to be able to understand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In Indonesia English is set by the Ministry of Education as a compulsory first foreign language taught in schools and colleges, therefore the teaching method now always updated to be easily accepted by students. But the trouble now is because English is not from the area we will certainly frequent mistakes in understanding (Vocabulary), pronunciation and unity. This is because most students would be bored if we are given exposure to the teaching of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the English language constantly and static, this will make students become bored and that his mind was not anywhere where classroom. Because of it here we will try to discuss about how the teaching of English as recognized Variatif method is an effective way of learning for use in a variety of disciplines.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Main Problem</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">English as a language that does not come from our country may be somewhat difficult to dipelajari.Kesulitan itself appears because of the fundamental differences between our language (Indonesian) with English, which include: a) Difficulty Reading English text</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Students is one very important factor, it is recognized that students entering junior high school education or MTs coming from very different backgrounds. As one of the elements, especially in teaching, students showed leg in junior high school (SMP) or junior secondary school (MTs) with proficiency in Britain are very different from each other. They are studying in junior high school equipped with facilities, human resources and pasilitas adequate methods tend to have a good command of English. Motivation is the background of the students seem to be very diverse. There are learning English when it realized that the close association with the development of the science of reading mastery. not infrequently, those who see English as a difficult subject and tend to then go away. There are also groups that are less active to realize that even if they pursue other disciplines outside of English or they can not escape from the need to read books in English in order to improve and develop this science. It is very difficult to understand is the view that English is not our language, and the completion of the study can be done without having to read the books or English text. To learn English anywhere, starts with learning vocabulary and grammar, and then read the full text of the context of interesting and useful. From the research, the authors look at the majority of students at SMPN 1 Surround assume that reading English text is very difficult because they lack vocabulary and English is a language that is foreign to them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b) Pronounciation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of words in the English language in our society turns more and more, even without realizing it of some words that are often used, there are many words</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">that are read with the pronunciation (pronunciation) is wrong, it seems as students at a junior high school who often do mistakes in English pronunciation example: Cat (cat) read Kat, Bread (bread) read Breaed, Cut (remove) read Kut and many more other mistakes. It may be that this illustrates that our students are still lazy to read, of course, in this case the relation is lazy to read the dictionary, whether it is to search for the meaning of the word or just finding out how the pronunciation of a word. Some English vocabulary can be spoken with the pronunciation of the two forms of weak and strong forms. Pronunciation strong form of a vocabulary only consists of one speech sound. While the pronunciation of the weak form can consist of a single speech sound. Thus, there is a vocabulary that can be spoken. Words that have a strong form of pronunciation. Pronunciation of words that have weak forms were spoken in strong form if:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">a.Vocabulary words were spoken in a position to stand on its own.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">b.Vocabulary b.words were uttered in a sentence, but had hesitated rest because tau forgot what to say. For example, where is yiur mother? + She is in the / o :/ ......garden!. artikal the supposed diucapkandengan powerful sound / oi :/ because artikal it in that sense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">c. Because the vocabulary word in a sentence and a voice greeting, hard ore of other words as a sign of special emphasis parcel in this example not from / from / Hamida, but for / fo :/ her. In this example there are two words that get special emphasis is from and for from can be pronounced with the sound of / from / as a form of strong and / fram / or / frm / as a weak form. For too can sound / fo :/ sbagai strong form and / fa / or / fr / as a form of weak d. Vocabulary consists of the types of prepositions are accompanied by verb. Form and prewposisi the end of sentences diltakkan example who did you give it to / tu :/?. Preposition contained in the above sentence is pronounced with a strong sound as it appears at the end of the sentence. Better if it is not located at the end of the sentence it sounds weak to use, the sounds are weak / ta / .kesalahan general is often done by students in the pronunciation of the English language is influenced by the dialects of each. To note that the dialect of the community members had a very strong bond with ineffectively dialect. In relation to the function of the dialect to express and regulate the social hierarchy. Therefore, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">dialect may have a certain status as a symbol of the values of society as complete.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Some of the English vocabulary.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Purpose of research</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">For the purpose of its own research is to know important how method instruction of this variatif so that can make student earn easier comprehend its items. Then we can know which method of variatif type what can be used to overcome difficulty of natural by difficulty of student in studying english. also to know effect instruction of variatif to knowledge at student.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research method that will be used here is an evaluative research method in which an evaluative word refers to a verb that describes the nature of the activity, and the noun is evaluation. Evaluative research describes the research activities that are evaluating objects to something, which is usually the implementation of a plan. So it is an evaluative research is research that aims to collect information on what is going on which is the real condition of the keterlaksanaan plan that requires evaluation.Where will be taught varied teaching methods to the classroom and learning methods that are tedious to other class.For this study we took a sample of the SMP II Surround, in Kec.Kepung Kediri, East Java, and the chosen are grade 2 , where class A which amounts to 40 people will be given a teaching method for a class B Variatif while its numbering 40 people will be given instruction in Static. Research is held during the holidays the second semester of the school year 2011/2012 which originally held early test for the ability of beginning students in English, then for at least two days each class is given different teaching the class A will be teaching Variatif starting Vocabulary teaching system which uses snakes and ladders using video animation in his teaching grammar, and pronunciation of his teaching methods done by playing songs over and over again then there's the lyrics that were removed and students were asked to fill it with a course taught by the teacher in advance where there is a total number of 20 words whether for class B common teaching method or by using the board and to pronunciationnya using the typical which teachers teach</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and students after instruction completion repeat it. Next held test again to see how far the students absorb the material english with different teaching methods.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">First Test :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tabel.1.Beginning Test Result</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Class A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Class B</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Vocabbulary</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">70,15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">71,00</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Grammar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">75,25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">74,55</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Pronounciation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">35</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">40</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The data recorded is the result mean all students in grade.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the above test results it can be seen that for the sample understanding of the English language has almost the same value to every aspect of testing ranging from vocabbulary, grammar and pronounciationnya, so it can continue to do the teaching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After 2 days of instruction conducted testing performed again with questions relating to the material that is taught, and the results are as follows: 1) Assessment Vocabulary done by giving 40 words to be translated into English either Indonesia or vice versa with the correct amount of 2.5 times. 2) Grammar Assessment is done by completing the sentence of the hiatus which consists of 40 questions with the correct amount of time is also 2.5. 3) Assessment Pronounciationnya dialukan to test the students one by one to recite the 20 words with the correct amount of five times.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tabel.2.Result of the test after given by items</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Class A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Class B</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Vocabbulary</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">82,05</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">73,30</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Grammar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">79,55</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">72,45</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Pronounciation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">70,15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">60,20</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">From tables in result of test above we have earned to know that effective instruction method is instruction method which is variatif, as evidence in test early eachclass have similar result then after conducted instruction of result him class</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">using method instruction of variatif more able to master and remember given items.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">So from the result of this research can be concluded that usage of method learn which variatif is of vital importance in instruction of that good English start from elementary school even until College.So to study of better in use of vocabbulary use doorstep snake method so that easier student comprehend and considering it, for the instruction of the grammar can use visual animation about way of merger of word and usage of tenses to create a sentence and to study in pronounciation better study with use song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://zhafarishop.blogspot.com/2012/07/kesulitan-kesullitan-siswa-dalam.html"><span class="font1">http://zhafarishop.blogspot.com/2012/07/kesulitan-kesullitan-siswa-dalam.html</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://zaenalbahri.blogspot.com/2010/09/peningkatan-hasil-belajar-matematika.html"><span class="font1">http://zaenalbahri.blogspot.com/2010/09/peningkatan-hasil-belajar-matematika.html</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://id.shvoong.com/writing-and-speaking/presenting/2114728-penelitian-evaluatif"><span class="font1">http://id.shvoong.com/writing-and-speaking/presenting/2114728-penelitian-evaluatif</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Susanti, R.2002,</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penguasaan Kosakata dan Kemampuan Membaca Bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font1">,Journal Pendidikan Penabur,01,90-92.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zubaidi.2006,</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Pengucapan Kata Bahasa Inggris dalam Pembelajaran</span><span class="font1">, Jurnal Ilmu Ilmu Sosial,02,153.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Merlina,Rena,</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengaruh Penggunaan Perpustakaan pada Pembelajaran</span><span class="font1">,2012,06-07.</span></p></li></ul>