---
layout: full_article
title: "TENSES USED IN THE E-MAILS"
author: "Yan Bin Gamaliel Sinurat"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TENSES USED IN THE E-MAILS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yanbin Gamaliel Sinurat</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini bertujuan untuk menganalisa penggunaan tenses pada e-mail serta melihat kalimat tidak terstruktur dalam e-mail. Data diperoleh dengan memilih secara acak lima email dari account </span><a href="mailto:bali6@mgholiday.com"><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">bali6@mgholiday.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Teori functional grammar yang dikemukakan oleh M.A.K Halliday digunakan sebagai landasan teori untuk menganalisis permasalahan yang diambil. Hasil studi menunjukkan bahwa, pertama, ditemukan enam macam tenses pada data yakni present perfect tense, past tense, past continuous tense, present continuous tense, present perfect continuous tense,and simple present.Kedua, penggunakan kata yang tidak terstruktur masih ditemukan pada data, misalnya penggunakan look forward to here from your end more business news for mutual growth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: email, M.A.K Halliday, kalimat terstruktur</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">English is the international language that is used by many people around the world and becomes an important language in many countries, even in Indonesia, especially in Bali. Nowadays, a lot successful foreigners develop their business in Bali. The amount of travel agencies, restaurants, handicrafts, until big scale exportimport companies, hotels, villas, even travel increased all around Bali. To communicate between one to another organization, they use many kinds of communication. One main communication used is e-mail.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Electronic mail, most commonly abbreviated email or e-mail, is a method of exchanging digital messages. E-mail systems are based on a store-and-forward model in which e-mail server computer systems accept, forward, deliver and store messages on behalf of users, who only need to connect to the e-mail infrastructure, typically an e-mail server, with a network-enabled device for the duration of message submission or retrieval.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In writing email, the writers, especially for those who do not speak English as his first language, have to master the knowledge of writing the English language. One basic aspect in writing is combining the idea by expressing it through sentences. Sentences in English language are not easily written since it has its own structure. Through this study, the writer would like to analyze the tenses used in e-mails as first problem and followed by analyzing the ungrammatical sentences used in the e-mail. To get reference about this issue, a thesis entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Formal English Used in the Speech of President George W. Bush and Its Context of Situation</span><span class="font2"> which was proposed by Tan (2007) was used since it gave contribution in understanding the formal English. Even the previous study did not give clear explanation about ungrammatical sentence, at least the differentiation of two different types of sentences was known.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background mentioned above, the writer wants to show people how to make an email in appropriate way and grammatically so the information sent in an e-mail is understandable. To give a concern relating this issue, there are two main problems discussed. The problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of tenses are found in the e-mails?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the ungrammatical sentences used in emails?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of study in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the tenses used in e-mails.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the ungrammatical sentences used in e-mails.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methodology</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data type used in this study is primary data. The data include any research based on the primary sources. In this research, the primary data are emails. The data were taken from the emails from one of the staff in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">MG Holiday Bali Tour and Travel</span><span class="font2">. The email addressed for this data was </span><a href="mailto:bali6@mgholiday.com"><span class="font2">bali6@mgholiday.com</span></a><span class="font2">. There is no one having used the email in that account as the data to be analyzed. The writer found more than hundreds of emails in that account. To get the corpus data, five emails were randomly chosen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected by identifying the sentences in emails from </span><a href="mailto:bali6@mgholiday.com"><span class="font2">bali6@mgholiday.com</span></a><span class="font2">. There were five emails randomly chosen as the data. Only one until three sentences in each email were analyzed later. The data was obtained from documentary research and use note taking technique.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed using qualitative method. Qualitative method is used to explain characteristic of the data by giving clarification of the data. There are three steps in analyzing the data, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence tenses were identified.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It followed by explaining the sentences found based on the theory of tense. The theory used was theory of functional grammar proposed by M.A.K Halliday.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The result of the analysis was presented through the descriptive method in order to make the approach easier to be grasped.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark1"></a>5.1. The Analysis of the Grammatical Sentence in The First E-mail</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Text one indicates that, the sender of his email uses Standard English and grammatical sentence. The first grammatical sentence is in Present Perfect Tense. It can be illustrated as in sentence below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 1 and 2:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">(1)</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I have enjoyed </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">my tenure here</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(2)</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You have provided </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">me during my time at the </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Royal Beach Seminyak Bali</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (1) indicates that, it is in Present perfect tense. The word ‘have’ is followed by the third form of verb ‘enjoyed’. It is concord with the subject I in that sentence construction. Meanwhile, the sentence (2) indicates that the sentence construction has the same pattern as in sentence (1) even though it has different subject and other word class. The word ‘provided’ is categorized as third form of verb cause it is followed by the present perfect’s marker ‘have’. Thus, the sentences are categorized as grammatical construction because they are suitable with the pattern of present perfect.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark3"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical Sentences in The First E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The example of ungrammatical sentence in e-mail can be elaborated as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 3:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">For further assistance </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may you need </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">with The Royal Beach Seminyak Bali, please feel free to contact: Mr I Nyoman Wira Maharjaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (3) indicates that, the grammatical sentence is wrong. It can be proved by the placing modal ‘may’ in front of object ‘you’. Even though, the implied meaning of this sentence construction is to inform that, the object ‘you’ may contact Mr. I Nyoman Wira Maharjaya which has been pointed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark5"></a>5.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Grammatical Sentence in The Second E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The first tense found is Past Continuous Tense. The applying of the tense is proved by the sentence construction below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 4:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">We were working </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">professional after completion of Master of Tourism Administration Degree from Himachal Pradesh University …</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence construction (4) explicates that, the sender of this e-mail expresses his idea by using past continuous tense. The existence of the auxiliary ‘were’ is concord with the subject ‘we’ in that sentence. The verb ‘working’ is appropriate in this context because verb should be attached suffix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–ing</span><span class="font2"> when it occurs after to be. The rest words in this sentence construction are the adverb of that sentence. This sentence is categorized in Past Continuous.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 5:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">We have taken </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">new initiative to provide the personalized and professional Travel related services here in the Himlayan Hills</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (5) is expressed in present perfect tense. It is indicated by the using third form of verb ‘taken’. This tense is used to tell the idea of the sender in this e-mail, that he/she has already made agreement to anticipate the services quality in the travel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark7"></a>5.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical Sentences in The Second E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the second e-mail, there is one ungrammatical sentence. This sentence is written as below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 6:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Look forward </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">to here from your end more business news </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">for mutual growth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (6) indicates that, there is usual dialect made by the speaker. Thus, he/she makes mistakes in writing. Perhaps, he intends to say ‘look forward to hear from you and more business news’ but he/she makes mistakes in constructing the sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5.5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Grammatical Sentence in The Third Email</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Example 7:</span></h1></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Recently, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Julia Roberts and Tony Blair visited </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">with their families.</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (7) has no auxiliary verb. The sender of this e-mail uses full verb, namely; visited. Thus, there is pattern of Past tense which is applying verb in sentence construction. The figure below is the past tense formula.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Subject &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;+ VII + Object &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;+ Adverb</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical Sentences in The Third E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The third e-mail has one ungrammatical sentence. The ungrammatical sentence expressed by using jargon in tourism term. Thus, the sentence is understood by those who are working in tourism sector only. The ungrammatical sentence is expressed as below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 8:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Beating </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">all comers from throughout all other provinces of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word ‘beating’ in sentence construction (8) cannot be translated by taking the meaning in dictionary. But it should be correlated with term in tourism sector. Beating in dictionary means ‘hitting’</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.7 The Analysis of Grammatical Sentence in The Fourth E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The fourth e-mail contains two tenses. Those tenses are simple present tense and present continuous tense. Those tenses are dominantly used. Consider the sentences below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 9:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Golf and Country Club </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">wishes </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">to thank you for your valued support during past years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence construction (9) indicates that the applying verb ‘wishes’ is wrong. The sender of this email intends to say that, there are two participants in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">this sentence will thank. The expression occurs in present time thus the verb ‘wishes’ form appears. Nevertheless, the sender of this message did not consider the application of simple present tense. Thus, he/she makes mistakes in constructing the idea in that sentence. Actually, the verb ‘wishes’ must be ‘wish’ because the subject in that sentence is plural, namely; Bali Golf and Country Club. Example 10:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">We are now offering </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">our Ancora Golf institute golf lesson charges at preferential tour operator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (10) is expressed in present continuous tense. The verb ‘offer’ is expressed in progressive form, namely; offering. The verb ‘offer’ is changed into ‘offering’ in order to make correlation with the existence of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font2"> ‘are’. In addition, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font2"> ‘are’ is concord with the subject of that sentence because it is plural.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical Sentences in The Fourth E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the text of the fourth e-mail, the writer finds one ungrammatical sentence. The ungrammatical sentence is not understood well because it uses the specific term in tourism sector. Consider the sentence construction below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">Example 11:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">All golf rates will continue to include complimentary </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">driving </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">range balls, plus for clients</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence (11) contains a specific term in tourism sector, namely; driving. Lexically, the word driving means riding. It is appropriate to express an idea, for instance; riding motorcycle or running car. Nevertheless, the word driving is used in this sentence. Thus, automatically, the appropriate meaning of this word, especially in this context, understood by those who are working in tourism sector only.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Grammatical Sentence in The Fifth E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The fifth e-mail is dominantly expressed by using simple present tense and Present future tense. The two sentences below are taken to be the representative sample of the application of Simple present tense in the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Example 12 and 13:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(12)</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We hope </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">this note finds you well.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(13)</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We are pleased </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">to confirm below reservation with confirmation number 2967469 for period august 26-29, 2011 at 1 unit of One Bedroom Villa in FS Jimbaran</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence constructions (12) and (13) are expressed in simple present tense. The sentence construction (12) contains full verb, namely; ‘hope’. It is in first form because the context of this sentence is in present time. It is not attached by other morpheme like </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–s</span><span class="font2"> because the subject of the sentence is in plural. Thus, the application of verb should be based o the pattern of the tense pattern. Meanwhile the sentence construction (13), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font2"> ‘are’ is used because there is no verb. Thus, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font2"> ‘are’ appears to link the subject ‘we’ and the complement of the sentence. Even though there is verb ‘to confirm’ in the sentence, but the main idea of the sentence is in the concept of the word ‘pleased’. Thus, the existence of the clause </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to confirm below reservation with confirmation number 2967469 for period august 26-29, 2011 at 1 unit of one bedroom Villa in FS Jimbaran</span><span class="font2"> is the supporting idea of that sentence</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical Sentences in The Fifth E-mail</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the text of the fifth e-mail, there are two ungrammatical sentences. Those sentences are expressed in specific terms in tourism sector. For the detail, let consider the sentences below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Example 14 and 15:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(14) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Please </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">advice the flight details</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(15) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Providing 147 unique panoramas of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">the idyllic sandy crescent </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">below-Four Seasons Resort Bali at Jimbaran Bay.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sentence construction (14) contains term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight details</span><span class="font2">. This term cannot be understood by those who are not focusing on the tourism sector. Meanwhile, there is also a mistake in exploring idea in that sentence. By considering the word ‘please’, thus the following word that is appropriate to the context should be ‘verb’ not ‘noun’. Thus, by consulting deeply about the word class of the word ‘advice’, it involves in noun. Then, the appropriate word for that position is ‘advise’. Meanwhile, sentence (15), the sender of the message uses jargon ‘the idyllic sandy crescent’ which is understood by those who are working in tourism sector only.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After examining and explicating the data in previous chapter, the writer deduces that, e-mail text in MG Holiday Travel contains of;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are seven tenses applied in the e-mail. Those tenses are used to express the message sender’s intends becomes understandable. Those tenses are present perfect tense, past tense, past continuous tense, present continuous tense, present perfect continuous tense, and simple present.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ungrammatical sentences in the e-mail are dominant in specific terms in tourism sector. For instance; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the flight details, the idyllic sandy crescent, driving range ball,</span><span class="font2"> an</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">d Beatin</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">g.</span><span class="font2"> In addition, there is another ungrammatical sentence expressed by using the usual spoken language, namely</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">; Look forward to here from your end more business news for mutual growth.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Daftar Pustaka</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bodomo, Dr. A.B. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Supplementary Notes on Features of Different Genre</span><span class="font2">. 2002 [online]. Accessed on &nbsp;&nbsp;27<sup>th</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;December 2011]. Available from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.hku.hk/linguist/qef/GenreFeatures.pdf"><span class="font2">http://www.hku.hk/linguist/qef/GenreFeatures.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darbyshire, A.E. 1971. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Style</span><span class="font2">. London: Andre Deutsch Limited</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday.MAK. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar.</span><span class="font2"> London: British</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Library Cataloging</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mellish, Chris and Graeme Ritchie. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Grammatical Analysis of Sentences Journal of Syntax</span><span class="font2"> [online]. Volume 6, No 23 [Accessed on 27<sup>th</sup> December 2011].Available from </span><a href="http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~csc264/teaching/"><span class="font2">http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~csc264/teaching/</span></a><span class="font2"> NLP/information/gram.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. 2012. [online]. [Accessed on 30 July 2012]. Available from </span><a href="http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary"><span class="font2">http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">NN. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding the Basics of English Grammar Analysis Level, Label, and Function</span><span class="font2"> [online]. [Accessed on 27<sup>th</sup> December 2011]. Available from </span><a href="http://www.sinclair.edu/centers/tlc/pub/handouts_worksheets/grammar_pun"><span class="font2">http://www.sinclair.edu/centers/tlc/pub/handouts_worksheets/grammar_pun</span></a><span class="font2"> ctuation_writing/english_grammar_analysis_understanding_the_basics.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Octavianti, Frida. 2007.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of the Lay Out and Grammatical Cohesion in English Business Correspondence at PT Satriavi Tour and Travel</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Papers, China 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Comparative Study on English and Chinese Tense Systems from a Cognitive Perspective</span><span class="font2"> [online]. [Accessed on 3<sup>rd</sup> August 2012]. Available from </span><a href="http://mt.china-papers.com/2/?p=181168"><span class="font2">http://mt.china-papers.com/2/?p=181168</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pelahua, Ishac.2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Context of Situation and Cohesive Devices in the Email Business Letters of Balibuys and a Buying Agent Company</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schulz, Anke. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tense, Modality and Polarity: The Finite Verbal Group in English and German Newsgroup Texts</span><span class="font2">.[online]. [Accessed on 3<sup>rd</sup> August 2012]. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://static.sdu.dk/mediafiles/Files/Om_SDU/Institutter/ISK/Forskningspublik"><span class="font2">http://static.sdu.dk/mediafiles/Files/Om_SDU/Institutter/ISK/Forskningspublik</span></a><span class="font2"> ationer/OWPLC/Nr29/Anke%20Schulz.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tan, Rudi. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Formal English Used in the Speech of President George W. Bush and Its Context of Situation</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wikipedia. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Email</span><span class="font2"> [online]. [Accessed on 25<sup>th</sup> December 2011]. Available from </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/email"><span class="font2">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/email</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wikipedia. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Formal Grammar</span><span class="font2"> [online]. [Accessed on 25<sup>th</sup> December 2011].Available from </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_grammar"><span class="font2">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_grammar</span></a></p>