---
layout: full_article
title: "TRANSLATION OF BALINESE MATERIAL CULTURAL TERMS FROM INDONESIAN INTO ENGLISH"
author: "Made Arya Astina"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21890 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-21890"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21890"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TRANSLATION OF BALINESE MATERIAL CULTURAL TERMS FROM INDONESIAN INTO ENGLISH</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Made Arya Astina</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sekolah Tinggi Pariwisata Bali Internasional Jalan Kecak No. 12, Gatot Subroto Timur, Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Telepon 0361 856 1800 </span><a href="mailto:kabag.adakstpbi@gmail.com"><span class="font0">kabag.adakstpbi@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Penelitian ini memfokuskan pada terjemahan istilah-istilah budaya kategori material pada buku dwibahasa yang berjudul </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> dan terjemahannya ke dalam bahasa Inggris. Ada dua hal yang didiskusikan pada studi ini. Permasalahan yang pertama adalah bagaimana </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">semantics frame element</span><span class="font0"> dari istilah-istilah budaya Bali dan terjemahannya dibandingkan? Permasalahan yang kedua adalah prosedur terjemahan apa yang dipakai untuk menerjemahkan istilah-istilah budaya tersebut? Istilah-istilah budaya pada buku ini dianalisa menggunakan frame semantic analysis (Fillmore, 1982) dan dielaborasi kedalam componential analysis (Newmark, 1988). Prosedur penerjemahan dianalisa berdasarkan prosedur yang dikemukakan oleh Vinay and Darbelnet (in Venuti, 2000). Istilah-istilah budaya yang tergolong istilah budaya material pada buku yang berjudul </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> diidentifikasi. Istilah-istilah budaya buku ini adalah istilah-istilah budaya Bali. Penerjemah menerapkan dua prosedur penerjemahan dalam menerjemahkan istilah-istilah budaya Bali category material pada buku ini. Prosedur penerjemahan yang diterapkan adalah borrowing dan literal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Istilah budaya, semantic frame elements, componential analysis,</span><span class="font0"> dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">prosedur penerjemahan</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">This study is concerned with the translation of material cultural terms found in the bilingual book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> and their translation into English. There are two things being discussed in this study. The first problem is how the semantics frame elements of Balinese cultural terms in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Art Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> are compared with their translation equivalents? The second one is what translation procedures are adopted to translate the cultural terms in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Art Festival Album</span><span class="font0">? The cultural terms found in the book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> were analyzed by using frame semantic analysis (Fillmore, 1982) and elaborated into componential analysis (Newmark, 1988). The translation procedures implemented in the translation of those cultural terms were analyzed based on the procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (in Venuti, 2000). The material cultural terms in the book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> are identified. They are Balinese cultural terms. The translator applied two procedures of translation in translating the Balinese cultural terms. They are borrowing and literal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key Words: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural terms, semantic frame elements, componential analysis,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">translation procedures</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Translating a text plays an important role in global era. It involves at least two languages, source language (SL) and target language (TL). People said that translating a text is a difficult to do, because in translating text there are many processes and methods involved. Some people said that translating a text is very interesting to do, since it involves cultural background understanding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Doing study about cultural terms would be an interesting thing. Translators are the bridge between the writers and the reader coming from different cultures. The problem about culture in terms of translation arises if the translator faces some culture terms in the source language text which are unknown in the target text since culture is unique. That is why the translator should be able to understand the culture of target language. In order to produce a comprehensive text for the target reader so that he or she will understand the terms of culture in the text, the translators need some strategies and techniques in translating cultural terms of source language to target language. Every community has different culture whether it is material or non material (Zenden, 1996) which is unique to each other because the culture in one community cannot be found in another community or they use different terms regarding the culture. The bilingual book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0"> as primary data source of this study contains Balinese material cultural terms. This study becomes interesting because the writers of this book are native Balinese, so they see the Balinese culture from the Balinese culture point of view. While the translator is a non Balinese people, so he sees Balinese culture from foreigner point of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The aim of this research is to know the semantics frame elements of Balinese material cultural terms compared with their translation equivalents and analyze the procedures applied by the translator in translating Balinese material cultural terms from Indonesian into English. By doing this study, some contribution hopefully can be gained, those are: to enrich the analysis of Balinese material cultural terms, in Indonesian and their translation into English, to give contribution to the development of procedures applied in the field of translation especially about translating Balinese material cultural terms.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHOD OF RESEARCH</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">This research belongs to qualitative research approach in which the data were analyzed descriptively. The data utilized in this research are Balinese material cultural terms found in the bilingual book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album.</span><span class="font0"> The data consisting of word and phrases were presented in Indonesian and their equivalent in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research is conducted in the form of library research in which the data is Balinese material cultural term with their English translation. The data collection was conducted by reading and observing the relevant data accurately. Those relevant data is the data which contain Balinese cultural terms both in Indonesian and in English. The source language text is observed to find out the word or phrase with their English equivalents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The techniques of analyzing data are explained systematically as follows: First, the data that is considered to be relevant for this study was collected. Second, the data is classified into Indonesian terms and English terms. Third, the semantic frame elements of each specific material cultural item are compared. Fourth, the data is elaborated using componential analysis based on the theory proposed by Newmark (1988), Fifth, the translation procedures are identified based on the theory proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (in Venuti, 2000). Finally, concluding the data</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">The study of Balinese material cultural terms are limited to the level of words and phrases found in the bilingual book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album.</span><span class="font0"> Acording to Newmark (1988) cultural specific terms are categorizes into five categories. They are ecology, material culture, social culture, social organization, and gesture and habit. This study is focusing on the analysis of material cultural terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Frame Semantic Elements and The Componential Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 1: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam prosesi ritual, misalnya, golongan anak-anak ini juga dilibatkan, diberi tugas, seperti membawa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, lelontek, dan semacamnya.</span><span class="font0"> (Supartha, 1997: 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In ritual processions for example, children are also involved, given duties, such as carrying </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">parasols</span><span class="font0">, banner, etc. (Supartha, 1997: 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is a Balinese material cultural term for Hindu ceremonial umbrella. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> can also be called </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tedung</span><span class="font0"> which is literally means ‘to guard’. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tedung</span><span class="font0"> is used in Balinese Hindu ceremony. The colour of the umbrella normally reflects the type of ceremony that is taking place. Pure shades of white and yellow symbolize dedication to the Hindu religion and the different manifestations of God.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In that text, the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is translated into parasol. Shadeg (2007: 371) defines </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> as an umbrella made of paper or silk (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tedung</span><span class="font0">). According to Hornby (2005) parasol is a light umbrella used to give shade from the sun. The analysis of the frame semantic elements of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">parasols are as follow.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Frame elements</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Parasol</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Descriptor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is a Balinese cultural term for Hindu ceremonial umbrella. This ceremonial umbrella is a symbol of invitation to the gods and the ancestors</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">A light umbrella used to give shade from the sun.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Ritual ceremony and decoration</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">To give shade from the sun</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">User</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Anyone</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">From the analysis of the frame element, below is the elaboration of the componential analysis of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng,</span><span class="font0"> and parasol.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Parasol</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Ceremonial equipment</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Use for parade</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A kind of umbrella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">The componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> and parasol shows that the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is not the same as parasol. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is used for Balinese ceremony and parades, while parasol is used for protection</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">from the sun light. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pajeng</span><span class="font0"> is Balinese Hindhu ceremonial umbrella as a symbol of invitation to the gods and the ancestors. Both </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> and parasol have similarity. They are a kind of umbrella.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 2: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam prosesi ritual, misalnya, golongan anak-anak ini juga dilibatkan, diberi tugas, seperti membawa pajeng, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, dan semacamnya.</span><span class="font0"> (Supartha, 1997: 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font0">In ritual processions for example, children are also involved, given duties, such as carrying parasols, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">banner</span><span class="font0">, etc. (Supartha, 1997: 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span><span class="font0"> is Balinese material cultural term. This is a ceremonial equipment defining a symbol from each God which made from some cloth usually with white and yellow color and some with black and white color. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span><span class="font0"> is attached to long bamboo poles. The term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span><span class="font0"> in the SL is translated into banner in the TL. According to Hornby (2005) banner is large strip of cloth showing an emblem or a slogan, or giving information about something. The analysis of the frame</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">semantic elements of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> and banner are as follow.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Frame elements &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Banner</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Descriptor &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A Balinese ceremonial equipment</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">that looks like banner that defining a symbol from each God which made from some cloth usually with white and yellow color and some with black and white color.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">A large strip of cloth showing an emblem or a slogan, or giving information about something. Banner are often displayed or carried, usually between two poles, during political or religious processions.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Use &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balinese Ceremony</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Political or religious procession</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">User &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balinese people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Anyone</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">From the analysis of the frame elements, below is the elaboration of the componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> and banner.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Banner</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese ceremonial equipment</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Symbol of Gods</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Made of cloth</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">+ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">The componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> and banner shows that both of the terms are different. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lelontek</span><span class="font0"> is a Balinese ceremonial equipments as a symbol of Gods, but banner is a long strip of cloth bearing a slogan. The material of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> is similar to banner which is made of cloth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 3: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kober</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hanya dibuat dari sepotong kain dan sebatang galah, memang, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kober </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sudah dapat berkibar-kibar mengikuti arah terpaan angin.</span><span class="font0"> (Supartha, 1997: 34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font0">Made simply from a piece of cloth and bamboo pole, the Balinese </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">pennant </span><span class="font0">waves according to the wind(Supartha, 1997: 36)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kober</span><span class="font0"> is one of traditional Balinese paintings. It is a kind of flag used for temple ceremony. The term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kober</span><span class="font0"> in the SL is translated into pennant in the TL. Shadeg (2005; 198) defines </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> as banner in a temple. According to Hornby (2005) pennant is long narrow pointed flag. Especially one used on a ship for signaling or to show the ship identity. The analysis of the frame semantic elements of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> and pennant are as follow.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Frame elements</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kober</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Pennant</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Descriptor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">One of traditional Balinese paintings. It is a kind of flag used for temple ceremony.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">A long Especialy signaling identity.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">narrow pointed flag. one used on a ship for or to show the ship</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese Ceremony</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">To show the ship’s identity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">User</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Anyone</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">From the analysis of the frame element, below is the elaboration of the componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> and pennant.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kober</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL Pennant</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese ceremonial equipment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Symbol of Gods</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Made of cloth</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">The componential analysis of the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> and pennant shows that both of the terms are different. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kober</span><span class="font0"> is a Balinese ceremonial equipments, but pennant, according to Hornby (2005), is a kind of flag on a ship. The material of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> is similar to pennant which is made of cloth. The translator translates the Balinese term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> into pennant.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 4: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cili</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Keduanya mesti diambil dari padi yang diketam di petak sawah yang paling pertama menerima aliran air sebagai simbolisasi hulu yang suci. Lalu, diberi hiasan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">cili </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">–juga sebagai pralambang Dewi Sri- lengkap dengan aneka warna bunga-bungaan.</span><span class="font0"> (Supartha, 1997: 43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font0">Both must be taken from the highest rice farm because there they get the first and purest water the symbol of the holy head. These are decorated with </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">cili </span><span class="font0">(special ornaments made of palm leaves) also symbolizing the Goddess Sri complete with colourful flowers. (Supartha, 1997: 43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cili</span><span class="font0"> is Balinese material cultural term. It is Balinese special ornament as a symbol of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dewi Sri</span><span class="font0"> (The rice goddess and fertility). It is made from young coconut leaf, pandan leaf, or colored sticky rice. The Balinese term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cili</span><span class="font0"> in the SL is translated into cili in the English. The translator kept the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili</span><span class="font0"> in the SL into the TL. The translator translated this cultural term by adding description ‘special ornaments made of palm leaves’. The frame semantic elements analysis and componential analysis could not be done because the translator use the same term with the term in the source text. Data 5: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Keris</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pada punggung lelaki ini, seringkali tersembul </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">keris </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yang rebah kekanan</span><span class="font0"> (Supartha, 1997: 47)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: A kris </span><span class="font0">(ceremonial dagger) is carried at the back with its handle near the right shoulder (Supartha, 1997: 51)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Keris</span><span class="font0"> is a traditional Balinese short sword and dagger, usually wavy, today seen only in dance performances or on days of great ceremonial importance. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> is an important part of traditional formal Balinese male dress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Shadag (2007: 200) defines </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> as dagger. The Balinese cultural term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> in the source text is modified into kris in the Target text. The translator translates the term by adding description ‘ceremonial dagger’. The frame semantic elements analysis and componential analysis could not be done because the translator use the term in the SL into the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 6: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wadah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sesudah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">wadah </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">itu dikelilingi penari Baris Jangkung ini, barulah prosesi menuju kuburan. </span><span class="font0">(Supartha, 1997: 85)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font0">Only once Baris Jangkung dancers have danced all around the </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">tower </span><span class="font0">can the procession set out for the graveyard (Supartha, 1997: 85)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This is Balinese material cultural term. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wadah</span><span class="font0"> means “container”, but is usually used to refer to a cremation tower, in which the effigy or body of a dead person is carried to the cemetery. The tower also called </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bade</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wadah</span><span class="font0"> made of wood, bamboo, and paper for placing the coffin in the cremation ceremony of Balinese Hindu. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> is then borne to the Balinese Hindhu cremation ceremony.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wadah</span><span class="font0"> in the SL is translated into tower in the TL. Shadeg (2007: 498) defines </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> as cremation-tower. Acording to Hornby (2005) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tower</span><span class="font0"> is tall narrow building, either free-standing or forming part of a building such as a church or castle. The analysis of the frame semantic elements</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> and tower are as follow.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Frame elements</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Wadah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tower</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Descriptor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">A temple structure made of wood, bamboo, and paper for placing the coffin in the cremation ceremony of Balinese Hindu.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">A tall narrow building, either free-standing or forming part of a building such as a church or castle</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese Ceremony</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Building</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">User</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Anyone</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">From the analysis of the frame element, below is the elaboration of the componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> and tower.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Wadah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TL Tower</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Narrow and tall</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Balinese Hindu Ceremonial</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">equipment</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">For Placing the coffin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">The componential analysis of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> and tower shows that both of the terms are different. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wadah</span><span class="font0"> is a Balinese Hindu ceremonial equipments used in cremation ceremony, but tower, according to Hornby (2005), is a tall narrow building. There is similarity between </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> and tower. The shape of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> is similar to tower which is narrow and tall.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Translation Procedures</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">In this section, the cultural terms were analyzed based on translation procedures used in translating cultural terms found in the book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Bali Arts Festival Album</span><span class="font0">. From seven procedures used in translation proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000), there are two translation procedures identified in this book applied to translate the material cultural terms. Those are borrowing and literal translation procedures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Borrowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator applied borrowing procedure in translating Balinese material cultural terms </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili,</span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> The term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili</span><span class="font0"> is unknown in the target language culture. In preserving the source language culture, the translator kept the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili</span><span class="font0">. The translator applied the borrowing procedure to translate this material cultural term. To make the cultural term clear for the reader of the target language, the translator gives a short description ‘special ornaments made of palm leaves’</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> By describing the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili,</span><span class="font0"> the reader can conclude what </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili</span><span class="font0"> is. There are two words of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> found in the source language. Both of them are translated into kris. The translator applied borrowing procedure to translate this cultural term. To make the reader clear and understand what </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kris</span><span class="font0"> is, the translator adding description ‘ceremonial dagger’. This is done because the term is unknown in the target culture. The cultural term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> in the SL is naturalized into kris in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Literal Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator applied literal translation procedure in translating Balinese material cultural terms </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng, lelontek, kober,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0">. The translator translated the source term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> into parasols in the target language. It was found that the translator translated this Balinese material cultural term in the SL into the TL literally. Literal translation procedure is applied in translating this cultural term. Although the component of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> and parasol are different, they have the same concept that they are a kind of umbrella. The translator introduced the word parasols to the target</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">reader to give a close description of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pajeng</span><span class="font0"> as a kind of umbrella. The translator translated the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Balinese term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> into banner. The translator translated this material cultural term in the SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">into the TL literally. Although the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lelontek</span><span class="font0"> and banner have different components, they have similarity. They are made of cloth and has similar shape. The translator applied literal translation procedure to translate this Balinese material cultural term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator translated the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> into pennant. The translator translated this Balinese materuial term in the SL into the TL literally. Literal translation procedure is applied to translate this cultural term. The translator translates </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> into pennant to preserve the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober</span><span class="font0"> as a kind of flag since in the target language culture there is no flag which is exactly the same as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kober.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator translated the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> into tower. The translator applied literal translation procedure to translate this Balinese cultural term. From the componential analysis of the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> and tower, they are different. But they have similarity in shape. They are narrow and tall. The term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadah</span><span class="font0"> is unknown in the target reader.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">The study of frame semantics and componential analysis of the cultural terms in this bilingual book can explain the differences among the components of the Balinese material cultural terms. Not all of the cultural terms can be analysed with both the frame elements and the componential analysis since the concepts of the terms are unknown in the target culture, like </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cili, </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator applied two procedures of translation in translating the Balinese material cultural terms. They are borrowing and literal translation procedures. Literal procedure of translation is the most often procedures applied by the translator in translating the material terms in this book. While, the borrowing procedure of translation is the least often procedure applied by the translator in translating the specific material cultural terms.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Fillmore, C. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Frame Semantics</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics in the Morning Calm</span><span class="font0">. Seoul: Hanshin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hornby, H.S. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.</span><span class="font0"> New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation.</span><span class="font0"> United Kingdom: Prantice Hall</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Shadeg, Norbert. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Balinese-English Dictionary.</span><span class="font0"> Singapore: Tuttle Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Venuti, L. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font0">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vinay and Darbelnet, 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Methodology of Translation in Venuty, Lawrence</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader,</span><span class="font0"> London Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Zenden, V. 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology: The Core.</span><span class="font0"> New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">11</span></p>