---
layout: full_article
title: "BORROWING TECHNIQUE IN THE TRANSLATION OF BALI LIVE MAGAZINE INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "I Wayan Suryasa"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21886 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-21886"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21886"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>BORROWING TECHNIQUE IN THE TRANSLATION OF </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">BALI LIVE MAGAZINE</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> INTO INDONESIAN</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Wayan Suryasa</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Sekolah Tinggi Manajemen Informatika dan Teknik Komputer (STMIK) STIKOM Bali Jln. Raya Puputan Renon No. 86 Denpasar-Bali, Phone. 0361-244445</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ponsel 081338734500</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:suryasa@stikom-bali.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">suryasa@stikom-bali.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This research was intended to describe the borrowing techniquesin the translation. The title of this research is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Borrowing Technique in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">.The analysis focused on the borrowing techniques used to render foreign elements into Indonesian language in a printed advertisement.The data in this analysis were cited and grouped based on the borrowing techniques used to translate the source language into the target language using the borrowing technique proposed by Molina &amp;Albir (2000:84). In this analysis, the borrowing technique used to translate the source language into the target language included two borrowing techniques, namely: (1) full absorption of words without any modification of pronunciation (pure borrowing), (2) the implementation of naturalized borrowing technique indicating a modification of pronunciation (referred to EYD).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">naturalized borrowing, pure borrowing, absorption of words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan teknik peminjaman dalam terjemahan. Penelitian ini berjudul Borrowing Technique in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian. Analisisnya terfokus pada teknik– teknik peminjaman dalam mengalihkan unsurasingke dalam bahasa Indonesia padamajalahcetak. Data dikutip dan dikelompokan berdasarkan teknik peminjaman yang digunakan dalam menerjemahkan bahasa sumber ke dalam bahasa target dengan menggunakan teknik peminjaman yang diusulkan oleh Molina &amp;Albir (2000:84). Dalam analisisnya, teknik peminjaman diterapakan untuk menerjemahkan bahasa sumber ke dalam bahasa target dengan menggunakan dua teknik peminjaman, yaitu: (1) penyerapan penuh tanpa memodifikasi pengucapannya (peminjaman murni), (2) penerapan teknik peminjaman alamiah yang menunjukkan modifikasi pengucapan (merujuk EYD).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">peminjaman alamiah, peminjaman murni, penyerapan kata.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Background of the Study</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The term of translation includes the product (the text which has been translated), and the process (the act of translating the text). Translation is a change of form. The text from which the translation is made is called the Source Language (SL). The form into which it is changed is called the Receptor Language (RL).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Translation means transferring the meaning of SL into the RL. The translation consists of transferring the meaning. The meaning oflanguage which is transferred rather than the form (Larson, 1984:3). In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font1">, Catford stated that translation is a textual material replacement of SL into TL (1965:56). Newmark stated that the translation is rendering the meaning of ST into TT (1988: 5). Nida (2008: 301) stated that translation is reproducing a natural equivalent in the receptor language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Bell (1991:6), translation is the replacement of equivalence textual representation in the second language. The different language text can be equivalent fully or partially. The translation levels are equivalent in context, meaning, grammar, and lexicon. The other ranks are word by word, phrase by phrase, or sentence by sentence. Every language is rich in vocabulary and word variations. It depends on the culture whereby languages develop. As an illustration, some words in Indonesian language are</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">padi, beras, gabah</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nasi</span><span class="font1">. It merely has one word in English, that is, rice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinay and Darbelnet in Venuti (2008:84) divided translation process into two terms. They are direct translation and oblique translation. There are seven techniques of translation. These techniques are used in translation. The direct translation techniques are Borrowing,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Calque, and Literal translation. The oblique translation techniques are Transposition, Modulation, Equivalence, and Adaptation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the present study, the researcher merely focuses on the borrowing translation technique. The borrowing translation means a word taken directly from another language. It is used to create a stylistic effect. According to Molina and Albir (2002:520), borrowing is divided in the two kinds. They are pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing. In this thesis, the borrowing translation technique is discussed proposed by Molina and Albir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Some linguists refer to pure borrowing as loan word. Pure borrowing means the expression or word taken over purely into the RL without any change. For instance, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melodrama</span><span class="font1"> in English (Lawrence, 1960: 107) is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melodrama</span><span class="font1"> in Bahasa (Achyar, 2008: 242).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Naturalized borrowing in the translation is made to fit the spelling rules in the Receptor Language (RL). Instead of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">February</span><span class="font1"> in English (Lawrence, 1960: 44), it is equivalent to the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Februari</span><span class="font1"> in Bahasa (Achyar, 2008: 146). In writing this thesis, the textbook was chosen as the data source. It is one of literary works. The translator should know how to make the reader interested. Therefore, the borrowing translation technique is needed to be a method. That is the reason why the topic of the present study is ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Borrowing Technique in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">.’ The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing translation</span><span class="font1"> refers to the technique of translation. The translator of the text book was a team. All rights reserved is in PT. GramediaPustakaUtama. In the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">, the researcher found many of borrowings. Another reason is that the content of magazine is very interesting. Hence, every reader will like if its translation is easily understood by the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In regard to</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Borrowing Technique in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">, there are some problems that needs answered. The problems are (1) 1.What types of borrowing technique used in the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">? and (2) What borrowing translation techniques were applied to translate this magazine?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The present study has two aims; they are general and specific aims. The general aims is general aim is to improve knowledge, especially the knowledge of translation studies. The present study only discusses one technique, that is, the borrowing translation technique. This research has two specific aims as follows: (1) to identify the types of borrowing technique found in the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1"> and (2) to classify and explain the borrowing translation techniques applied to the translation of this magazine.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Significance of the Study</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">It was expected that the result of the present study would be significant theoretically and practically.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Theoretical Significance</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study will give contribution to the translation studies. It discusses about translation technique, particularly the borrowing translation technique in printed advertisement.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study will give contribution to the borrowing translation concept between two different languages, particularly English and Indonesian.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study will give contribution to the effectiveness of the borrowing translation technique.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Practical Significance</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study will be useful to those who are interested in analyzing the borrowing technique in the translation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study was intended to be useful to translators who are concerned with the translation of printed advertisement from English into Bahasa and vice versa.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study was intended to be a reference for those who are interested in translation studies.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Theoretical Framework</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">There is one main theory adopted in this study. It is the theory of translation by Molina and Albir (2002). According to them, technique means the strategy used to solve the problem in translating based on the purpose of translation itself. This theory was used to find out the answers to all the problems in the present study. Some other theories were also used as the supporting theories.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Direct vs. Oblique Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The table below shows the direct and oblique translations according to Vinay and Darbelnet. The table shows the translation techniques. The researcher is concerned with the borrowing translation technique as a direct translation technique. (See Table 1: Vinay&amp;Darbelnet’s model of translation techniques Vinay and Darbelnet define seven basic techniques, operating on three levels of style: Lexis, distribution (morphology and syntax), and message. The techniques are classified as direct (or literal) and oblique which coincide with the distinction between direct (or literal) and oblique translations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Literal translation occurs when there is an exact structural, lexical, even morphological equivalence between the two languages. These are merely possible when the two languages are very close to each other. The direct translation technique is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Borrowing</span><span class="font1">. Borrowing is a word which is taken directly from another language, e.g., the English word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">editor</span><span class="font1"> has been incorporated directly into other languages. The other example is the English word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulldozer </span><span class="font1">whichhas been incorporated directly into other languages. This concept is acceptable and used.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Equivalence of word form in absorption</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The absorption of foreign term into BI is processed based on the following phrases:The foreign term that will be absorbed should increase the inter translatability of both SL, and RL, and conversely. It makes the RL readers understand the terms more easily because they have already known the terms before. They are simpler than their translation equivalents. It is easier, and more practice for scientists to make decisions related to their equivalence. It will be more appropriate and efficient without having bad connotative meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The absorption of foreign terms by the visual form as priority through the following process: absorbing with spelling and pronunciation of word; for example, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">camera</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kamera</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">microphone</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mikrofon</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">system</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sistem</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Absorpsion with spelling adjustment without pronunciation adjustment is illustrated by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">file</span><span class="font1">→</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fail</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">science</span><span class="font1"> →</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sains</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">photocopy</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fotokopi</span><span class="font1">. Absorption without spelling adjustment, but there is pronunciation modification. For examples: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bias</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bias</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">radar</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ra dar</span><span class="font1">; nasal → nasal. Absorption without spelling and pronunciation adjustment, for examples: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">allegro moderato</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">devideetimpera</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Aufklarung</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dulceet utile</span><span class="font1">; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">status quo</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in vitro</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>METHOD OF RESEARCH</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Research Approach</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">There are three kinds of research based on the research location, i.e. library research, laboratory and field research (Bungin, 2005: 40-41). In this thesis, the library research was applied to collect some information as data and theories.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study applied qualitative research approach. The data was taken from a textbook particularly a magazine. The qualitative method was implemented and the analysis is explained using descriptive sentences.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study is a written text; the data was taken from one of the best selling magazines named Bali Live Gonzaga. The collected data were closely observed in SL and RL. The data were listed based on the borrowing translation terms. Therefore, the data were directly taken from the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research was conducted using three instruments. First the magazine, as a bilingual written textbook, was read. It is the most important thing to complete the present study. Second, a personal computer was used to input, identify, and classify the data for analysis. In addition, an internet was used to search the terms of borrowing.Third, the resources such as the theory, the dictionary (Oxford and KBBI PusatBahasa) were obtained.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">In collecting the data, the content analysis method is applied. According to Sutopo (2006: 81):</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Teknik catat dokumen ini oleh Yin (1987) disebut sebagai content analysis, sebagai cara untuk menemukan beragam hal sesuai dengan kebutuhan dan tujuan penelitiannya”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The quotation above means that content analysis is the technique of getting some information based on the purpose of the analysis. Some books are used as references and many others related to the topic; the information was taken all in order to obtain further knowledge of the borrowing translation techniques.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken using the purposive sampling, which means that the only samples, which are concerned with the purpose of the study which were taken, as stated by Sutopo (2006: 64).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the qualitative method was used to analyze data and it was applied to describe the borrowing translation techniques including the types of borrowing in the translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian. Qualitative method means a research, which uses some instruments for collecting the data. According to Sutopo (2006: 257):</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Dalam penelitian kuantitatif proses pengumpulan data dan analisisnya terpisah secara jelas, dan analisisnya dilakukan pada tahap akhir pengumpulan data selesai. Tidak demikian halnya dalam penelitian kualitatif, yang proses analisis nyaharus dilakukan sejak awal bersamaan dengan proses pengumpulan data.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The quotation above means that in the qualitative method, the process of analysis is firstly done in collecting data. Calculating the Pure Borrowing and Naturalize Borrowing,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bungin’s formula in Srikandi (2009: 30) was used to find the types of borrowing in the translation techniques that occur mostly in the magazine. The following formula is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The systematic techniques in conducting the analysis are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading the magazine repeatedly.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Identifying the pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing based on their grammatical categories.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classifying the words into pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analyzing borrowing types and elaborate more about translation techniques in the translation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Drawing some conclusions based on the result of analysis.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The present study mainly applied one method to present the analyzed data. There is an informal method. All of the data were identified and classified. There are three kinds of research based on the location of the research i.e. library research, laboratory and field research (Bungin, 2005: 40-41). In this thesis, the library research method is applied by collecting some theories and information about a text, analysis of borrowing procedures in translation, then, internet, and other sources which support the writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study is a written text taken from one of the best magazines by GNP Magazine, Indonesia, in 2012.The data was collected by closely observing the terms in SL and RL of data source. By reading the data source, all the borrowing termwas listed. Therefore, the data was taken directly from the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The magazine contains 22 chapters and consists of 105 pages. Ten samples are used in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">study. Each sample was on the homogeny data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Analysis and Findings of the Borrowing Technique in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis is based on some theories. The theory of borrowing technique is proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet in Venuti (2008:84), which is also supported by Groesjean (1982:14) and also the classification of borrowing by Molina and Albir (2002). At least, the analysis is done based on the standard integration of absorbing word elements into Indonesian system that supports the existence of the borrowing word in translation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Types of borrowing technique found in the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The present study focused on two types: pure and naturalized borrowings. They are supported by the standard integration of absorption of word-elements legalized by the Indonesian Government as stated in PUEBIYD by P3B. In regard to the magazine, two types of borrowing techniques were found. Those are pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing translation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Borrowing Translation Techniques Applied in the Translation of Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">For further explanation, the analysis below is based on the data related to the borrowing translation techniques applied in the translation of “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Live Magazine into Indonesian</span><span class="font1">as.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Pure Borrowing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The table below shows the pure borrowing found in the data. In this case, the researcher merely describes and classifies the data based on the borrowing types proposed by Molina and Albir (2002).The total of pure borrowing words is 16 words, (See table 2: Pure Borrowing) Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The table shows that the technique used is borrowing translation. Those words were taken directly from the source language into the receptor language to show that the borrowing translation technique was applied in the pure borrowing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL tex</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“…one day before the wedding to accommodate the style that you would like to achieve and expect from our hair and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">make up </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">artist...</span><span class="font0"> (p. 33)”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL tex</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“… satu hari sebelum pernikahan, semua itu adalah cara untuk mengakomodasi agar tercipta gaya dan model yang diinginkan oleh para pelanggannya sehingga tercipta keserasian antarapelanggan dan ahli </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">make up </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dan rambut di perusahaan ini nantinya…</span><span class="font0">(p. 35)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1"> is a lexical unit in translation. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1"> in the source language has the same form as the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1">in the receptor language. Based on the meaning, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1">in the source language is equivalent to the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1">in the receptor language. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1"> in the source language and receptor language are categorized as a common noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1"> means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">put cosmetics on the face</span><span class="font1">(Oxford,1995:533) which should be translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">menghiaswajah</span><span class="font1">(Echols 2003:285) in the RL text which seem similar to the concept in BI. In this case, as a loan word, the translator used the specific word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up</span><span class="font1"> without spelling system and sound adjustment. The translation is acceptable in the RL, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">make up </span><span class="font1">itself is common nowadays in the RL culture, it has been well known in the RL, and, at least, this word has become RL vocabulary. So, it is not necessary to transfer it into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">menghias / berhias</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">At that time he will release a new </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">brand </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">name for his label, that are:….</span><span class="font0">(p. 31)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pada bulan itu dia akan rilis </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">brand </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">baru, yaitu:….</span><span class="font0">(p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> is a lexical unit in translation. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the source language has the same form as the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the receptor language. Based on the meaning, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the source language is equivalent to the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the receptor language. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the source language and receptor language are categorized as a common noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">brand</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a type of product manufactured by a particular company under a particular name</span><span class="font1">(oxford, 1995 :445) which should have been translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">merek / buatan</span><span class="font1"> (Echols et al,2005 : 246) in the RL text which seem to refer to similar concept in BI. Here, the translator uses the borrowing word (brand) as loan word in order to take the function, as a name of product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dwi Iskandar is a talented young </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">designer</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, he was born in Tuban, East Java</span><span class="font0"> (p.30).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Didirikan oleh seorang </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">designer </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">muda berbakat bernama Dwi Iskandar, pria kelahiran Tuban, JawaTimur.(p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">designer</span><span class="font1"> means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a person who plans the look or workings of something prior to it being made, by preparing drawings or plans</span><span class="font1"> (Oxford, 1995: 763) which should have been translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">perancang</span><span class="font1"> (Echols, 2005: 388) in the RL text which seem similar to the concept in BI. In this case, as a loan word, the translator used the specific word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">designer</span><span class="font1"> without spelling system and adjustment. The translation is acceptable in the RL, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">designer</span><span class="font1"> itself is common nowadays in the RL culture; it has been known in the RL, and at least this word has become RL vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">If we see the </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">background, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">he also has a tourism school background.</span><span class="font0"> (p.31)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Karena dia juga mempunyai </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">background </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sekolah pariwisata.</span><span class="font0"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">background</span><span class="font1"> means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">part of a scene behind the main things or people, conditions and events that influence , person’s social class/education</span><span class="font1">(Oxford, 1995: 88) which should have be translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dasar / latarbelakang</span><span class="font1"> (Echols, 2005: 56) in the RL text which seem the similar concept in BI. In this case, as a loan word the translator uses the specific word bazaar without spelling system and sound adjustment. The translation is acceptable in the RL, the word bazaar itself is common nowadays in the RL culture, it has been well known in the RL. So, it is not necessary to transfer it into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dasar / latarbelakang</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Nail art decoration, nail painting, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">design </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sculpture 3D, nail extension,…</span><span class="font0"> (p.33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Seni menghias kuku, ekstensiakuarium, Nial art, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">design </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">patung 3D, ekstensi kuku,… (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font1"> refers to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">plan or drawing produced to show the look and function or workings of a building, garment, or other object before it is made</span><span class="font1">. Therefore, there is no other specific word and it seems to be equivalent with the generic word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">object before made</span><span class="font1"> (Oxford, 1995: 260). In order not to make the meaning vague, the translator transferred the specific word of the original language </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font1"> into RL text which then called a loan word or pure borrowing. It has been well known in RL culture, so it needs to be transferred into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pola or model</span><span class="font1"> (Echols, 2005: 51).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Naturalized Borrowing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The table below shows naturalized borrowing words found in the data, (See table 3: Naturalized Borrowing). Analysis: A word can be naturalized borrowing when it can be naturalized to fit the spelling rules in the TL. The analysis bellow is the borrowing with spelling and pronunciation adjustment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Borrowing translation are absorbedto combine double consonants into one consonant in the RL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our own gown co</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ll</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ection (50 to 100 gowns), designer to make custom gowns,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">profe</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ss</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ional photographers</span><span class="font0">, …..(p. 33)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That’s why he choose Bali for start a fashion busine</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ss</span><span class="font0">. (p.30)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ko</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">l</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">eksi gaun pengantin (50 sampai 100 gaun), desainer untuk membuat gaun,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Professional fotografer,….</span><span class="font0">(p.35)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Memilih Bali untuk memulai tempat bisni</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">s </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fashionnya.</span><span class="font0"> (p.32)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">collection</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text is translated into the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">koleksi</span><span class="font1"> in the RL text. In this case, the translator translated the word by only modifying the spelling system. Consequently, the adjustment occurs by changing double the consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ll</span><span class="font1">into s in the RL </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">koleksi</span><span class="font1">and change at the beginning element </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font1">–into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1">– and ending element (t) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si</span><span class="font1">. This word is shared in BI culture and has been familiar to the readers as a kind of absorbing process; the procedure applied is naturalized borrowing. The adjustment occurs as well to the word profe</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ss</span><span class="font1">ional which was translated into</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">profe</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ional</span><span class="font1"> and busine</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ss </span><span class="font1">into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bisni</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Borrowing translation by absorbing consonant c at the beginning of word into consonant k in the RL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Our own gown </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ollection (50 to 100 gowns), designer to make custom gowns, professional photographers, …..</span><span class="font0">(p. 33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Koleksi gaun pengantin (50 sampai 100 gaun), desainer untuk membuat gaun, professional fotografer,….</span><span class="font0">(p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the SL the words above are translated into (→) RL words: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Collection</span><span class="font1"> → </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Koleksi</span><span class="font1">. From the equivalence, the concepts (between SL and RL) in those words are known in the RL culture. The RL takes the sound and the spelling system is modified as stated in PUPI; in this case, the translator replaced the SL word in the RL by giving adjustment to the RL, namely. Collection, this is a style of borrowing by modifying the spelling which changes the consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font1"> into the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">pronunciation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1">, and the last letters –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tion</span><span class="font1"> into the pronunciation –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si</span><span class="font1">. This is a style of borrowing by modifying the spelling which changes the consonant c into the pronunciation k. In the RL word above, the procedure applied is borrowing which commonly used in terms absorbing of word elements, which has been known by the RL readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The consonant –y is changed into the sound /i/ as suggested in PUEBIYD (1993:26).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">… with many divisions to provide for within the Wedding industr</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">y</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.(p.33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">… memiliki banyak divisi untuk menyediakan kebutuhan pernikahan, kecantikan yang sudah menjadi sebuah industr</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">i</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">industry</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text was translated into the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">industri</span><span class="font1"> in RL text. In this case, the translator translated the word by taking the sound /industri/ (Oxford, 1995: 770) and modifying the spelling system. In this borrowing procedure, adjustment occurs through absorption process into BI, such as the consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">y</span><span class="font1"> is changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">i.</span><span class="font1"> The translator used this procedure to translate that word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Borrowing translation by absorbing the consonant –</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">- in the middle of word into consonant –</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">- in the RL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">And he used lo</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">al produ</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">t for his fashion label such as from Bandung or Bali itself</span><span class="font0">. (p.30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Walaupun bahkan yang dipakai merupakan produk buatan lo</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">al seperti dari Badung atau Bali.</span><span class="font0"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">product</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text was translated into the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">produk</span><span class="font1"> in the RL text. The meaning of these two words is similar. In the SL the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">product</span><span class="font1"> means a substance that is manufactured or refined for sale (Oxford, 1995: 772). While in the RL, that word means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sebuahhasil</span><span class="font1"> (Echols, 2005: 390). In this case, the translator translated the word by just modifying the spelling system, and the adjustment occur by changing consonant c in the end of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">t</span><span class="font1"> which should have been changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1"> in the RL (PUEBIYD, 1993:27). The same case also occurred</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">to the other word; such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">local</span><span class="font1"> which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lokal</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">documentation</span><span class="font1">which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dokumentasi</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">decoration</span><span class="font1"> which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dekorasi</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">collection</span><span class="font1"> which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">koleksi</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">architecture</span><span class="font1"> which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">arsitektur</span><span class="font1">. As can be seen that the process of absorbing in BI takes place; the procedure applied is borrowing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Borrowing translation in absorbing the consonant combination of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ph</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> into one consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">f </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the RL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">…fashion </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ph</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">otography and concept photography</span><span class="font0">. (p33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">…</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">otografi fashion dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">otografi konsep</span><span class="font0">. (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The meaning of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">photography</span><span class="font1"> means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the art or practice of taking and processing photographs</span><span class="font1"> (Oxford, 1995: 756). Therefore, the RL takes the sound and modifies the spelling system, in this case, the translator replaced the SL word in the RL by giving adjustment to the RL, namely: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">photography</span><span class="font1">, in which the suffix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–phy</span><span class="font1">is changedinto </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–fi.</span><span class="font1"> Moreover, in the RL above, the procedure applied is borrowing which is used commonly when absorbing of new technical terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Translation by absorbing suffix </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">–ure</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">–ur</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">It can be from environment, architect</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ure</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, culture or even… (p30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bisa terinspirasi dari apa saja, bisa lingkungan sekitar, arsitekt</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ur</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, kebudayaan bahkan… (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">architecture</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text was translated into the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">arsitektur</span><span class="font1"> in the RL text. The meaning of these two words is similar. In the SL word</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">architecture</span><span class="font1"> means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the art or practice of designing and constructing buildings (</span><span class="font1">Oxford, 1995: 901). While in the RL, that word means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">perancangbangunan</span><span class="font1"> (Echols, 2005: 440). The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">architecture</span><span class="font1"> was translated into</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">arsitektur</span><span class="font1"> in RL, which was made by adjusting the final element –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ure</span><span class="font1"> into –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ur</span><span class="font1">in BI. In this case, the procedure is borrowing. It is acceptable in translation because the </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">concept </span><span class="font1">is shared and well known by the RL, as can be seen that the meaning of the two words (SL and RL) is similar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Translation by absorbing suffix (t)-</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> into –</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">asi</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">…, photo video, photo documentat</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, fashion photography, and concept photography.</span><span class="font0"> (p.33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">RL text</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">…, studio foto, dokument</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">asi </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">foto, fotografi fashion, dan fotografi konsep</span><span class="font0">. (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">documentation</span><span class="font1"> in the SL text was translated into the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dokumentasi</span><span class="font1"> in the RL text. The meaning of these two words is similar. In this case, the translator translated the word without taking the pronunciation and modifying the spelling system. According to PUPI, the adjustment occurs by changing the final element –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font1"> into –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si</span><span class="font1"> in the RL. In the process of affixation absorbing of foreign element into BI, the procedure applied is borrowing. Here, it can also be found in the next examples: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">transportation becomes transportasi</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">decoration becomes dekorasi</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">associationbecomesasosiasi</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>CONCLUSIONS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the finding in the analysis, some conclusions can be withdrawn as follows. The lexical terms used in the RL consist of the loan words which are generally assimilated with RL, and some are new to the RL speakers. There is intentional and no intentional modification in the process of translation. It is to say that the type of borrowing is more oriented towards two types: pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing. As the equivalents, the translator mostly applied the procedures of borrowing in the translating the SL word into the RL. Applying the intentional modification of spelling and/or pronunciation with reference to PUEBIYD (1994). This kind of translation is a naturalized borrowing. Here, the affixation is absorbed into RL (such as:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">changing the vowels, consonant, or suffix) which show the shared concept (that acceptable to the RL culture). Applying borrowing without intentionally modification. This kind of translation is pure borrowing. In this case, the translation takes over fully borrowed word from the SL.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the Almighty God</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, Ida SangHyangWidhiWasa/Tuhan Yang Mahaesa</span><span class="font1"> for His blessing, thus this paper could be completed and my master degree in applied linguistics, particularly in translation studies could be obtained. In this good opportunity, I would like to express my special gratitude to DIKTI Scholarship (DirektoratPendidikanTinggi) that had supported my study financially. All the staff and friends of the Indonesian and Foreigner students; thank you very much for their motivation, inspiration and support. I hope that God will always reward those helping the completion of this paper. May God bless you all.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Achyar, Arfan. 2008. Lady Chatterley’s Lover. Jakarta: Alvabet</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Alwi, Hasan, dkk (ed). 2003. Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia. Jakarta: BalaiPustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bell, Roger T. 1991. Translation and Translating. Theory and Practice, London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bungin, Burhan. 2005. MetodologiPenelitianKuantitatif: Komunikasi, Ekonomi, dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">KebijakanPubliksertaIlmu-IlmuSosialLainnya. Jakarta: Prenada Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cardford, J. C. 1965. A Linguistik Theory of Translation. London: Oxford University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cut NovitaSrikandi, 2010: Borrowing In The Translation Of D. H. Lawrence Lady Chatterley Lover Into Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Echols, John M. And Hassan Shadily. 2003. Kamus Indonesia-Inggris. Edisiketiga. Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Groesjean, Francois. 1982. Life with Two Languages, an Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">KamusBesarBahasa Indonesia, 2008. EdisiKeempat. PT. GramediaPustakaUtama. Jakarta: DepartemenPendidikanNasional.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1984. Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross: Language Equivalences. Lanham: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina, L and Albir, A. H. 2002. Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. Spain: UniversitatAutonoma da Barcelona.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter. 1988. Textbook of translation. U. K: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, E. A. and Charles R Taber. 1974. The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden: E. J. Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PusatPembinaan dan PengembanganBahasaDepartemenPendidikan dan KebudayaanRepublik Indonesia. 1993. PedomanUmumEjaanBahasa Indonesia yang Disempurnakan. Jakarta: Grasindo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutopo, H. B. 2006. MetodologiPenelitianKualitatif, DasarTeori dan Terapannya dalam Penelitian. Surakarta: UniversitasSebelasMaret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Venuti, Lawrence (ed). 2000. The Translation Studies Reader. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinay, Jean Paul and Jean Darbelnet, 2000. A Methodology for Translation. The Translation Studies Reader. Ed. Lawrence Venuti. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Waite, Maurice.2012. Oxford English Dictionary. Seventh Edition. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1: Vinay&amp;Darbelnet’s model of translation techniques</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Type &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Orientation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Technique</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Direct TranslationSource Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Borrowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Calque</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Literal Translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Oblique TranslationTarget Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Transposition Modulation Equivalence Adaptation</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>Table 2: Pure Borrowing</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark53"></a>Source LanguageTarget Language</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Background (p.31) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Background</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brand (p.31) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Brand</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Casual wear (p.31) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Casual wear</span><span class="font1">(p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Design (p.30)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Design</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Designer (p.33) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Designer</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fashion (p.33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fashion</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hotel (p.33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hotel</span><span class="font1"> (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Label (p.30)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Label</span><span class="font1">(p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Legal (p.30) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Legal</span><span class="font1"> (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mainstream (p.31) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mainstream</span><span class="font1">(p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Make up (p.33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make up</span><span class="font1">(p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Modern (p.33) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Modern</span><span class="font1"> (p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Show (p.31)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Show</span><span class="font1"> (p.32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Villa (p.33) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Villa</span><span class="font1">(p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Water proof (p.33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Water proof</span><span class="font1">(p.35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wedding (p.33)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Wedding</span><span class="font1">(p.32)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>Table 3: Naturalized Borrowing</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark56"></a>Source LanguageTarget Language</span><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark57"></a>Double consonant One consonant</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Collection (p.33), Koleksi (p.35),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Business (p.30), Bisnis (p.32),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Professional (p.33) Profesional (p.35)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark58"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark59"></a>Consonant c (at the beginning)Consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> (at the beginning)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Collection (p.33) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Koleksi (p.35)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark60"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark61"></a>Consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">–y</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> of the sound /i/ Vowel –I</span></h2>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Industry (p.33)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Industri (p.35)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark62"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark63"></a>Consonant –c- in the middle of word Consonant –k- in the middle of word</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Architecture (p.30), collection (p.33), Arsitektur (p.32), koleksi (p.35), decoration (p.33), documentation (p.33), dekorasi (p.35), dokumentasi (p.35), local (p.30), product (p.33)lokal (p.32), produk (p.35)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark64"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark65"></a>Consonant combining ph-</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Photography (p.33)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark66"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark67"></a>Consonant f-</span></h2>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Fotografi (p.35)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark68"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark69"></a>Suffix –ureSuffix –ur</span></h2>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Architecture (p.30)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Arsitektur (p.32)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark70"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark71"></a>Suffix (t)-ion Suffix –asi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Transportation(p.33),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Documentation(p.33), Dokumentasi (p.35),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Decoration (p.33),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Association (p.30)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Transportasi (p.35),</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Dekorasi (p.35),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Asosiasi (p.32)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">21</span></p>