---
layout: full_article
title: "TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH IMPERATIVE SENTENCES IN  PROCEDURAL TEXTS INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "Ifoni Ludji"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21887 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-21887"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21887"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH IMPERATIVE SENTENCES IN PROCEDURAL TEXTS INTO INDONESIAN</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ifoni Ludji</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Teacher Training and Educational Sciences Faculty</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PGRI NTT, Kupang University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">III/40 Perintis Kemerdekaan, Kota Baru</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Telepon 0380- 82182</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:Ifoni.ludji@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Ifoni.ludji@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This study aims at exploring the types of English imperative sentences in procedural text and analyzing the reason why such translation procedures are applied. The method in conducting this study was descriptive qualitative method. The researcher did observation by taking notes and also applied the document analysis. The result of the study indicates that the types of English imperative sentences used in English procedural texts and their Indonesian translation in psychology book entitled “What I Wish I Knew at Eighteen” commonly use three types of imperative such as negative commands, requests, and positive commands. In addition, four kinds of translation procedures are used in this study. The existences of translation procedures become the reason of why such translation procedures are being applied and also there are three basic reason namely, semantic factor, syntactic factor and culture factor</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">procedural text, imperative sentences, translation procedures.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengeksplorasi jenis kalimat perintah bahasa Inggris dalam teks prosedural dan untuk menganalisis alasan mengapa prosedur penerjemahan tersebut diterapkan. Metode yang digunakan dalam melakukan penelitian ini adalah metode deskriptif kualitatif. Peneliti melakukan pengamatan melalui mencatat dan juga menerapkan analisis dokumen. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa jenis kalimat perintah bahasa Inggris yang digunakan dalam teks prosedural dan terjemahan bahasa Indonesianya dalam buku psikologi yang berjudul&quot;What I Wish I Knew at Eighteen”pada umumnya menggunakan tiga tipe kalimat perintah seperti, kalimat perintah negative, kalimat permintaan, dan kalimat perintah positif. Selain itu, terdapat juga empat macam prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan yaitu prosedur peminjaman, modulasi, transposisi,dan literal. Selanjutnya, prosedur penerjemahan tersebut diterapkan berdasarkan faktor semantik, sintaksis dan faktor budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">teks prosedural, kalimat perintah, prosedure penerjemahan.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Conveying meaning of a sentence cannot be done by knowing the meaning of each single word in that sentence then the meaning is totally denoted. But the most important thing in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">identifying meaning of a sentence construction is by explicating each meaning of each single word in sentence. It is not always done for each word in sentence because there is gapping in breaking down the meaning of each part of speech in sentence. Thus, it is quite difficult to translate certain sentences into the target language. For example the verb, noun, adjective and adverb in a sentence bring different concept. The different is in the main focus of that sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dealing with sentence, imperative sentence is one of the sentences that has uniqueness in conveying or expressing a meaning in a sentence construction, because this sentence constructions quite poorly understood, in the sense that it is not clear how they should be represented, or what rules should be used to describe them. The imperative sentences mostly found in procedural text, because the procedural texts tell us about the process of making and doing something by following the instruction. It explains the way people perform various processes in a sequence of steps, and it is often in imperative sentences. English imperative sentences are usually used to give command and prohibition to other people and have no subject and contain the basic verb. While Indonesian imperative gives the similar concept about the imperative like the English imperative, but English has simple types or form while Indonesian is quite complicated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Those phenomena above become the interesting topic to be discussed, actually what the different between English imperative sentence construction and their Indonesian imperative sentence? This paper is discussing about the types of English imperative, the way of constructing English imperative and Indonesian imperative and the reason of such translation procedure are being applied.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>METHOD OF RESEARCH</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The data of the research were taken from one English psychology book text (SL) entitle “What I Wish I Knew at Eighteen” along with their translation into Indonesian psychology book text (TL) entitled “What I Wish I Knew at Eighteen” used as the data source. In collecting the data, the writer employed certain techniques such as “observation”: the aim of this technique is finding</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the imperative sentences, underlined them and compared them by reading the target language in order easy to observe how they are being translated into target language and taking note of them. Furthermore, in analyzing data the identify method proposed by Sudaryanto (2011:239) is used while the technique such as, identifying the types and their translation, describing the data qualitatively, exploring the implied phenomena deals with linguistics and the discourse of text in data, and classifying the translation procedures applied by the translator in the product of translation in terms of imperative sentences and their translation. In presenting the data, the researcher uses the formal method (Sudaryanto, 1993). It deals with the way of presenting a topic by describing and explanation in words about the findings.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter discusses about the types of English imperative sentences and their Indonesian equivalent sentences. Moreover, it also elaborates the reason of applying translation procedures. Those topic above are important to be discussed because English has simple types while Indonesian is quite complicated. For the detail, let considering the following sub-sections.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The Types of Imperative Sentence in English Procedural texts and their Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English imperative sentence used in procedural text of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“What I Wish I Knew at Eighteen” </span><span class="font1">can be classified into three types, they are: (1) Negative imperative command, (2) request command, and (3) positive command.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Negative Commands Types of Imperative Sentence</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The negative commands in English are not dynamic in terms of syntactic level, while Indonesian negative commands are dynamic because of morphological operation. The morphological operation is marked by word formation in particular verbs in Indonesian. This issue</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">is elaborated in five sub section of negative commands type of imperative sentence, such as following:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">do not + base verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jangan + prefix meng- + base verb+ suffix –kan</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and Their Indonesian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The English pattern is quite different from Indonesian. Indonesian insists morphological process which is means that, the complexity of the semantic form is important. The complexity represents the notion which is meant by a sentence. For example: the word “ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mengandalakan” </span><span class="font1">derives from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘andal’</span><span class="font1"> it is the root or the base. It has prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng-</span><span class="font1"> and suffix –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kan.</span><span class="font1"> If the prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng-</span><span class="font1"> is omitted thus the meaning of the form will be different. The prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng-</span><span class="font1"> means that the subject is an agent which does or do the implied meaning. One representative data below describe the issue.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t make promises you can not keep</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan menjanjikan hal-hal yang tidak bisa kamu penuhi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example above shows that the sentence is negative commands. This called as negative commandbecause the construction of the sentence is marked of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do not</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan.</span><span class="font1"> Thomson (1986: 280) stated that negative command in English imperative sentence reported by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">not</span><span class="font1"> + infinitive (base verb) in the sentences. The SL data is translated into Indonesian in the same type of imperative, namely negative imperative command. Sneddon (1996:325) stated that negative commands are formed with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do not</span><span class="font1"> before the verb. the process of imperative construction of the SL is formed by syntactical process that is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do not + base verb,</span><span class="font1"> while in TL it is formed by morphological process by attaching </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan + meng + base verb + -kan.</span><span class="font1"> The affixation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng- kan</span><span class="font1"> functioned to form the active transitive verb. The prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font1"> represent a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. By attaching the prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font1"> to a verb root word does not change the meaning of the verb but gives the new verb a sense of having the main focus of the sentence on the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">actor and not on the action or the object of the action. Further, adding </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kan-</span><span class="font1"> to show that the subject get someone else to perform the action, for example “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">menjanjikan”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example (1) shows the transposition procedures is relying on. It is called transposition procedure since the translator in TL translates the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘make promises’</span><span class="font1"> in SL into the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘menjanjikan’</span><span class="font1"> in TL. Vinay and Dalbernet (2001:56), stated that transposition involves replacing one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message. In this case, the grammatical change occurs in changing the word class or part of speech from the ‘phrase’ in SL become sthe ‘verb’ in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">do not + base verb</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> ⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jangan + meng- + base verb</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and their Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is found that Indonesian verb determines the sentence pattern of imperative sentence. Not all the types can be categorized in this issue. The verb which can have this kind of issue is stative verb and the verb which accepts the prefixation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng-</span><span class="font1"> only. Thus, Indonesian imperative sentence’s pattern structurally. The example below show the simplification:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t make an important decision while your upset</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan membuat keputusan penting saat marah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example above shows that the sentence is negative commands. This called as negative command the construction of the sentence is marked of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do not</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan.</span><span class="font1"> Thomson (1986: 280) stated that negative command in English imperative sentence reported by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">not</span><span class="font1"> + infinitive (base verb) in the sentences. The SL data is translated into Indonesian in the same type of imperative, namely negative imperative command. Sneddon (1996:325) stated that negative command are formed with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do not</span><span class="font1"> before the verb. The data (2) has a base </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“buat”</span><span class="font1"> is categorized as verb in Indonesian. So it means that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“buat”</span><span class="font1"> in that context is accepted as well. However, it has a prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng-</span><span class="font1"> in the form is called inflectional bound morpheme because it does not change the word class of the root or base </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“buat”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translation result in data (2) indicates transposition occurs due to the translation effect in the sentence that the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">important decision</span><span class="font1"> in SL is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">keputusan penting</span><span class="font1"> in TL. Transposition is a shift of word class as a change of grammatical category. In this case, the data shows the structural shift result from the fact that the word or phrasal structure of the SL different from that of the TL. The SL phrasal made up of a </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">modifier</span><span class="font1"> followed by a </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">head, important decision </span><span class="font1">while in the TL the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">head</span><span class="font1"> is followed by the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">modifier, keputusan penting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">do not + base verb</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> ⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jangan + ber + base verb</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and their Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In English, the stative verbs come with prefixation. The prefix is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ber-.</span><span class="font1"> For the detail, let see the example below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t expect your spouse to change his or her ways</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan berharap pasanganmu bisa merubah cara-caranya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Considering the data (3) above, it claims that it is involved in negative command which is marker by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan+ber+base verb.</span><span class="font1"> it can be seen that the negative imperative command </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ do not </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan</span><span class="font1"> are markers of the negative command constructions in the sentences. The same type of imperative is translated into Indonesian, namely negative imperative command which is formed with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“jangan”</span><span class="font1"> or do not before the verb. The data (3) above indicates that the SL is equivalent with the Indonesian sentence. However, they are different morphologically. In SL there is a base verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘expect’</span><span class="font1"> without undergoing morphological process. While in TL, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“berharap”</span><span class="font1"> undergoes morphological process. It shows that the form can be broken down into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ber-“</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“harap”</span><span class="font1">. The word “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">harap”</span><span class="font1"> itself is involved in verb class. Even, the existence of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ber-“</span><span class="font1"> at the beginning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“harap”</span><span class="font1"> does not change the word class.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The transposition translation occurs in the level of structural shift in the example (3). The structural shift result from the fact that the word or phrasal structure of the SL different from that of the TL. SL phrasal structure is made up of a post modifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">your</span><span class="font1"> followed by a head </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">life</span><span class="font1"> become </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">your</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">life.</span><span class="font1"> Whereas, in the TL the head </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hidup</span><span class="font1"> is followed by the modifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“mu”</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“kamu”</span><span class="font1"> thus it becomes “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hidupmu”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">do not + base verb</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> ⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jangan+base verb+</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>-kan</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and their Indonesian</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesian base verb undergoes suffixation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–kan,</span><span class="font1"> it means that –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kan</span><span class="font1"> as bound morpheme also has implication in terms of conveying meaning in grammatical sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t say something about someone else</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan katakan sesuatu tentang orang lain</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–kan</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian is to form verb- morphologically. moreover, syntactically it is supported. It means that the context of sentence structure makes the meaning of – </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kan</span><span class="font1"> becomes explicitly. The suffix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–kan</span><span class="font1"> changes the word class of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“kata”</span><span class="font1"> as (noun) to be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">katakan”</span><span class="font1"> (verb). Further, semantically, suffix</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">-kan</span><span class="font1"> means that something which is being told is moving or undergoing the event of the verb. the example above clear that the topic ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sesuatu tentang orang lain</span><span class="font1">’ is the main purposes of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–kan</span><span class="font1"> to be moved on. In addition, the speaker of the expression in that example wants to state that the event of the verb should be done if the verb stands alone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example of the data(4) above relying on literal translation in which literal translation is word-for word translation which follows closely the form of source language. In addition, Molina and Albir (2002:510)states that literal translation is to translate a word an expression word for word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">never + base verb</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TL jangan pernah + base verb + meng + kan</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and their translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Negative command of imperative sentence is enriched by another sentence pattern. The sentence pattern is shown in the example below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Never say anything in writing form</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan pernah mengatakan apapun dalam bentuk tertulis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The imperative construction in English and Indonesian as shown in example above, thus it can be included in negative command. The marker </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">never</span><span class="font1"> is conveying the similar meaning with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">not,</span><span class="font1"> that is ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jangan pernah’</span><span class="font1">. Further, the word “mengatakan” is equivalent to the English base verb “say”. The Indonesian </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“mengatakan”</span><span class="font1"> is complicated in form and meaning. The prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meng </span><span class="font1">indicates that there must be an agent. The agent is the actor of the event or the action implied in the verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example of the data indicates the transposition procedure. It claims as transposition procedure in the level of structural shift because the structural shift result from the fact that the word or phrasal structure is made up of modifier “writing” followed by a head”form”, whereas in the TL the head </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“bentuk”</span><span class="font1"> is followed by the modifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“tertulis”</span><span class="font1"> .</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Requesting Type of English Imperative with </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Base Verb</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> are Translated into TL </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Base Verb + Particle –lah</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and Their Indonesian.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Requesting type of English imperative sentence and Indonesian imperative is unique. The uniqueness is shown by the particle –lah in Indonesian. For the detail, let see the data below: (6) SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Be proactively nice</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jadilah pribadi yang aktif dan menyenangkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data above including in request type. It is called as request since the concept of request is an intention of the speaker, so that listener does something. Hornby (1976:193). While the Indonesian has different types of imperative namely, addresse in imperative and particle </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–lah</span><span class="font1">. Sneddon (1996:328) stated that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–lah</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian makes an imperative polite. It is similar like in English when the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“please”</span><span class="font1"> is coming as the request. The process of imperative construction of the SL it is formed by syntactical process that is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">SL + infinitive (base verb),</span><span class="font1"> whereas in TL it is formed by morphological process by attaching </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">base verb + particle –lah.</span><span class="font1">The particle </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–lah</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian writing and speech </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–lah</span><span class="font1"> is optionally added to the verb in imperative construction. This can occur in informal styles but is much less frequent. Its occurrence here is to mark the predicate, which is out of its normal position, occurring at the beginning of the clause as an example above </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“jadilah”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dealing with the translation procedure, the example (6) has two translation procedures they are transposition and borrowing. It claims as transposition because there were changes of rank from the SL to TL. The changes of rank were from words (adverb of manner) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“proactively”</span><span class="font1"> which was translated into Indonesian to become clause in post modified noun phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“yang“</span><span class="font1"> construction.. Thus it becomes pribadi </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">yang proaktif.</span><span class="font1"> The borrowing also is relying on with the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">proactive </span><span class="font1">into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">proaktif</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Positive Command Types of English Imperative with </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Base Form of Verb</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">are Translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Base Verb + -kan</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and Their Indonesian.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">There is Indonesian base verb undergoes suffixation –kan as bound morpheme and also has implication in terms of conveying meaning in grammatical sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Put relationship before things</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Letakkan hubungan pribadi diatas harta benda</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example above is including in positive command type. Hornby (1976:245) stated that, the command is given when there is a power between speaker and listener, the speaker has an authority to command the listener to do something. The process of imperative construction of the SL is formed by syntactical process, while in TL it is formed by morphological process that is by attaching </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">base verb + suffix –kan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translation procedure is included in modulation. It is called modulation since it occurs when the translator translate the source text in many different ways in target text. It is like the example above in which in SL </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">put relationship before things</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">letakakan hubungan pribadi diatas harta.</span><span class="font1"> Here the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“relationship”</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“hubungan pribadi”</span><span class="font1"> and “before things” is translated into “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">di atas harta”.</span><span class="font1"> The idea or meaning is the same but the phrases that are used in SL and TL are different.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">base verb</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">⇒</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">base verb</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> form</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following example shows that in Indonesian imperative construction the stative verb can be put in the beginning of an imperative sentence. The main rule is, the Indonesian stative verb should not undergo morphological process because it is not necessary. In this context, the object</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">determines the meaning of the stative verb.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Remember their name</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ingat nama mereka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data above indicates that the source text has the same form and meaning in the target text.Thus this translation relying on literal translation in which the concept of literal translation is word-for-word translation which closely the form of source language. The real one indicated by the clause of the data above “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">remember their name”</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ ingat nama mereka”.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Reason of applying such translation procedures in English imperative sentences translated into Indonesian</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The linguistic factor of the existence of translation procedures are becoming the reason of such translation procedures are applying. The factor are classified into three, they are semantic factor, syntax, and culture factor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Semantic Factor</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Semantic is a linguistic branch. It studies about languages meaning. When we are doing translation, meaning becomes the main point. Here the study of meaning become one factor that triggers out a translation procedure comes up. Meaning which means here is not linguistic meaning but also pragmatic meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Related to this topic, the context also is exploring meaning as well. Context is the place of meaning. It means that it is not considering the words meaning only but also the time or the event of the existence of the words which is called context. Therefore, the researcher consider also about the speaker’s meaning. Since the context of an utterance creates meaning as well. The effects of semantic become the main factor of why modulation in translation procedure is applied in translating the text of English imperative sentence in “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">What I Wish I knew at Eighteen”</span><span class="font1">. According</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">to Hatim and Munday (2004:150), modulation is a variation of the form of the message obtained by a change in the point of view. In other words, modulation means restructuring a message of source language text in a target language text in different structure but the meaning is not different. One of the example can be taken as an example of modulation procedure is in data below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Put relationship before things</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Letakkan hubungan pribadi diatas harta benda</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word r</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">elationship</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">before things</span><span class="font1"> in SL indicates that there is changing in form. The changing is in target language. The context of the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">put relationship before things</span><span class="font1"> is supported by the whole context on the sub section title </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“relationship and communication”</span><span class="font1">. In addition, the previous expressions have meaning that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“things”</span><span class="font1"> in SL is wealth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Syntactic Factor</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The syntactic construction of Indonesian and English is different. It is caused by the possibility of function words using in English is more frequent rather than Indonesian. In syntactic factor, the translation procedure which is having potential occurring is literal procedure. Literal translation or word-for-word translation is the direct transfer of a source language text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate target language text. Syntactically, literal procedure and transposition are relying on the sentence structure. The literal procedure comes up when the grammar of SL and TL is in the same order, while the transposition comes up from the word function in sentence level. Thus, it is influenced by syntax. It can be seen in the example of the data which is showing the literal procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Remember their name</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ingat nama mereka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Newmark (1998), states that extended literal translation ranges from one word to one word, through group to group, collocation to collocation, clause to clause, and sentence to sentence. Moreover, Molina &amp;&nbsp;Albir (2002:510) states that literal translation is to translate a word or an expression word for word. What is meant by word for word in this case does not mean</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">that it is translated one word to the other word, but more tend to translate word for word based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">their function and meaning in the sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Culture Factor</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Culture which is mean in translation perspective is not only the way of life of a group but also the concept or the understanding of a group of people about something. The most common in translation is borrowing culture in sequences perspective. The sequences perspective which is mean here is the translator only considers about the environment of the target readers’ culture then the translation product is referred to the words the words that can represent such concept as in source language text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Borrowing is coming up in translation procedure as one of a good solution in rendering the message from SL to TL. The data below is an example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t let technology control your life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan biarkan teknologi mengendalikan hidupmu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data above shows that “technology” is translated into “teknologi” in TL. It claims as borrowing because the word “technology” in SL is translated into “teknologi” in TL in which it refers to a case where a word or an expression is taken from the SL and used in the TL. In this case based on the data in SL and TL it is included in borrowing with changes in form but without change the meaning, Haugen in Sari (2009:29).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Considering the elucidation above, then it can be concluded that three types of imperative sentence of English imperative sentence in procedural text entitled “What I wish I knew at eighteen” translated from English into Indonesian, they are: negative command, request and positive command. Seeing from the process of imperative constructions of the SL, it can obviously be stated that it is formed by syntactical process, whereas in TL it is formed by morphological process that is by attaching the marker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are four types of translation procedure used in this study. All of them are oriented towards the target language. Those procedures are: borrowing, modulation, transposition, and literal translation. The translation procedure mostly used is transposition. The used of transposition in this study that it changes the grammatical category of the SL when it is translated into to TL. The factors leading to the application of particular techniques of translation in this study are linguistic factors such as; semantic factor, syntactic factor, and culture factor.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, AS. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Guide to Pattern and Usage in English.</span><span class="font1"> Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to Cross Language Equivalence. </span><span class="font1">University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina, L &amp;&nbsp;Albir, A.H.2002. Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. In Meta, Vol. XLVII, No. 4. Hal. 499-512).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Munday,J &amp;&nbsp;Hatim, B. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation: An Advanced Resource book</span><span class="font1"> (Applied Linguistics). London &amp;&nbsp;New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Munday, Jeremy. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Translation Studies. Theories and Applications.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sari, Fachwinalia Keumala. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Translation Procedures of Translating Computer Terms in Andrew S. Tanenbaum 3<sup>rd</sup> Computer Networks Into Bahasa Indonesia. </span><span class="font1">Medan:University of Sumatera Utara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sneddon, James Neil. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian: A Comprehensive Grammar.</span><span class="font1"> London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto.1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: DutaWacana University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thomson, A. J, and Martinet, A.V. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Practical English Grammar.</span><span class="font1"> fourth edition. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1 3</span></p>