---
layout: full_article
title: "TRANSLATION PROCEDURES OF MEDICAL TERMS IN THE BOOK ENTITLED STRESS LESS"
author: "Desak Nyoman Astri Pradnyani Putri"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21884 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-21884"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21884"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TRANSLATION PROCEDURES OF MEDICAL TERMS IN THE BOOK ENTITLED </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">STRESS LESS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Desak Nyoman Astri Pradnyani Putri</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Siki Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jl. Jayagiri XI No.1 Renon, Denpasar (0361) 226314 </span><a href="mailto:desak.astri1112@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">desak.astri1112@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This article aims at investigating the translation procedures of medical terms from English into Indonesian. The data of medical terms was taken from the book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> written by Colbert (2005) and the Indonesian version with the same title, translated by Wandaningsih (2006). This article applied qualitative research method. Observation method was applied at once with the implementation of note-taking technique. Informal and formal methods were applied to present the analyzed data in this article. The theory proposed by Newmark (1988) was applied to analyze the problem of procedures of translation. Newmark (1988) introduced eighteen translation procedures. The findings show that there were eleven translation procedures applied in translating the medical terms in the book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less.</span><span class="font1"> The translation procedures were literal translation, transference, naturalization, descriptive equivalent, through-translation, shift, modulation, recognized translation, reduction and expansion, note and triplets. The application of those procedures was significantly influenced by readership aspect, where the target readers of the book are common people with many kinds of background.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">rds: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">procedures of translation, Newmark’s theory, medical terms,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Stress Less”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Artikel ini bertujuan untuk menjelaskan prosedur penerjemahan istilah-istilah medis dari bahasa Inggris ke bahasa Indonesia. Data berupa istilah-istilah medis ini diambil dari buku yang berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> yang ditulis oleh Colbert (2005) dan versi Indonesianya dengan judul sama yang diterjemahkan oleh Wandaningsih (2006). Metode yang digunakan dalam tesis ini adalah metode penelitian kualitatif. Metode observasi dan digunakan bersamaan dengan teknik mencatat. Metode informal dan formal digunakan untuk menyajikan data yang telah dianalisis pada studi ini. Teori dari Newmark (1988) digunakan untuk menganalisis masalah tentang prosedur penerjemahan. Newmark (1988) mengajukan delapan belas prosedur penerjemahan. Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa terdapat sebelas prosedur yang digunakan untuk menerjemahkan istilah-istilah medis yang terdapat pada buku </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> tersebut</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> Prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan adalah </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">literal translation, transference, naturalization, descriptive equivalent, through-translation, shift, modulation, recognized translation, reduction,</span><span class="font1"> dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">expansion, note,</span><span class="font1"> dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">triplets.</span><span class="font1"> Penggunaan prosedur-prosedur tersebut sangat dipengaruhi oleh aspek pembaca, di mana pembaca buku tersebut adalah orang-orang dengan berbagai macam latar belakang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">prosedur penerjemahan, teori dari Newmark, istilah-istilah medis,</span><span class="font1"> dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Stress Less”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Translation is a phenomenon that has a huge effect on everyday life. This can range from the translation of an international treaty to the following multilingual poster that welcomes customers to a small restaurant (Hatim and Munday, 2004: 3). Translation is significantly needed, particularly, since most books whether fiction or non-fiction in Indonesia are the translation version as a result of lack of original works written in Indonesian language. One example of the translated non-fiction books intended for common people and used as the data in this article is entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less </span><span class="font1">(Colbert, 2005). The book contains practical medical knowledge especially related with mental health intended for not only people with medical background but also for the majority of people with other kinds of background. In order to be able to transfer the practical knowledge of science to many Indonesian people especially those who lack of English proficiency, the Indonesian version was available and translated by Wandaningsih (2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The title of the translation version, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less,</span><span class="font1"> which is also the same as the source language title, becomes the first thing to intrigue this research. It shows that the translator has simply applied the procedure of transference to translate the title, which has relation to medical terms, instead of using other procedures proposed by Newmark (1988). Referring to to Newmark (1988: 81), the procedure of transference happens when the source language words or expressions are translated directly without changing anything. The same thing happens when the translator chose not to translate the title of the book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This fact then leads to more interesting question whether the translator has applied more transference procedure in the translation of medical terms, or whether the translator also applied other procedures, or perhaps combined more than one procedure for a single medical term, defined by Newmark (1988) as couplets procedure. The procedures of translation, according to Newmark (1988: 81), are used for sentences and smaller units of language. For translators, procedures are considered as the ways applied when translating word, phrases, or expressions, and consist of literal translation, transference, naturalization, cultural equivalent, functional equivalent, descriptive</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">equivalent, synonymy, through-translation, shift, modulation, recognized translation, translation </span><span class="font0">2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">label, compensation, reduction and expansion, paraphrase, couplets, notes, and componential analysis. It is not an easy matter to apply or choose the appropriate procedure for certain words, phrases, or expressions, as there are some factors to be considered so that the meaning is accurate and can be understood by the readers, especially when dealing with medical terms. Therefore, this study investigates further the translation procedures applied in translating the medical terms in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> (2005) so that translators are able to get insight on how medical terms are translated by applying the appropriate procedures.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHOD OF RESEARCH</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The method applied to analyze the data in this article is qualitative method which according to Creswell (2003: 18) refers to a procedure or manner in solving the problem by describing or explaining the data which does not include the numbering calculation. The data was taken from the book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> written by Colbert and published by Siloam in 2005, as well as the Indonesian translation with the same title translated by Wandaningsih and published by Immanuel in 2006.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first step to gather the data was reading the book and its translation carefully. Both books were skimmed and then the sentences found with the translation procedures were identified and marked. The sentences were then classified in the different types of translation procedures and analyzed using the relevant theory proposed by Newmark (1988). Finally, the data analysis was presented informally using description technique and supported by formal method consisting of the presentation of figures or tables.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The theory of translation procedures proposed by Newmark (1988) was applied in analyzing the problem. Each translation procedure is discussed in the following.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Literal Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Literal translation occurs when the translator converts the source language (SL) grammatical constructions into their nearest target language (TL) equivalents, but the lexical words are again translated individually (Newmark, 1988:46). It is a procedure that focuses on rendering the words rather than the form. Newmark (1988: 69) clearly mentions that literal translation should be distinguished from word-for-word or one-to-one translation. He argues that word-for-word or one-to-one translation translates the meaning of SL words and transfers SL grammar and word order into TL, while literal translation attempts to achieve the nearest equivalents in TL both in terms of meaning and word order. In addition, Newmark states that (1998:69) “literal translation is correct and must not be avoided, if it secures referential and pragmatic equivalence to the original.” This procedure is accurate when the SL word and the TL meaning correspond, or in other words they refer to the same concept. However, he also says that a good translator does not use literal translation when the produced text is inexact or does not sound as an original text. Here is the example where literal translation is applied to translate a noun phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: …for example menopause, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">hormonal imbalance</span><span class="font1">, …. (p.8)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">…misalnya, menopause, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ketidakseimbangan hormon</span><span class="font1">…. (p.11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Before dealing with translation of noun phrases, some theories proposed by scholars regarding with English noun phrase are important to be discussed. Quirk </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font1"> (1985) point out that a noun phrase consists of four constituents, that is, the head, the determinative, the premodification, and the postmodification. For the example above, the SL noun phrase has a premodifier, not a postmodifier. In addition to English noun phrase rule, it is important to understand the rules in TL as well. In Indonesian grammar, noun phrase is called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">frasa nomina. Nomina</span><span class="font1"> (noun) according to Alwi </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font1"> (2003: 213) can be defined as a word referring to human, animals, things and concept. In Indonesian grammar, if the predicate in a sentence is a verb, then noun tends to function as subject, object or complement. The Indonesian nominal phrases are constructed on the basis on D-M structure. D stands for </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Diterangkan</span><span class="font1"> and M stands for </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Menerangkan.</span><span class="font1"> It signifies that the head comes</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">first and followed or explained by the postmodifier. In this case, the head in TL is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ketidakseimbangan</span><span class="font1"> and followed by a postmodifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hormon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is clear that literal translation was applied in translating the term above because the words in the phrase are translated individually and literally. Then, the words from SL are reconstructed according to the rules in TL so that the rules of TL noun phrase are still maintained. Even though the translator translated the words individually, she did not transfer the order of the words or the order of the head and modifier from SL into TL, since literal translation seeks the nearest equivalent. In addition, applying literal translation will not transfer SL grammar into TL as happens in word-for-word translation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Transference</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Transference</span><span class="font1"> according to Newmark (1988: 81) is the process of transferring an SL word to a TL text. It also includes transliteration, which relates to the conversion to different alphabets. It is a procedure when the translator decides to use the SL word in TL without any change. Transference is quite common in English-Indonesian translation, especially when translating terms that are familiar with the target readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: …and homes for those with leprosy, TB, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">HIV/AIDS</span><span class="font1">. (p. 268)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">…dan rumah-rumah untuk penderita lepra, TBC, dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">HIV/AIDS</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> (P. 340)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translator has chosen to keep the acronym of HIV/AIDS, or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">human immunodeficiency virus infection/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome</span><span class="font1"> according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Pocket Medical Dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> because this acronym is generally known among Indonesian people and commonly used in texts or books. It would be also very accurate if the translator chose to translate the acronym and explain into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sindrom defisiensi imun dapatan</span><span class="font1">, as according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Saku Kedokteran Dorland Edisi Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font1">. However, it might not be understood by a lot of people except by those who have some knowledge in medical. Translators need to consider the fact that this procedure cannot simply be applied for all medical terms especially the ones that are not very familiar for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">readers in Indonesia as they will feel the foreignness of the translation version. It is in line with </span><span class="font0">5</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">what Newmark (1988: 81) argues where the translator has to decide whether or not to transfer the SL words that are unfamiliar with target readers. He suggests that another procedure can be applied to complement transference in order to give more clarity to readers. Moreover, the application of this procedure for all terms will indicate that the translator lacks the background knowledge in medical field.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Naturalization</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This procedure is quite same as the transference procedure. However, while transference is transferring SL words or phrases into TL without changes, this procedure adjust SL words so that it will fit the TL rules. It adapts the SL word first to the normal pronunciation, then to the normal morphology or the word-forms of the TL (Newmark, 1998: 82).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Since the target language is Indonesian, it is important to use naturalization procedure that is in accordance with the rules of Indonesian language. The rules are called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ejaan Yang Disempurnakan (EYD).</span><span class="font1"> The rules from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">EYD</span><span class="font1"> have been applied and referred when the translator has applied naturalization procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: Immune impairements that lead to chronic and recurrent ear infections, colds, sinus infections, sore throats, bouts with the flu, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">bronchitis</span><span class="font1">, or pneumonia, as well as chronic and recurring infections of all types. (p.14)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kerusakan kekebalan tubuh yang mengakibatkan radang telinga, pilek, radang sinus, tenggorokan serak, influenza, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bronkitis</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, atau radang paru-paru yang menahun dan sering kambuh, dan segala jenis infeksi menahun dan sering kambuh. (p.19)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: …she had been to see three different cardiologists who had put her through three different nuclear stress tests, three </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">echocardiograms</span><span class="font1">, and two heart catheterizations, as well as numerous other cardiac tests…. (p.90)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">…Ia telah menjumpai tiga ahli jantung yang telah memberikan tiga tes ^tress nuklir berbeda, tiga </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ekokardiogram</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, dan dua kateterisasi jantung berbeda, maupun sejumlah tes jantung lainnya…. (p.116)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Both examples (3) and (4) have shown that in naturalization procedure, the translator also applies the rules in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">EYD.</span><span class="font1"> It can be clearly observed that the consonant </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font1"> in front of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a, u,o</span><span class="font1"> and in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">front of consonant is changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cch</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ch</span><span class="font1"> in front of vowel and in front of consonant is changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">k.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Descriptive Equivalent</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Application of this procedure reflects its name, which is translating a certain term with its description. Newmark (1988: 83) argues that while description is mostly the focus of this translation procedure, the function can also be added.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: This, in turn, stimulates </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the pituitary gland </span><span class="font1">to secrete another hormone, ACTH. (p.22) TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hormon ini kemudian merangsang </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kelenjar bawah otak </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">untuk mengeluarkan hormon lain, yaitu ACTH.</span><span class="font1"> (p.27)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5) above, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pituary gland</span><span class="font1"> is also known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hypophysis gland.</span><span class="font1"> In Indonesian medical field it is commonly known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kelenjar pituitari</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kelenjar hipofisis,</span><span class="font1"> which means that the phrase is commonly translated using naturalization procedure where the translator slightly adjusts the phrase. However, the data above shows that in TL the phrase becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kelenjar bawah otak. </span><span class="font1">This indicates that the translator has applied descriptive equivalent, since </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pituitary gland,</span><span class="font1"> according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Medical Dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> is described as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">an endocrine gland located at the base of the brain and has a diameter about 1/3 of an inch</span><span class="font1">. It is obvious that the translator wants to elaborate </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pituitary gland</span><span class="font1"> to the target readers so that they can visualize where it is located.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Through-Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This procedure is also known as other names such as calque or loan translation. Newmark (1988: 84), however, prefers the term through-translation as it is a more transparent term than the other two. This procedure is the literal translation of names of organizations that already have recognized terms. However, it can also be applied for components of compounds or phrases.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: DHEA has also been shown to be an effective </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">anti-obesity agent</span><span class="font1">. (p. 261)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">DHEA juga telah diperlihatkan sebagai </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bahan anti kegemukan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">yang efektif. (p. 330)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translation of noun phrase becomes the focus of the example above. The application of through-translation can be seen from translating the modifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">obesity</span><span class="font1"> that has a prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anti.</span><span class="font1"> In this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">case, even though the translator has applied the rule of Indonesian noun phrase in the translation where there is a D-M structure, the translator still maintains the way of expressing and the rule of the prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anti.</span><span class="font1"> If the SL term is translated into TL by following the rules of Indonesian noun phrase, the structure should be as described below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Anti</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Obesity &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Bahan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">kegemukan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;anti</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">However, even though it is the structure based on TL noun phrase rule, it is not acceptable in TL. In addition, since the term is translated by applying through-translation, the TL structure imitates the structure in SL, as described below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Anti Obesity agent</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Bahan anti kegemukan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Even though the translator has applied through-translation, it does not indicate that there is a lack of clarity in the translation because the use of prefix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anti</span><span class="font1"> such as, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anti bakteri, anti peradangan,</span><span class="font1"> etc, has been adopted into Indonesian system and widely known by people in Indonesia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Shifts or Transpositions</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">According to Newmark (1988: 85) transposition or shift reflects the grammatical change that occurs in translation from SL to TL. It is a procedure that basically concerns with word’s form and position.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(7)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Purplish abdominal striae </span><span class="font1">(p.23)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Guratan berwarna keunguan di perut</span><span class="font1"> (p.28)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (7) above, the head of the SL noun phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">striae</span><span class="font1"> and it is modified by two modifiers, namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">purplish</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">abdominal</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Striae</span><span class="font1"> is a plural noun and when it is singular it is called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stria.</span><span class="font1"> As shown in TL, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Striae</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">guratan</span><span class="font1"> indicating the change in terms of plural</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">noun into singular noun. Besides clearly related with plural and singular nouns, it also concerns</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">with the word’s form and position. Shift procedure is applied by changing the position of the words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If it is done by literal translation, the position will be as follows.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Purplish &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;abdominal</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Premodifier premodifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">striae </span><span class="font1">head</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Guratan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;perut</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Head &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;postmodifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">berwarna keunguan </span><span class="font1">postmodifier</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The construction above is acceptable in TL. However, the example shows that the translator has clearly made a slight change on the position, as described below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Purplish abdominal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;striae</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Premodifier premodifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">head</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Guratan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;berwarna keunguan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">di perut</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Head &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;postmodifier &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;postmodifier</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The position shift has been caused by translating the SL premodifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">abdominal</span><span class="font1"> which is an adjective premodifier into TL prepositional phrase as a postmodifier where it consist of a preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">di</span><span class="font1"> with a noun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">perut.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Modulation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark (1988: 88) argues that by applying modulation, translator is able to express a different point of view in the translation. The change in the point of view does not alter the message of SL and does not generate a sense of strangeness in the TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: Those who snore often have anatomical differences, such as an obstructed </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">nasal passage</span><span class="font1">…. (p. 168)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Orang-orang yang mengorok sering mempunyai kelainan anatomis, seperti </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lubang hidung </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">yang terhalang…. (p. 215)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the example above, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nasal passage</span><span class="font1"> is a human organ. According to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Medical dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> it is the uppermost portion of the human respiratory system, the nose is a hollow air passage that functions in breathing and in the sense of smell. In Indonesian, it can be translated as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saluran nasal</span><span class="font1"> or the passage related with respiratory. By translating </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nasal passage</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lubang hidung,</span><span class="font1"> there is a difference in perspective, but there is not any difference in the meaning, since </span><span class="font0">9</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lubang hidung</span><span class="font1"> is also part of human respiratory system. The application of modulation procedure may affect the way of conveying the meaning, but the meaning itself does not change. This procedure also follows the rules of TL so that the target readers will not feel the strangeness in the translation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Recognized Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Translator normally uses the procedure of recognized translation when there is the official or the generally accepted translation of any institutional term. This procedure is best used to translate terms whose translation is already recognized (Newmark, 1988: 89).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: More </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">x-rays </span><span class="font1">were ordered, and ultimately a CT scan was also done (p. 110)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Diperintahkan untuk dilakukan lagi beberapa </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">foto Rontgen</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, dan akhirnya dilakukan CT scan juga.</span><span class="font1"> (p.140)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">X-ray or also known as X-radiation, according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Medical Dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> is a form of electromagnetic radiation. It is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">foto Rontgen</span><span class="font1"> as in the name of a person, Wilhelm Rontgen. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Foto Rontgen</span><span class="font1"> is already familiar and commonly known by most people in Indonesia if dealing with radiation. It was taken from the name, Wilhelm Rontgen who is credited as its inventor, and named it </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">X-radiation</span><span class="font1"> to signify an unknown type of radiation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translator must firstly identify which medical terms are familiar for most target readers in Indonesia and which are not. In that way, by applying recognized translation as in the example above, the translator does not have to add more explanation to the translation since this procedure allows the translator to use generally accepted terms. Consequently, the translation will not become too long, which sometimes can distract the target readers and the translation will still provide accurate and clear message to the readers.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Reduction and Expansion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark (1988: 90) argues that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reduction</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Expansion</span><span class="font1"> can be practiced intuitively when the translator is conducting the work since it is the translator’s job to transfer the message from SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">into TL accurately. In this case, the translator needs to make some adjustments either by reducing or expanding the translation. In reduction procedure, the translator is more likely to reduce in the number of elements that form the SL. When applying this procedure, translator needs to make sure that no crucial information is dropped in translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(9) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: People in the exhaustion stage are very prone to developing autoimmune diseases such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Hashimoto’s tyroiditis</span><span class="font1">…. (p.27)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Orang-orang dalam tahap kelelahan sangat mudah menderita penyakit-penyakit yang berhubungan dengan kekebalan tubuh, seperti </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">radang kelenjar tiroid</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">….</span><span class="font1"> (p.34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (9) above, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hashimoto’s thyroditis</span><span class="font1"> is one type of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroiditis</span><span class="font1"> disease, according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Pocket Medical Dictionary.</span><span class="font1"> Moreover, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroiditis</span><span class="font1"> is the inflammation of the thyroid gland. The procedure above can be considered as reduction since the translator merely translates the term </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroiditis</span><span class="font1"> by applying descriptive equivalent and giving explanation in TL which becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">radang kelenjar tiroid.</span><span class="font1"> However, the translator eliminates the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hashimoto</span><span class="font1"> in TL which reduces the element in TL. According to the medical dictionary, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroiditis</span><span class="font1"> has many types such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hashimoto's Thyroiditis, De Quervain's thyroiditis, Riedel's thyroiditis</span><span class="font1">, etc. Despite the reduction of the element and leading to the reduction of the explanation of the disease type, the target readers will not lose crucial information in the translation. It is based on the fact that every different type of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroiditis</span><span class="font1"> disease firstly originates from the abnormality in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thyroid gland</span><span class="font1"> which has been conveyed correctly into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">radang kelenjar tiroid</span><span class="font1"> by the translator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On the other hand, expansion procedure refers to the case where the translator exceeds the number of words of the SL in translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(10) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: Side effects from Provera include blood clots, depression, nausea, insomnia, breast cancer, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">fluid retention</span><span class="font1">, breast tenderness, as well as other symptoms. (p. 263)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Akibat samping dari Provera termasuk gumpalan darah, depresi, mual, kesulitan tidur, kanker payudara, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">penyimpanan cairan tubuh</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, payudara melunak, maupun gejala-gejala lainnya.</span><span class="font1"> (p. 332)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The addition procedure also occurs in translating the SL noun phrase above. The phrase above has </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">noun + noun</span><span class="font1"> construction where the head of the phrase which is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">retention</span><span class="font1"> is premodified by another noun which is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fluid.</span><span class="font1"> If the phrase is translated literally, it becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">penyimpanan cairan,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">as it needs to follow the rule of Indonesian noun phrase. However, it is clearly observed that the translator has added another word which is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tubuh</span><span class="font1"> as the second premodifier for the head. This indicates that the translator has decided to give more emphasis and clarity so that the target readers will not confused </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fluid</span><span class="font1"> as another type of fluid, but clearly visualize it as the fluid existing in human body.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Notes</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">According to Newmark (1988: 92) additional information in the translation may take various forms, such as within the text, notes at bottom of page, notes at end of chapter, notes or glossary at end of book. After observing the books, note procedures are found with the combination of other procedures. Firstly, note procedure is combined with literal translation as it is presented below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Cardiovascular disease </span><span class="font1">and hypertension, elevated cholesterol levels, arrhythmias (abnormal heart rhythms), mitral valve prolapsed, and palpitations…. (p.14)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Penyakit kardiovaskuler (penyakit jantung dan pembuluh darah) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan hipertensi (tekanan darah tinggi), kadar kolesterol yang meningkat, arrhythmias (irama detak jantung yang tidak normal), mitral valve prolapsed (letak katup jantung tidak normal), dan palpitations (jantung berdebar-debar…. (p.18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL noun phrase above is translated literally into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">penyakit kardiovaskuler,</span><span class="font1"> where the translator has literally translated the words while still being in accordance with the TL noun phrase rule. In order to make clarity, especially on the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kardiovaskuler</span><span class="font1"> which many people are not familiar with, the translator has also inserted additional information in form of round bracket.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Couplets</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark (1988: 91) argues that translator may also combine two, three or four different procedures when conducting translation process. Combining two procedures is described as couplets, combining three procedures is described as triplets and combining four procedures is described as quadruplets.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(12) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL:Symptoms of a folic acid deficiency include irritability, weakness, forgetfulness, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">megaloblastic anemia</span><span class="font1">, weight loss, apathy, hostility, paranoid behavior, palpitations, headaches, gastrointestinal disturbances, and diarrhea. (p.190)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">12</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gejala-gejala kehabisan asam folic termasuk lekas marah, lemah, pelupa, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kurang darah megaloblastic (inti sel darah merahnya membesar secara tidak normal)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, penurunan berat badan, lesu, rasa permusuhan, perilaku yang penuh ketakutan, jantung berdebar-debar, sakit kepala, pencernaan terganggu dan diare.</span><span class="font1"> (p.241)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (12), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">megaloblastic anemia</span><span class="font1"> is translated using recognized translation and transference procedures as it becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kurang darah megaloblastic. Anemia,</span><span class="font1"> if according to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dorland’s Medical Dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> does not actually mean </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lack of blood</span><span class="font1"> as it is conveyed in the TL, but it means a condition when there is a decrease in amount of hemoglobin of red blood cells in the blood. The translator has decided to translate </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anemia</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kurang darah,</span><span class="font1"> since this terms is very familiar with people in Indonesia. When people talk about this condition, most of them rarely refer it as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anemia</span><span class="font1"> but simply refer it as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kurang darah.</span><span class="font1"> In this case the translator has decided to apply recognized translation, which allows the translator to apply familiar term in her translation. However, there is the unavailability of equivalence of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">megaloblastic</span><span class="font1"> in Indonesian language. As a result, the translator merely transfers the word without any change, which indicates the application of transference procedure. In this case, more explanation is needed in form of note. This is done so that the target readers who have different kinds of background can also understand the meaning clearly. Newmark (1988: 91) argues that note is applicable as long as it does not affect or disturb the flow of reading. Observing the TL, the application of note does not affect the flow of reading since it is not very long and it is within the text. In the end, the translator has decided to apply three procedures, namely recognized translation, transference, and note, which according to Newmark is considered as triplets.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis above, there are eleven translation procedures out of eighteen translation procedures proposed by Newmark (1988) applied to translate the medical terms in the book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less</span><span class="font1"> (2005), namely literal translation, transference, naturalization, descriptive equivalent, through-translation, shift, modulation, recognized translation, reduction and expansion,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">note, and triplets. Five procedures, namely literal translation, transference, naturalization, through-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">13</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">translation, and shift emphasize accuracy of the message since they maintain some elements of SL or imitate some SL structures. The other procedures, namely descriptive equivalent, modulation, recognized translation, reduction and expansion, note, and triplets focus on the readability since they adjust the SL terms into TL to suit the target readers. This based on the aspect of readership where focus is on the target readers who are people with many kinds of background, not only medical background. Therefore, the translator has decided to apply eleven procedures with the hopes of maintaining the accuracy while attempting to make the translation as natural as possible for the target readers.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Alwi, H. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et. al.</span><span class="font1"> 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Colbert, Don. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less.</span><span class="font1"> Florida: Siloam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Colbert, Don. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stress Less.</span><span class="font1"> (Translated by Sri Wandaningsih). Jakarta: Immanuel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Creswell, J. W. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches</span><span class="font1"> (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hatim, B. and Munday, J. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation: An Advance Resource Book</span><span class="font1">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation.</span><span class="font1"> Shanghai: Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quirk </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et. al.</span><span class="font1"> 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language.</span><span class="font1"> London: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>