---
layout: full_article
title: "THE CONVERSATIONAL IMPLICATURES AND THE COOPERATIVE PRINCIPLES IN MONSTERS UNIVERSITY"
author: "Marcelia Hardianti Rukmini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">THE CONVERSATIONAL IMPLICATURES AND THE COOPERATIVE PRINCIPLES IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MONSTERS UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Marcelia Hardianti Rukmini</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah ujaran dapat mengandung makna tambahan terlepas dari makna literal yang dimilikinya. Fenomena linguistik ini kemudian diformulasikan oleh Grice (1975) sebagai Implikatur Percakapan. Dengan tujuan memprediksi dan menjelaskan secara lebih mendalam tentang Implikatur percakapan, Grice (1974) mengembangkan teori lain bernama prinsip –prinsip koperatif. Prinsip ini mengandung empat bidal yang dikenal dengan nama bidal Grice. Dalam studi ini, akan membahas implikatur percakapan, makna tambahan, serta kaitannya terhadap prinsip koperatif dalam sebuah naskah film yang berjudul Monsters University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Data dalam studi berbentuk ujaran-ujaran yang dikutip langsung dari naskah film Monsters University dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi. Lantas, data-data tersebut dianalisa melalui metode dekriptif kualitatif. Teori yang diterapkan meliputi teori Implikatur dan prinsip-prinsip koperatif, yang mana kedua teori tersebut dikemukakan oleh Grice (1975).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dari hasil analisa, diperoleh kesimpulan bahwa implikatur percakapan, sengaja atau tidak sengaja, telah diadopsi oleh tokoh-tokoh dalam naskah film Monsters University. Implikatur percakapan membuat makna tambahan yang sangat erat kaitannya dengan konteks situasi. Dengan mengacu pada makna tambahan tersebut, tokoh-tokoh dalam film dianggap telah ‘menaati’ prinsip-prinsip kooperatif yang memang selayaknya diindahkan dalam percakapan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Implikatur percakapan, prinsip- prinsip koperatif, bidal Grice.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Utterances are produced to convey messages or ideas. However, sometimes one utterance may contain hidden meaning apart from its literal meaning. Therefore, it should be interpreted by the hearer using his/her intelligence which relates to the context of why the particular utterance occurs. This kind of linguistic phenomenon was then formulated by Grice (1975) as implicature. Implicature is used to bridge the gap between what is literally said and what is conveyed. In the further development,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">there are two kinds of implicatures; conventional and conversational implicatures. With regard to this study, conversational implicatures was one of the main topics being discussed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Later on, Grice (1975) developed another theory to explain and predict conversational implicatures, namely the Cooperative Principles. The cooperative principles consist of four basic maxims called the Gricean Maxims that help to describe how people attempt to be cooperative in their communication. The Gricean maxims are; Quantity, Quality, Manner, and Relevance. In this research a movie script entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1"> was chosen as the data source since conversational implicatures were found within the utterances produced by the characters of the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background explained above, the discussion within this study was limited on finding the following problems:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What conversational implicatures are conveyed by the characters in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the implied meanings in each conversational implicature found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are the uses of Gricean maxims in conversational implicatures found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In accordance with the problems formulated above, the aims that were projected to be achieved on this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out conversational implicatures in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the implied meanings within each conversational implicature in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monster University</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the uses of Gricean maxims in conversational implicatures found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monsters University</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data used in this study are in the form of utterances and were taken from the movie script entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Monster University</span><span class="font1"> using documentation method. The data were analyzed using descriptive qualitative method. The analysis is categorized as descriptive analysis which described the data based on the certain theories (Arikunto, 2010). The data were classified as qualitative since they are in the form of words and script that can be related to certain meanings, value, and definition (Mahendra, 2009).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conversational implicatures are the situations or propositions which a hearer needs to assume in order to preserve his/her view of the speaker as a cooperative partner in communication (Grice, 1975). This assumption eventually will lead to the inference of the genuine utterance. In regards with the cooperative principle, Grice (1975) explains the connection between implicatures and how it may follow or break down Gricean maxims into two ways; violating and flouting. The following examples represent conversational implicatures with their effects towards the Gricean maxims; a) Following the Gricean Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RANDY: Come on Mike- it’s a fraternity and sorority party. We have to go!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">We flunk that scaring final, we are done. I’m not taking any chances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation happened on the first day of school. Randy and Mike were talking in their dorm room, where Randy excitedly asked Mike to go to a fraternity – sorority party with him. However, Mike uttered an implicatures as a response. Implicatures promise to bridge the gap of what is said and what is literally conveyed (Levinson, 1983: 98). The gap where Mike should answer with yes or no was replaced by explaining the consequence of ‘flunking’ the final exam. Therefore an inference within Mike’s utterance can be paraphrased as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RANDY: Come on Mike- it’s a fraternity and sorority party. We have to go!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">No, I don’t think that we have to go to that party. I’d rather study because if we flunk that scaring final, we will be expelled from the scaring program. I’m not taking any chances of being expelled.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If one took the utterance literally without concerning the above inference, Mike’s respond seems irrelevant since Randy only said, “we have to go!” Mike did not respond with simply a refusal or an acceptance. As a result, Mike genuine utterance was considered as flouting the maxim of relevance since the essential rule of this maxim is to make one’s contribution relevant (Levinson, 1983: 102).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">However, the inference of implicature above was constructed in order to preserve the assumption that the two participants had been conversed in such cooperative way. Thus, by concerning the relevancy within Mike implicit refusal in, “No, I don’t think that we have to go to that party. I’d rather study because if we flunk that scaring final, we will be expelled from the scaring program. I’m not taking any chances of being expelled”, Mike was assumed to be following the maxim of relevance. By this point, it could be concluded that Gricean Maxims are not always adhered to a genuine utterance. It is possible to relate Gricean Maxims into inference (Levinson, 1983: 102).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flouting the Gricean Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Flouting maxim means breaking the maxim in a flagrant way (Grice, 1975). Take the following conversation as the example;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: Look, they don’t need to be good. I’m gonna carry the whole team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: Really? And who’s gonna carry you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hey, you wanna go back to can design, you know where the door is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This scene was taken after both Mike and Sulley realized the fact that the rests of their team – Oozma Kappa fraternity – were misfits with no experience in scaring. They both argued concerning on how they would win the game with that condition. Mike was brave enough to take the responsible for their team. However, Sulley, who had no confidence with Mike’s leadership, continuing to ridicule Mike by asking pointless question. Sick of Sulley’s complaint, Mike implicitly brought an option within utterance, “hey, you wanna go back to can design, you know where the door is.” Consider the following inference of conversational implicature;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Look, they don’t need to be good. I’m gonna carry the whole</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: Really? And who’s gonna carry you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MIKE: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hey, come with me joining the Scare Game or you can leave and go</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">back to can design class.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It was obvious that the inference did not answer Sulley’s question. By concerning back on the end of Hymes’ theory, Mike uttered the implicature simply because he aimed to stop Sulley complaining. Mike’s patience was beginning to run out which resulting him to almost kick Sulley out of the team. Therefore, the irrelevancy between Mike’s inferences with the Sulley’s question triggered an exploitation of maxim of relevance, or in Grice’s term, it was called as flouting the maxim of relevance (Levinson, 1983: 109) since Mike gave no relevant answer which related into Sulley’s question.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Violating one to invoke another Gricean Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A person wants to fulfill two conflicting Gricean maxims; however it results in a clash between those Gricean maxims (Grice, 1975: 51).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">HARDSCRABBLE: Do you think he’s scary?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He’s the heart and soul of the team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">HARDSCRABBLE: DO YOU think he’s scary?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: (no response)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sulley attempted to be as cooperative as possible by giving Dean Hardscrabble his opinion. He tried to respond by providing the fact about Mike which he knew for sure; the fact that he’s the heart and soul of the team. However, it is clear that Sulley failed to provide answer with sufficient information since Dean Hardscrabble repeated her question, “DO YOU think he’s scary?” Take a look at the following inference;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">HARDSCRABBLE: Do you think he’s scary?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I do not care whether he’s scary or not. But you should know that he is the heart and soul of the team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">HARDSCRABBLE: DO YOU think he’s scary?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SULLEY: (no response)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The paraphrase above indirectly concluded that Sulley desired to fulfill two different maxims; maxim of quantity and maxim of relevance. This act triggered a clash between them which resulting in violating maxim of quantity in order to invoke maxim of relevance (Grice, 1975: 51). The violation happened because Sulley avoided admitting Mike’s weakness, therefore the question remained unanswered. Instead, Sulley gave other information by bringing positive facts about Mike since Sulley did not want to lie towards a person whose authority was above him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conversational Implicatures, intentionally or unintentionally, were adopted in the conversation among the characters inside Monsters University. The context which mainly focuses on the rivalry and competition has triggered most of the use of conversational implicatures in the discourse. By referring towards the inference or the implied meaning, it could be concluded that every single participant eventually attempts to be able to engage in such cooperative conversation. Among the four Gricean Maxims within the cooperative principles (quantity, quality, relevance and manner), the findings show that the maxim of relevance was responsible prominently in producing the conversational implicatures found. It occurred because the characters tend to convey irrelevant respond towards others’ questions or requests. Hence, a deeper interpretation of the irrelevant answer (in the form of implied meaning) is needed to preserve the assumption that the characters obey the Cooperative Principles.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Arikunto, Suharsimi. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prosedur Penelitian; Suatu Pendekatan Praktik</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denzin &amp;&nbsp;Y. Lincoln. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Handbook of Qualitative Research</span><span class="font1">. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gerson, Daniel. Monsters University. Movie Script. 2011. (cited 2014 March) available from URL: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://waltdisneystudiosawards.com/downloads/"><span class="font1">http://waltdisneystudiosawards.com/downloads/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">monsters-university-screenplay.pdf.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grice, H. Paul. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Logic and Conversation.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge, MA: Harvard University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Levinson, Stephen C. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Discourse</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publisher</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. Cornwall, Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>