---
layout: full_article
title: "TRANSLATION TECHNIQUES OF TWIN FORMULAS  PROVERBS INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "I Made Joni Jatmika"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-14003 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-14003"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-14003"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TRANSLATION TECHNIQUES OF TWIN FORMULAS PROVERBS INTO INDONESIAN</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">I Made Joni Jatmika</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Program Studi Linguistik Konsentrasi Terjemahan Universitas Udayana Jl. Pulau Nias No.13 Denpasar 80114</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Telepon (0361) 250033, Ponsel 081916229117 </span><a href="mailto:jonijatmika@gmail.com"><span class="font0">jonijatmika@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">This study was aimed at describing the unique characteristics of twin formulas and analyzing translation techniques applied. The meaning equivalence within the twin formulas was analyzed based on denotative and connotative approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Library research and qualitative method were used in this study. The proverbs being analyzed were taken from a bilingual self-help book, entitled “Awaken the Giant Within” written by Robbins (1991) and its translation </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0"> translated by Saputra (2006). The theory about proverb types proposed by Mieder (2004) was used as the main theory. Translation theory proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet (2002) were used to analyze the translation techniques. In relation to denotative and connotative meaning of proverbs, meaning equivalence theory proposed by Leech (1974) was used to support the analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The collected data showed that there were 15 of 113 data were recognized having the characteristics of twin formulas. Alliterative and opposite patterns were found as variation of twin formulas. The literal translation was the translation technique mostly used. Besides, transposition, modulation and borrowing techniques were employed. Related to the meaning of proverbs, most forms were transferred denotatively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font0">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Proverbs, translation techniques, meaning equivalence, twin formulas, alliterative and opposite patterns</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk mendeskripsikan, karakteristik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">twin formula</span><span class="font0"> dan menganalisis teknik penerjemahan yang digunakan. Makna yang terdapat pada peribahasa berjenis </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">twin formula </span><span class="font0">kemudian dianalisis menggunakan pendekatan makna denotatif dan konotatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Studi ini menggunakan metode kualitatif dan penelitian kepustakaan. Peribahasa yang dianalisis diambil dari buku dwibahasa yang buku sumbernya berjudul </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Awaken the Giant Within </span><span class="font0">(1991) yang ditulis oleh Robbins, yang dialihbahasakan oleh Saputra berjudul “Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri” (2006). Adapun teori utama yang digunakan yaitu teori jenis peribahasa yang dikemukakan oleh Mieder (2004) dan teori teknik penerjemahan yang kemukakan oleh Vinay dan Dalbernet (2002). Upaya menyempurnakan analisis makna menggunakan teori pendukung tentang makna denotatif dan konotatif yang dikemukakan oleh Leech (1974).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Berdasarkan data yang telah dikumpulkan maka ditemukan peribahasa yang berjenis dan memiliki karakteristik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">twin formula</span><span class="font0"> berjumlah 15 dari total keseluruhan 113 peribahasa. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Twin formula</span><span class="font0"> memiliki dua sifat turunan, yaitu bentuk pengulangan (a</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lliterative pattern</span><span class="font0">) dan pertentangan (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">opposite pattern</span><span class="font0">). Terjemahan secara literal merupakan teknik terjemahan yang paling sering digunakan dalam menerjemahkan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">twin formula</span><span class="font0">. Teknik penerjemahan lainnya yang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ditemukan dalam penerjemahan peribahasa berjenis </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">twin formula</span><span class="font0"> yaitu </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">transposition, modulation, </span><span class="font0">dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing.</span><span class="font0"> Dalam kaitannya dengan makna peribahasa, ditemukan bahwa makna yang terdapat pada setiap elemen yang ada pada teks sumber dapat tersampaikan secara denotatif pada teks sasaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font0">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Peribahasa, teknik penerjemahan, kesetaraan makna, twin formula, bentuk pengulangan dan pertentangan</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Many people do not aware of the existence of proverbs in their life, even though the proverbs exist in both spoken and written language. Proverbs are included in some books, such as short story books, motivational books, or even compiled in one proverbs book. Self-help book is one example of many which applied translation activity. Moreover, self-help books typically advertise themselves as being able to increase self-awareness and performance, including satisfaction with one's life. “Awaken The Giant Within” by Robbins (1991) is coming as the choice through the analysis for this book; it is the best-seller book in the world and translated into many languages including into Indonesian language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Honeck (1997: 11) defines in linguistic standpoint that proverb is phonological, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, or even semiotic (complex sign) entity. As a linguistic entity, proverbs are also known as complex combinations of intentions, meanings and functions, which, from a pragmatic perspective, distance the speaker from the message conveyed, thereby requiring the listener to contribute much in order to decipher the precise meaning of the proverb. As stated by Norrick (1985: 2) proverb is part of language, like simplex words and idioms, proverbs are form-meaning units which must be included in any complete language description. Proverbs in Greek known as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">paremia</span><span class="font0"> are used to name the study of proverb, paremiology. Furthermore, the collection of proverbs is known as paremiography, and paremiologist is someone who studies proverbs. The paremiographers are concerning themselves with the collection and classification of proverbs, meanwhile the paremiologists address such questions as the definition, form, structure, style,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">content, function, meaning, and value of proverbs. The proverbs are then divided into proverbial subgenres such as: Proverbial expressions, proverbial comparisons, proverbial interrogatives, twin formulas, wellerisms, and proverbial exaggerations (Mieder, 2004: 13).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">One interesting proverb type that attracts the intention is called twin formulas. Twin (binary) formulas are traditional word pairs that are linked together by alliteration and/or rhyme, as for example “short and sweet”, “tit for tat”, “spick and span”, “rags and riches”, “sick or swim”, “men and mice”. In one situation, the twin formulas may link a word to its opposite, such: “give and take” (Mieder; xii, 14). This type of proverbs has some patterns which other types do not have, they are alliterative pattern and opposite pattern.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Related to translation activity, lack of background knowledge of proverb type and translation techniques may cause misunderstanding to the intended meaning of proverbs. By knowing proverb types, it must be easier literally and contextually to translate the proverbs. Besides, the misleading translator’s technique of translation is also causing that misperception. On this situation, the equivalents of both source proverbs and target proverbs are needed to analyze. There are two procedures as techniques of translation proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet (in Molina and Albir: 2002); they are direct and oblique translation procedures. Direct translation occurs when two lannguages are very close to each other. This technique occurs when structural and conceptual elements of the source language can be transposed into the target language. Direct translation consists of three sub classification techniques; they are borrowing, calque, and literal translation. Meanwhile, oblique translation occurs when word for word translation is not possible. This translation procedure is also used to find the variation of sayings in target language. It has four techniques, they are: transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation. These procedures are then used as reference in assessing the translation equivalence by comparing source and target text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In order to connect the possible translation, specifically the equivalence of the forms and meanings in proverbs, denotative and connotative approach proposed by Leech (1974) is used to</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">complete the analysis. The factors affecting the translation of proverbs then can be seen by looking at the major linguistic change. Those denotative and connotative approach theories can be generated as the following possibilities:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A/ A<sup>1</sup> (SL Proverbs) = B/ B<sup>1</sup> (TL Proverbs) = C (Actual meaning)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The proverbs marked A and B are usually having the same words and sentence structures for the translators are basically using direct translation. The meaning is then transferred denotatively. Meanwhile, the proverbs marked A<sup>1</sup> and B<sup>1</sup> might have different words and sentence structures for the translators are using oblique translation. This A<sup>1</sup> and B<sup>1</sup> condition usually happens in the type of proverbs named proverbial expression as they are usually translated using the equivalence technique. In addition, the meaning is denotatively or connotatively transferred. Furthermore, the translator’s experience and differences in cultural background cause the variation. The connotative proverbs in A<sup>1</sup> and B<sup>1</sup> are basically having one actual or real meaning, which is called C the message.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this point, twin formulas are then classified through their characteristics found in the sample data and the translation techniques proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet (2002) are used to analyze the data. The equivalence of meaning between the source text and target text is also analyzed based on denotative and connotative meaning approaches.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">The main approach used in this paper is descriptive qualitative. Descriptive is used to explain the smallest unit of the study, in this case, proverbs categorized as twin formulas including the elements in them such words, phrases, and sentences. Based on Creswell (2012: 19), qualitative research tends to analyze words or images and then group them into larger meanings of understanding such as codes, categories, or even themes. Furthermore, Flick (2009; 4) stated that qualitative research is the work with texts, the methods for collecting information-interviews or</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">observations-produce data, which are transformed into texts by recording and transcription. The data were collected through library research. Library research is one method used in qualitative research utilizing some sources of information such as books, artifacts, texts, etc (Sugiyono, 2012: 82). The collected data are analyzed qualitatively using the related theories to give clear description of the concerning topic including the types of proverbs theory proposed by Mieder (2004) and translation technique theory by Vinay and Dalbernet (in Molina and Albir, 2002)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected from the source book entitled “Awaken the Giant Within” by Robbins published in 1991 and its Indonesian version </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri </span><span class="font0">published in 2006 and translated by Saputra. The author, Robbins, is an expert in psychology of change. He provides a step-by-step program teaching the fundamental lessons of self-mastery that enables the readers to discover true purpose, take control of life, and harness the forces that shape destiny. The collected data show that 15 of 113 data samples were recognized having characteristics of twin formulas. There are two variations of this twin formulas type as mentioned above, they are: alliterative and opposite patterns.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Twin formulas type is categorized as the proverb that is linked its words together with alliteration and/or rhyme. The words linked are usually paired, and for this is called twin (binary). Based on Mieder (2004: xii,14), this type of proverbs sometimes comes in opposite pairs such “give” and “take”. Based on this description, twin formulas proverb is then divided into two patterns, they are alliterative and opposite patterns of twin formulas. Each pattern and technique of translation is explained as the following sub section.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Translation Technique of Alliterative Pattern of Twin Formulas</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">The alliterative pattern of twin formulas usually has consistent rhyme pattern. The rhymed pattern has two levels, word and sentence levels. The pattern is categorized in word level when there are two words paired in one line, which are rhymed one to another at the front, middle, or end of the words in the line of proverb. Meanwhile, the pattern is categorized in the sentence level when there are some phrases or expressions in different lines which are rhymed one to another. The rhymed phrases may also come at the beginning, middle, or end of the lines in proverb. Below are given some samples related to alliterative pattern.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data 1:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">Ask </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">you </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">receive. Seek </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">you </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">find; knock, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">it </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">be opened to you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 162)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mintalah, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">diberikan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">kepadamu</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">; carilah, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kamu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mendapat; ketoklah, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pintu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dibukakan bagimu</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0">, 2006:202)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Division of data 1,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">(ST) Line 1: </span><span class="font0">ask </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">you </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">receive &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">(TT) Line 1: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">… kepadamu</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 2: </span><span class="font0">seek </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">you </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">find &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 2: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kamu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 3: </span><span class="font0">knock, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">and </span><span class="font0">it </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">will </span><span class="font0">be opened to you &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 3: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">maka akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bagimu</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Alliterative unit marker: </span><span class="font0">and … will &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Alliterative unit marker: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">maka… akan</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data 2:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: Each of us </span><span class="font0">inevitable; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Each of us </span><span class="font0">limitless—</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">each of us </span><span class="font0">with his or her right upon the earth; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Each of us </span><span class="font0">allow'd the eternal purports of the earth; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Each of us </span><span class="font0">here as divinely as any is here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 432)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kita masing-masing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tak terelakkan; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kita masing-masing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tak terbatas—</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kita masing-masing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dengan haknya di muka bumi; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kita masing-masing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">diberikan makna kekal di muka bumi; </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kita masing-masing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">di muka bumi sini adalah sama ilahinya dengan yang lain</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0">, 2006: 541)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Division of data 2,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">(ST) Line 1: each of us </span><span class="font0">inevitable</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 2: each of us </span><span class="font0">limitless</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 3: each of us </span><span class="font0">with his or her right upon the earth</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 4: each of us </span><span class="font0">allow'd the eternal purports of the earth</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 5: each of us </span><span class="font0">here as divinely as any is here.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Alliterative unit marker: each of us</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>(TT) Line 1 to 5: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kita masing-masing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Alliteration level in both data samples 1 and 2 above is categorized in sentence level. In sample 1, alliterative marker “and … will” is rhymed in the middle of each line. Line 1 and line 2 are identically rhymed by pronoun “you”, while line 3 is using pronoun “it”. The difference of placement of rhyme through difference line in twin formulas especially in alliterative pattern can be seen in the division of sample 2. This sample has five lines, which are identically rhymed using the alliterative marker “each of us” at the beginning of each line. For this, sample 2 is also categorized to have sentence level of twin formulas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The uniqueness of this proverb occurs in its pattern which is repeated within the proverb. The repetition occurs in its rhymes, words, and phrases. The repeated rhymes, words, and phrases are translated literally, such in data 1 which has “… and you will” which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">maka akan…kepadamu</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">maka kamu akan</span><span class="font0">. Both the translations have the same literal sense in which the translation follows the structure of TT. In addition, there is one additional element placed in the last line of sample1, the noun </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pintu</span><span class="font0">. The noun </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pintu</span><span class="font0"> is placed to complete the rational sense of the proverb. There is another option to replace the noun </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pintu</span><span class="font0"> which is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">hatinya,</span><span class="font0"> but that is not the direct</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">purpose of the translation. It can be irrational if the additional noun is changed into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pintu surga</span><span class="font0">. The modulation technique was also used in the word “receive” which was literally translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">menerima</span><span class="font0">, but in the proverb point of view it was translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">diberikan padamu</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data 2 also shows the repeated form “each of us” which is translated similarly in each line into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kita masing-masing</span><span class="font0">. Most all units in data 2 were translated literally, but one unit “his” and “her” in “his and her right” was eliminated and was just translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">haknya.</span><span class="font0"> This elimination was intended to avoid awkwardness in the translation for its literal translation can be </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">hak dia lelaki dan dia perempuan.</span><span class="font0"> The Indonesian language does not have gender distinguisher of possessive adjective as in “his and her” of the English language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Data 3:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">Go put your </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">creed </span><span class="font0">into your </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">deed</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 473)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Amalkanlah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kepercayaan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Anda dalam </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tindakan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Anda</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0">, 2006: 595)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Data 4:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">Let the word go forth from this time and place, to </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">friend </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">foe </span><span class="font0">alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans, born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient heritage, and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed, and to which we are committed today, at home, and around the world. Let every nation know, whether it wishes us </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">well </span><span class="font0">or </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ill</span><span class="font0">, that we shall </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">pay </span><span class="font0">any </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">price</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">bear </span><span class="font0">any </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">burden</span><span class="font0">, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 490-491)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Biarlah tersiar kabar dari waktu dan tempat ini, bagi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kawan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">maupun </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lawan</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, bahwa obornya telah diteruskan kepada warga Amerika generasi baru, yang dilahirkan di abad ini, yang ditempa oleh perang, yang didisiplinkan oleh perdamaian yang berat dan pahit, yang bangga akan keturunannya, dan tidak bersedia menyaksikan atau membiarkan dilanggarnya hakhak asasi manusia yang menjadi komitmen bangsa ini sejak dahulu hingga sekarang, di dalam negeri maupun di seluruh dunia. Biarlah semua bangsa mengetahui, apakah mereka itu berniat </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">baik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ataupun </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buruk </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">terhadap kami, bahwa kami akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">membayar harga berapa pun</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">memikul</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">beban seberat apa pun</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, menghadapi kesusahan seberat apa pun, mendukung kawan mana pun, melawan lawan mana pun, untuk memastikan kelangsungan dan keberhasilan kemerdekaan</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0">, 2006: 614-615)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Besides, the alliterative pattern of twin formulas has another word level, in which the rhymed words are placed in one of the lines through the proverb. Data 3 and 4 represent the variation of this alliterative pattern. Words pair in data 3, “</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">creed</span><span class="font0"> into your </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">deed</span><span class="font0">” are rhymed one to another on their last syllable. The word pair in data 3 is placed in one line. However, when it is compared to data 4, the word pairs “pay any price”; “bear any burden” are placed in different line. Both those pairs have front alliterative letter. In data 4, there are also words pairs rhymed at the front letter such as “friend and foe”, and rhymed at the last letter of the words such as “well or ill”. Both pairs “friend and foe” and “well or ill” are also categorized as having opposite pattern of twin formulas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Transposition technique occurs in data 3 and 4. The noun phrase “your creed”, for example, is translated into head-modifier </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kepercayaan anda</span><span class="font0">. The noun phrase “your deed” is also translated by using the transposition (structure shift) into the head-modifier </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tindakan anda</span><span class="font0">. In terms of alliterative pattern, both words “cre</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ed</span><span class="font0">” and “de</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ed</span><span class="font0">” are alliterated at the last syllable; however, in their translation the sound of the syllable is changed into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kepercaya</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tindak</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font0">. The next alliterative word pairs are “</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">f</span><span class="font0">riend” and “</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">f</span><span class="font0">oe” which is having opposite pattern but also alliterative at their first letter which are translated with the change in the last syllable rhymed </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">wan</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">la</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">wan</span><span class="font0">. Further sample of this type is in the opposite words “well” and “ill” which alliterate in the two last letters, and they are translated to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">b</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aik</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">b</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">uruk</span><span class="font0"> which are alliterated at their first letter. This case is different from the phrase “</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">p</span><span class="font0">ay any </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">p</span><span class="font0">rice”, which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">me</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mbayar harga ber</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">apa pun</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font0">and the phrase “</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">b</span><span class="font0">ear any </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">b</span><span class="font0">urden” which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">me</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mikul beban seberat </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">apa pun</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> They match not in the word level rhyme, but in different lines which is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">me ………..apa pun</span><span class="font0">. Besides, data</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">4 applied transposition (unit shift) in the word “home” which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">di dalam negeri </span><span class="font0">specifically from the smaller unit to higher unit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word “go” in data 3 is merged with the word “put” which actually has </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">letakkanlah</span><span class="font0"> as translation, but then it was translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">amalkanlah.</span><span class="font0"> The technique used in the translation of “go put” into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">amalkanlah</span><span class="font0"> is equivalence, but using reference theory for </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">amalkanlah</span><span class="font0"> precisely matches the phrase than the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">letakkanlah</span><span class="font0">. This situation also occurs in data 4, where the noun phrase “Proud of </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">our ancient heritage</span><span class="font0">” is translated to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bangga akan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">keturunannya</span><span class="font0">. From this point, literal translation, modulation, equivalence and transposition (structure and unit shift) were found in the translation of alliterative pattern of twin formulas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Most all meanings in data 1 to 4 are denotatively transferred to TT. Literal translation and modulation transfer the meaning of the whole text denotatively although in some situations the modulation technique changes the proverb point of view. In this situation, the literal translation technique follows A = B formula, which means that the whole meaning of proverb is denotatively transferred, while equivalence technique follows A<sup>1</sup> = B formula means that the words/phrases or even the proverb in ST is transferred from its idiomatic or connotative meaning to denotative meaning in TT.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Translation Technique of Opposite Pattern of Twin Formulas</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">The opposite pattern of twin formulas has the characteristics of having two words opposite one to another within a line in a proverb. Due to this explanation, the opposite pattern is categorized in the word level of twin formulas. Some data show that one proverb may have some opposite words paired. This phenomenon occurs in data 4 of alliterative pattern above, they are “friend and foe” and “well or ill”. Some data related to this variation are given as follows.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Data 1:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">It is the mind that make </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">good </span><span class="font0">of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ill</span><span class="font0">, that maketh </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">wretch </span><span class="font0">or </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">happy</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">rich </span><span class="font0">or </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">poor</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991:85)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pikiran itulah yang menjadikan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">baik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">atau </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buruk</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sengsara </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">atau </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bahagia</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kaya </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">atau </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">miskin</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri, 2006:105)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Division of data 1:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 1: </span><span class="font0">It is the mind that make </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">good </span><span class="font0">of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ill</span><span class="font0">, that make </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">wretch </span><span class="font0">or </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">happy</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">rich </span><span class="font0">or </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">poor</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Opposite pattern marker: or </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">of</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Data 2:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: Good </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">evil</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">reward </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">punishment</span><span class="font0">, are the only motives to a rational creature: these are the spur and reins whereby all mankind are set on work, and guided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 141)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Baik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jahat, imbalan </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">hukuman, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">adalah satu-satunya motif bagi makhluk yang rasional: itulah pemicu dan kendali dengan mana semua manusia bekerja dan dipandu</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri, 2006:176)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Division of data 2:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 1: good </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">evil</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">reward </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">punishment</span><span class="font0">, are the only motives to a rational creature</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 2: </span><span class="font0">these are the spur and reins whereby all mankind are set on work, and guided</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Opposite pattern marker: and</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Data 3:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">A powerful agent is the right word. Whenever we come upon one of those intensely right words . . .the resulting effect is </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">physical </span><span class="font0">as well as </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">spiritual</span><span class="font0">, and electrically prompt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 200)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pelaku yang hebat adalah kata-kata yang tepat. Setiap kali kita menemukan salah satu kata yang luar biasa tepat itu ... pengaruhnya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">spiritual </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sekaligus </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fisik, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dan luar biasa segera</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri, 2006: 250)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Division of data 3:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 1: </span><span class="font0">a powerful agent is the right word. Whenever we come upon one of those intensely right words . . .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 2: </span><span class="font0">the resulting effect is </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">physical </span><span class="font0">as well as </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">spiritual</span><span class="font0">, and electrically prompt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Opposite pattern marker: as well as</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Data 4:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ST: </span><span class="font0">There can be no transforming of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">darkness </span><span class="font0">into </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">light </span><span class="font0">and of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">apathy </span><span class="font0">into </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">movement </span><span class="font0">without emotion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Awaken the Giant Within, 1991: 246)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TT: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tanpa emosi, tidak mungkin </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">gelap </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terang </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">apatis </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">gerakan</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri, 2006: 309)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Division of data 4:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Line 1: </span><span class="font0">there can be no transforming of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">darkness </span><span class="font0">into </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">light </span><span class="font0">and of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">apathy </span><span class="font0">into </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">movement </span><span class="font0">without emotion.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Opposite pattern marker: into</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Four data 1, 2, 3 and 4 above contains twin formulas in their lines. Each data has the characteristics of opposite pattern because there are some opposite word pairs identified in its line. Starting from data 1, which has three opposite word pairs in one line such as: “good of ill”, “wretch or happy”, “rich or poor”. Two word pairs in data 1 are connected with the antithetical marker “or” which are “wretch or happy”, “rich or poor”, and one is connected with “of”. Afterwards, data 2 has two lines and two opposite word pairs in line 1, “good and evil”, and “reward and punishment”. Even though both the pairs are connected with the equal marker “and”, it does not mean that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">pairs are equal. Based on the context of the proverb, the marker “and” here basically shows that the words are opposite one to another. The case in data 2 is the same as the case in data 3, but it is using the equal marker “as well as” to show the opposite pattern of twin formulas. The opposite word pairs “physical as well as spiritually” are maintained to have opposite meaning in line 2. Data 4, however, uses the connecting marker “into” to show the opposite movement of word pairs “darkness into light” and of “apathy into movement”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As it is named, the opposite pattern of twin formulas has two words paired opposite one to another within the proverbs. Its translation is mostly done literally without changing the meaning of each word. Literal translation, as mentioned above, mostly occurred in the sentence level of the translation of the proverb in this pattern. The opposite pattern is signed by the existence of opposite word pairs such in data 1, “good or ill”, “wretch or happy”, “rich or poor”. Those words pairs are translated directly into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">baik atau buruk, sengsara atau bahagia, kaya atau miskin</span><span class="font0">. The words pairs in data 2, 3 and 4 are also literally translated. The word pairs in data 2 “Good and evil”, “reward and punishment” are translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">baik dan jahat, imbalan dan hukuman.</span><span class="font0"> However, the word pair in data 3 “physical as well as spiritual” is translated reversely into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">spiritual sekaligus fisik</span><span class="font0">. The last word pairs “darkness into light and apathy into movement” in data 4 are translated directly into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">gelap menjadi terang dan apatis menjadi gerakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the other situation, through these data, it was found that the transposition technique (structure shift) in the translation of words/phrases such as in data 2 in which “rational creature” is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mahluk yang rasional</span><span class="font0">. The word “rational” is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">rasional</span><span class="font0"> that uses the borrowing technique, while the literal translation of “rational” is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">masuk akal</span><span class="font0"> or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">berakal</span><span class="font0">. Some noun phrases using the transposition technique (structure shift) are found in data 3. Data sample 3 has two noun phrases translated using the transposition (structure shift) technique as in: “powerful agent” which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pelaku yang hebat</span><span class="font0"> and “right words” which is translated into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">katakata yang tepat</span><span class="font0">. And the last, data 4 shows that literal translation occurs whether there is syntactical</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">change, in which the part </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tanpa emosi</span><span class="font0"> is placed in the beginning of the TT. By this point, it can be concluded that the literal translation, transposition (structure shift), and borrowing are found in the translation of opposite patterns of twin formulas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word/phrase and sentence meaning of the opposite pattern of twin formula are preserved as their source texts. Literal translation and borrowing make it happen for they are categorized as SL-emphasis method of translation. As the opposite patterns are translated literally from data 1 to 4, the meanings are transferred denotatively. The transposition technique, which is categorized as TL-emphasis, is used to change the structure of the phrases, and not the meaning. The connection of denotative meaning in opposite pattern of twin formulas between ST and TT is shown in A = B formula.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Besides, the syntactical variation in data 4 placed the translation </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tanpa emosi</span><span class="font0"> at the beginning of the translation without changing the meaning as it is placed back to its position, which is the last part of the proverb; however, the meaning is still preserved.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Types of proverbs especially twin formulas appear come with unique characteristics in literature. The uniqueness comes in two patterns including alliterative and opposite patterns. The first is alliterative pattern of twin formulas, as explained in discussion, which comes in words and sentence levels. The rhymed words of alliterative pattern in sentence level may come at the beginning, middle or even the last part of the sentence, and so does the rhymed syllable, or letter of the words of alliterative pattern may come in front, middle, or even in the last words. The second is opposite pattern of twin formulas has the characteristics of having two words paired opposite one to another. The words are connected by the antithetical unit marker “or”, equal marker “and” and “as well as” which usually use to show connection of opposite word pairs, and connecting marker “into” to show the movement opposite of word pairs. One proverb categorized as twin formulas</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">may have more than one opposite word pairs in one line. The word pairs may come in the beginning, middle, end of the line or even in different lines of the proverb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The translator could more carefully translate the elements in alliterative pattern for some words cannot be alliterative in rhyme on their translation while still maintaining the denotative meaning of the words. The alliterative pattern of twin formulas must be translated carefully for it has rhymes through the words, phrases, or sentences which cannot be randomly translated because it may change the rhyme structures. In another situation, the words categorized as having characteristics of opposite pattern of twin formulas were more easily translated without worrying the change in rhymed patterns. Both patterns were mostly translated literally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Related to the other translation techniques used in the translation of twin formulas, alliterative pattern was also found using the modulation, equivalence and transposition (structure and unit shift) techniques; however, an opposite pattern was found using transposition (structure shift) and borrowing. All of those techniques used were transferring the meaning denotatively from source to target text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">Creswell, John W. 2012. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches</span><span class="font0">. United States of America: Sage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Flick, Uwe. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction of Qualitative Research</span><span class="font0">. London: Sage Publication Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Honeck, Richard P. 1997. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Proverb in Mind: The Cognitive Science of Proverbial Wit and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wisdom</span><span class="font0">. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, G.N. 1974. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics.</span><span class="font0"> England: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mieder, Wolfgang. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Proverbs: A Handbook</span><span class="font0">. London: Greenwood Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Molina, L &amp;Albir, A.H. 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach</span><span class="font0">. Dalam Meta, Vol. XLVII, No. 4. Hal. 499 – 512.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Norrick, Neal.R. 1985. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">How Proverbs Mean: Semantic Studies in English Proverbs</span><span class="font0">. New York: Mouton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Robbins, Anthony. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Awaken the Giant Within</span><span class="font0">. New York: Simon &amp;&nbsp;Schuster.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Robbins, Anthony. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bangunkan Kuasa Raksasa di Dalam Diri</span><span class="font0">. Pamulang-Tanggerang Selatan: Karisma Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sugiyono. 2012. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Memahami Penelitian Kualitatif.</span><span class="font0"> Bandung: Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">153</span></p>