---
layout: full_article
title: "THE USE OF SWEAR WORDS IN THE MOVIE SCRIPT “SOUTH PARK BIGGER, LONGER, AND UNCUT”"
author: "Abdi Resda Wiyanti Putu"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE USE OF SWEAR WORDS IN THE MOVIE SCRIPT</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>“SOUTH PARK BIGGER, LONGER, AND UNCUT”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Putu Abdi Resda Wiyanti</span><br><br><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark4"></a>English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture</span><br><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Udayana University</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat beranggapan kata-kata umpatan adalah kata-kata kotor yang tidak pantas untuk digunakan dalam percakapan. Namun belakangan ini, penggunaan kata-kata umpatan sudah mulai bisa diterima dalam masyarakat kita. Bahkan kata-kata ini telah banyak digunakan dalam media seperti televisi, film, dan lirik lagu. Menurut Hughes (1998: 208) mengatakan bahwa kata-kata umpatan diklasifikasikan ke dalam enam kategori. Penulis juga menggunakan teori Searle, dan Andersson sebagai acuan dalam menganalisis fungsi dari kata-kata umpatan, dan motif megumpat. Data dari penelitian ini diambil dari naskah film yang berjudul “South Park Bigger Longer and Uncut”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengklasifikasikan tipe kata-kata umpatan, fungsi, dan motif dari kata-kata umpatan yang diutarakan oleh karakter dalam film. Penulis menemukan bahwa ada empat tipe kata-kata umpatan yang ditemukan dalam naskah film, dimana tipe general term memiliki frekuensi penggunaan paling besar yang digunakan oleh karakter, dan juga ada empat fungsi ucapan berdasarkan teori Searle yaitu expressives, directives, commisives, dan representatives. Berdasarkan fungsi ucapan tersebut, ditemukan juga bahwa psychological dan linguistic motives adalah motif ang paling sering digunakan oleh karakter dalam film saat mengumpat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: kata umpatan, general term, fungsi, motif</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">One of the things that set humans apart is that we talk to communicate. Without communication, people cannot understand each other. In order to understand and have a good interaction with other people in society, people need language as a medium for their communication to share their feelings, ideas, information, and opinion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to the condition, language can be used in two conditions, formal and informal. In informal language, there are some words that are considered inappropriate which usually used to express their feelings such as anger, sadness, loneliness, and disappointed known as swear words. Although mostly people assume that swear words is a bad or dirty</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">word which is inappropriate to be used in conversation, Nowadays, swear words seem more acceptable and common in our society not only used for negative statements, but it can be used in any reasons and purpose. The use of swear words has also become more frequent on the media, such as television, movie, and song lyric in recent years. The movie entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“South Park Bigger, Longer and Uncut”</span><span class="font0"> is about four kids, Stan Marsh, Kyle Broflovski, Eric Cartman, and Kenny McCormick who sneaks into an R-rated movie However, after seeing the movie of Terrance, and Phillip, the boys language becomes harsh. Soon, all the kids in town have seen the movie and start imitating the F-words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Despite the fact of being a cartoon movie, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">South Park</span><span class="font0"> is clearly not for children, because of all the characters are swearing and using an offensive language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are three problmes in this study that can be formulated based on the background as follows: (1) What kinds of swear words found in the movie script entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“South Park Bigger, Longer and Uncut”?</span><span class="font0"> (2) What are the functions of swear words uttered by the characters? (3) What are the motives of swearing uttered by the characters?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are three specific aims of this study, there are: (1) To categorize the types of swear words used in the movie script </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“South Park Bigger, Longer and Uncut”.</span><span class="font0"> (2) To find out the functions of swear words uttered by the characters. (3) To analyze the motives of swearing uttered by the characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Research method in this study defined as the methodology or certain procedure applied to carry out the research in order to find a certain conclusion toward it. There are three components of the research method which in this study: data source which is taken from the movie script, the process of collecting data, and and how the data analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;General Term</span></h3>
<h3><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Conversation 1</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Mr. Mackey :Excuse me, what the heck is &quot;Terrance and Phillip?&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sheila : Terrance and Phillip are two very untalented actors from Canada. Nothing but foul language and toilet humor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mr. Mackey : Well, I guess I'll have to send a warning letter out to parents before more children see Terrance and Phillip!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Everybody's fuckin' seen it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Liane &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Eric!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman : I'm sorry, I can't help myself. That movie has warped my fragile little mind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The conversation above occurred when Stan, Cartman, and Kyle in the school counselor after they said the F-word which is forbidden and should not uttered. When Mr. Mackey said that he will send a warning letter to the parents to avoid many children see Terrance and Phillip movie. Suddenly Cartman said </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Everybody's fuckin' seen it</span><span class="font0">”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuck</span><span class="font0"> in the conversation above means extremely or very. In this case the speaker wants to say that everybody had watched the movie Terrance and Phillip. This swear word can be classified as general term, because it is used to give strength or emphasized his utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Function of the swear words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“fuckin”</span><span class="font0"> that he used in his utterance is representatives. Representatives perform the speaker to convey his belief of some proposition is true. Therefore the speaker in this conversation asserts and informs something to the hearer. In this case Cartman informs Mr. Mackey that all of the children in school had watched Terrance and Phillip movie by using swear words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The motive of swearing in the conversation above is linguistic motives. It is because the speaker’s utterance does not to insult or intimate the hearer. Since linguistic motive is a ways of people in expressing their selves using different words, or different grammatical structures. In this case, the speaker’s swears because he just wants to express his utterance in different way. After watching Terrance and Phillip movie, the speaker and his friends imitate all of the f-words in the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Religion Term</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Conversation 3</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[The cafeteria, lunchtime. The camera pans across the room and stops at the boys waiting in line. Stan looks as Wendy as she lunches with Gregory. She and Gregory are deep in conversation.]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A Boy : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[reviewing his sandwich]</span><span class="font0"> My mom gave me egg again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stan : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[thinks]</span><span class="font0"> There's the girl that I like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Over there laughing with that smart ne—</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman : </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ey! You're holding up the God-damned lunch line!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This conversation occurs in the middle of lunch time in the cafeteria. W hen Stan, and his friends were waiting in to get their lunch. While Stan is waiting for his lunch, He saw Wendy was enjoying her lunch with Gregory. He just stared at her, and makes the line standstill, and Cartman who saw this said </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Ey! You're holding up the God-damned lunch line!.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The swear words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">God-damned</span><span class="font0"> in this conversation means to condemn vigorously something. This swear words categorized as religion term because of the existence of the word God which is related to any sort of religious things, and sacral.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The function of the swear words uttered by Cartman in this situation is directives, because it is used to make the hearer to take any particular actions. In this case, Cartman uttered his swear words in order to make Stan that made the line stalled, moved away.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The swearing motive of the utterances in the conversation above is linguistic motives. The used of swear words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">God-damned</span><span class="font0"> in the utterance is not for insult or cursing somebody, however it is only used to express his utterances in different way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Excretory Term</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Conversation 8</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[the moms enter]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sheila : So, boys. You saw that movie again?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The boys &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[resigned]</span><span class="font0"> Yes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sheila : Well, Kyle, I have had it! You are grounded for the next two weeks!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kyle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Grounded?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sharon &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: And you, Stan. Come on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[Stan exits, and the other two follow]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Liane &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: And you're grounded for three weeks, Eric.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: Ey, why am I grounded more? That's shit mom!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sheila : Whatwhatwhaaat?! What was that word young man?!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The conversation between Cartman, Stan, and Kyle with their mothers was taken in the hospital after their friend Kenny died. When their mother found that their children had watched Terrance and Phillip movie again, their mother was totally angry, and they said to his children that they will be punished for all the things that had made, and Cartman will get three weeks punishment which is the longest among his friends. The situation makes Cartman swearing again with his mother </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Ey, why am I grounded more? That's shit mom!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font0"> in the conversation above means nonsense. Cartman’s thinks what his</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">mother said about the punishment is nonsense. This swear word is classified as excretory term, because it is simplified that </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font0"> is the solid waste matter from the anus (feces).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The function of this swear words is commisives, where Cartman used the swear words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font0"> is to refuse his mother decision about his punishment. He said that his mother decision is like feces.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The motive of swearing in the conversation uttered by the speaker is psychological motives since its swearing used to showing his feeling to the hearer. The speaker is angry and unfair about his mother decision</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anatomical Term</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Conversation 5</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">There's the girl that I like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman: Hey, Stan. Tell about when Terrance called Phillip a testicle-shitting rectal wart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, more than ever, she gives me butterflies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It makes my stomach queasy every time she walks by.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cartman: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Asshole, I'm talkin' to you!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I know I can be cool if I try.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">[smiles. Wendy knows he's there and comes at him spinning in the air in a triple Lutz before landing before him. He gets ice all over his face.]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This conversation occurred in the Stark’s pond, where many of the third grader were playing ice skating when Stan and Cartman is in the middle of their conversation. When Cartman asked him about Terrance and Phillip movie, suddenly Stan saw the girl that He liked, Wendy. he would begin to be nervous, and couldn’t say any word, and it makes Stan forgot he was talking with Cartman. This situation makes Cartman said </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“asshole, Im talkin’ to you”</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">asshole</span><span class="font0"> in the conversation above means the worst kind of person or idiot. The speaker uttered the swear words in order to insult Stan who does not hear what the speaker told him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the context above, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">asshole</span><span class="font0"> is related to the human anatomy, and private parts of the body which is in the type of anatomical term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The function of asshole in this utterance is directives. Directives attempts by the speaker to make the hearer to do something. In this case, the speaker wants to warn something, and request to somebody, where Cartman really want Stan to hear him, and answer his questions about Terrance and Phillip movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The motive of swearing in the conversation between Cartman, and Stan in the Stark’s pond is psychological motives. It is because the speaker wants to show his bad mood or</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">feeling to his friend Stan. The speaker is angry because his Friend Stan did not listen to his words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>V. CONCLUSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">After analyzing swear words found in the movie </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">script “South Park Bigger, Longer, and Uncut”</span><span class="font0"> the writer found that there are four swear words classifications found in the movie script. There is general term which has the greater frequency to be used by the character in the movie. It is followed by religion term as the second classification, excretory and anatomical term as the last classification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Every swear words uttered by people has different functions depending on the person and the context where it is uttered. After analyzing the functions of swear words uttered by the characters in the movie. It is found there are four functions of utterance are expressives, directives, commisives, and representatives based on the Searle (in Levinson 1983). The characters mostly used swear words in order to express their feeling to the hearer or somebody they talk to. Therefore, expressives become the widest functions of utterance found in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The motives of swearing has great influence on the function of the swear words uttered by the characters. It is found that there are only two motives of the characters to swear. Psychological motives and linguistic motives. Psychological motives usually come from the all things associated with feeling, and emotion. In the other hand, linguistic motive is the motive where the speaker used swear words in order to make a different ways of expressing what they want to utter. The speaker doesn’t use swear words to insult or intimidate the hearer</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>VII. BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Aliakbari, Muhammad. (2013). A Sociolinguistics Study of Conversational Swearing in Iran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">International Journal of Linguistic. 5 (3), 43-59 (cited July 2013. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.macrothink.org/journal/index.php/ijl/article/view/3899/pdf"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.macrothink.org/journal/index.php/ijl/article/view/3899/pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Andersson, L.-G. &amp;&nbsp;Hirsch, Richard . 1985. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perspectives on Swearing In swearing, Report no. 2</span><span class="font0">.Göteborg: Dept. of Linguistics at the University of Göteborg.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Anonymous. Swear Words in Pasak lauak Sungai Barameh Lubuk, Begalung District, Padang. (cited: January 2014) Available from: </span><a href="http://pasca.unand.ac.id/id/unduh/bahan-kuliah/artikel-program-master-s2-2/artikel-3/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://pasca.unand.ac.id/id/unduh/bahan-kuliah/artikel-program-master-s2-2/artikel-3/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fägersten, kristy Beers. 2012. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Who’s Swearing Now? The Social Aspects of Conversational Swearing</span><span class="font0">. UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hughes, Geoffrey. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Swearing: A Social History of Foul Language Oaths and Profanity in English</span><span class="font0">. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hughes, Geoffrey. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An encyclopedia of swearing: the social history of oaths, profanity, foul language, and ethnic slurs in the English-speaking world</span><span class="font0">. New York: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Japutri, Joko Silvia. 2006. A Study of Swear Words Used by All Characters in The Movie “The Nutty Professor”. Surabaya: Faculty of Letters Petra Christian University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jay, Timothy. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Why We Curse: A Neuro-Psycho-Social Theory of Speech.</span><span class="font0"> Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jemmy. 2005. Swear Words Produced by the Main Characters in The Movie “Bad Boys II”. Surabaya: Faculty of Letters Petra Christian University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Karjalainen, Markus. 2002. Where Have All the Swearwords Gone. (cited June 2013) available from: </span><a href="http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/hum/engla/pg/karjalainen/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/hum/engla/pg/karjalainen/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Levinson, Stephen C. 1983. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Midjord, Siri Margit. 2013. Swearing in Subtitle “The Killing&quot;. (cited January 2014) available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.pure.au.dk/portal-asb-"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.pure.au.dk/portal-asb-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">student/files/52877351/Speciale_samlet_final.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Montagu, Ashley. 1967. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Anatomy of Swearing</span><span class="font0">. New York: Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suyanto, Arfian. 2010. Javanese Swear Words in a Boarding House: The Case of Soegijapranata Catholic University Students. Semarang: Faculty of Letters Soegajipranata Catholic University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trudgill, Peter. 1983. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics: An Introduction to Language and Society</span><span class="font0">. Harmondsworth: Penguin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font0">. London: Longman.</span></p>