---
layout: full_article
title: "A STUDY OF INDONESIAN – ENGLISH CODE SWITCHING IN INDONESIAN ARTISTS’ TWITTER"
author: "Inten Dewi Desak Putu"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">A STUDY OF INDONESIAN – ENGLISH CODE SWITCHING</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">IN INDONESIAN ARTISTS’ TWITTER</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Desak Putu Inten Dewi</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Komunikasi adalah hal yang sangat penting dalam kehidupan manusia. Dalam komunikasi, bahasa merupakan hal yang paling penting karena bahasa merupakan sarana komunikasi yang digunakan dalam bidang bisnis, media masa, maupun dalam berkomunikasi dengan sesame manusia. Ketika manusia berkomunikasi dengan sesame, secara tidak sadar mereka seringkali menggunakan bahasa asing seperti bahasa inggris maupun bahasa asing lainnya. Kita seringkali mendengar penggunaan dua bahasa atau lebih yang lebih dikenal dengan bilingualism ataupun multilingualism menjadi hal yang biasa. Dan hal ini dikenal dengan istilah code switching. Code switching telah menyebar hampir diseluruh aspek kehidupan, seperti dibidang ekonomi, tekhnologi, sastra, hukum, dan begitu pula dengan dunia hiburan. Oleh karena itu, beberapa artis - artis di Indonesia terkadang menggunakan code switching dalam aktivitas komunikasi mereka. Seperti apa yang mereka lakukan di social media seperti twitter. Mereka biasa menyisipkan istilah – istilah dalam bahsa inggris dalam tweet mereka. Dan melalui twitter mereka bisa tetap menjaga hubungan dengan para penggemar mereka dengan memposting tweet di akun twitter. Dalam hal ini ada delapan orang artis yang diakan diteliti mereka adalah Nadia Mulya, Ibnu Jamil, Gita Gutawa, Vidi Aldiano, Bunga Citra Lestari, Tora Sudiro Dewi Lestari, dan Raditya Dika. Adapun tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui apa saja fungsi code switching yang sering muncul dalam tweet mereka yang menggunakan teori dari Appel and Muysken (in Fong, 2011) dan apa alasan mereka menggunakan code switching yang menggunakan teori dari Malik (in Muthusamy, 2009). Setelah melakukan analisis dari enam fungsi code switching hanya ada lima fungsi yang muncul, dan dari sepuluh alasan menggunakan code switching hanya ditemukan tujuh alasan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : code switching, bilingualism, twitter</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The use of code switching has spread in almost all aspects of social life in Indonesia, such as economy, science, technology, law, literature, and as well as entertainment. Therefore, many Indonesian artists sometimes use code switching in their communication activities as the mark of modernization. Today, the Indonesian artists usually share their stories and their activities through the social networking. One of the favorite social networking is Twitter. Twitter helps the Indonesian artists to communicate with their friends or their fans by posting something in it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background mentioned above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">What are the functions of code switching used by Indonesian artists in Twitter?, Why do Indonesian artists use code switching in their Twitter?, Which one of the profession is more frequently in using code switching among the Indonesian artists in their Twitter?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The aims of this study are based on the problems above are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To describe the functions of code switching used by Indonesian artists in Twitter, to analyze the reasons of Indonesian artists switch the code in Twitter, to identify and classify the frequency of specific profession in using code switching among the Indonesian artists’ Twitter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This part of study consists of three elements. They are data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This study used the data that was directly taken from the Twitter. In this case the eight Indonesian artists’ Twitter which is different by profession, specifically between female and male are grouped by their profession. They are: Nadia Mulya, she is a presenter &amp;&nbsp;MC (master of ceremony) and Ibnu Jamil, he is a sport presenter and also an actor; Gita Gutawa, she is an Indonesian singer and Vidi Aldiano, he is a singer anda songwriter; Bunga Citra Lestari, she is an Indonesian female singer &amp;&nbsp;multi-talented actress and Tora Sudiro, he is an actor and a comedian; And then the last group is Dewi Lestari, she is an author, a singer and a songwriter and Raditya Dika, he is a writer and an actor. They are chosen because they often post their tweet and they are very active in using social media especially twitter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The method of collecting data in this study was observation method. And the technique of collecting the data in this research was by downloading the tweets of eight famous Indonesian artists, they are: Nadia Mulya, Gita Gutawa, Bunga Citra Lestari, Dewi Lestari, Ibnu Jamil, Vidi Aldiano, Tora Sudiro, Raditya Dika.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data is analyzed qualitatively based on code switching theory, functions of code switching by Appel and Muysken (in Fong, 2011), and reasons of code switching by Malik (in Muthusamy, 2009).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of the functions and reasons of code switching in Indonesian artists’ twitter</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are five functions of code switching and seven reasons of the use of code switching found in Indonesian artists’ twitter. The theory used are proposed by Appel and Muysken (in Fong, 2011), and Malik (in Muthusamy, 2009).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Referential Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">It occurs when there is lack of knowledge of one language or lack of facility in that language on a certain subject. Hence, bilingual speakers switch code when they do not know the word or when a certain concept is not available in that language. Language is chosen because it is more appropriate or suitable to be used for a particular topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tweet from Nadia Mulya</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Trenyuh baca kisah2 Mama yg dilemma memilih antara jd</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> full time </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mom vs wanita karir. Memang a/ dilemma hmpr semua wanita bekerja@LactamilMama.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the second tweet which was posted on 2<sup>nd</sup> August, the phrase “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">full time</span><span class="font0">” has the referential function. This artist chose this English phrase rather than translate it into Indonesian because it is more proper to emphasize the message of the speaker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reason of this artist used code switching is because the expression is more familiar to be spoken rather than the Indonesian expression “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">penuh waktu</span><span class="font0">”. It belongs to lack of facility. This artist showed her opinion on the mothers who choose to be a full time mom or a career mom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directive Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Directive function in this function, this participant-related function of code switching aims to include or exclude a person from a part of a conversation such as by using a familiar or foreign language to that person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tweet from Ibnu Jamil</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“saat paling indah adalah saat dimana lemak lemak mulai menangis,,,!!!</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keep healty,,lets run</span><span class="font0">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this tweet which was posted on 1<sup>st</sup> August the directive function is applied. Ibnu jamil used code switching in this tweet in order to make an interaction with his followers. He wanted to give support to choose a healthy life by saying “keep healthy, lets run” to all his followers. In other words, he involved all of his followers in this tweet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reason of this artist used code switching is to emphasize a point. In this tweet the switch was at the end of an argument not only helps to end the interaction with his followers but may serve to emphasize a point. “Keep healthy, let’s run” is a form of invitation to more aware with the health by choosing a healthy life and this is showed to all his followers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressive Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this function, speakers use more than one language to stress their selfidentity or feelings to others in conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tweet from Nadia Mulya</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“@F3NNI</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> thanks for the support</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Krn dana msh sisa kita mau lanjut bikin sesuatu yg lebih permanen, spr tmn bacaan., insyaalah.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In the last tweet which was posted on 5<sup>th</sup> August, an expressive function is used. This artist started her tweet in English to show her feeling and said thanks to @f3nni of her support. In this case @f3nni has joined in Nadia Mulya’s program and it means that @f3nni has given a support for the success of her program.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A habitual expression is the reason of this artist switched the code in this tweet. This artist said thanks to @f3nni for her support is a habit of people after</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">receiving a help of others. In this case, this artist said thanks to one of her follower @f3nni for her help on the artist’s project.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phatic Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Phatic function, in this function code switching is used to show a change in tone and emphasize parts of a conversation that are of importance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tweet from Tora Sudiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Pinginya sih</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> ontime</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">…Tapi kalo si tepat waktunya ngga pengen di pinginin gimana dong.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the tweet that posted on 6<sup>th</sup> August, the word “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ontime</span><span class="font0">” has the phatic function. This tweet showed the phatic function because there is a repetition of one word first in English “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ontime</span><span class="font0">” and then Indonesian “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tepat waktu</span><span class="font0">” to emphasize that on time is the important things in this tweet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reason of this artist used code switching in tweet is to make the highlight in his tweet. Well, the focused in his tweet is about “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ontime</span><span class="font0">”. From the tweet we can see that although he has tried to be on time but there is still a reason to be late.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metalinguistic Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The metalinguistic function of code switching refers to giving of comments directly on the language involved. Based on Mayers-Scotton (1979) asserted that speakers sometimes switch code in order to comment on another language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tweet from Bunga Citra Lestari</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Efek nonton “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">” </span><a href="http://instagram.com/p/qo9G6ENE3/"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://instagram.com/p/qo9G6ENE3/</span></a><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. “</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The tweet on 5<sup>th</sup> August, the code switching “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font0">” has the metalinguistic function. “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font0">” here is the title of film, so it is impossible to change it into Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reason this artist switched the code in this tweet is to make sure that her followers know what to highlight in this situation. She wanted to show something happened to her is the effect of watching “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font0">”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6.</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, the most function applied in this study is directive function, referential function, metalinguistic function, expressive function, and the last one is phatic function. And there are seven reasons of the use of code switching that found in twitter such as the most reason is to emphasize a point, lack of register, lack of facility, to attract attention, habitual expression, and the last one is to address a different audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Aldiano, Vidi. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/vidialdiano"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/vidialdiano</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Appel and Muysken (2006) in Fong, C.W. 2011. ”Functions and Reasons For Code Switching On Facebook”. Faculty of Arts and Social Science: University of Tunku Abdul Rahman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dika, Raditya. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/radityadika"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/radityadika</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gutawa, Gita. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/gitagut"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/gitagut</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jamil, Ibnu. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/ibnujamilo"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/ibnujamilo</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lestari, B.C. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/bclsinclair"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/bclsinclair</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lestari, Dewi. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/deelestari"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/deelestari</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Malik (1994) in Muthusamy, P. 2009. “Communicative Functions and Reasons for</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Code Switching: A Malaysian Perspective”. Malaysia: University of Putra Malaysia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mulya, Nadia. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/_nadiamulyabbb"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/ nadiamulyabbb</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sudiro, Tora. 2013. Tweets available on </span><a href="https://mobile.twitter.com/t_ORASUDI_ro"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://mobile.twitter.com/t ORASUDI_ro</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>