---
layout: full_article
title: "DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN THE YOUNG VICTORIA MOVIE"
author: "Novita Mulyana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE YOUNG VICTORIA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MOVIE</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Novita Mulyana</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tindak ilokusi direktif bertujuan untuk membuat pendengar melakukan sesuatu untuk pembicara. Untuk mendapatkan tujuan dari sebuah komunikasi, seseorang perlu memperhatikan kesantunan dalam mengujarkan sesuatu, termasuk tindak ilokusi direktif. Studi ini di lakukan untuk mengindentifikasi tindak ilokusi direktif dan aplikasi strategi kesantunan di dalammya dengan menggunakan sebuah film berjudul “The Young Victoria”. Hasil dari studi ini menunjukkan bahwa keenam tipe tindak ilokusi direktif yang diajukan oleh Bach dan Harnish (1979) terdapat dalam film ini. Sebagian besar dari ujaran tersebut merupakan tindak tutur langsung. Selain itu, keempat strategi kesantunan milik Brown dan Levinson (1987) yaitu “bald on record”, “positive politeness”, “negative politeness”, dan “off record strategy” digunakan dalam mengujarkan tindak ilokusi direktif dengan “bald on record strategy” sebagai strategi kesantunan yang paling sering digunakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci </span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ujaran, tindak ilokusi direktif, strategi kesantunan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Directive illocutionary acts is one of five basic classification of illocutionary act proposed by Searle (1976). It is aimed to get the hearer to do something for the speaker. In real life situation, several factors can contribute a great influence to the way people deliver their utterance. One of the considerations of choosing appropriate way to say something is politeness. Most of the times, in uttering directive illocutionary acts, people also consider politeness strategies according to the purpose or goal of interaction. The relation between directive illocutionary acts with politeness strategy can be seen for instance, when a boss commanded his maid to open a door, the boss preferred to use imperative </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Open the door! </span><span class="font2">expression instead of the more polite one such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Could you please open the door?</span><span class="font2"> The awareness of status distance between the speaker and the hearer would mostly influence the type and the way the speaker uttered his utterance. From the example above it can be seen that the boss commanded his maid by a direct</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">speech act. His authority over the hearer allows him not to redress the expression to satisfy the hearer’s face. In other words, he used </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bald on record</span><span class="font2"> strategy. Here it can be seen that politeness strategy could bear a close relationship with directive illocutionary acts. Based on this background, a study entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Directive Illocutionary Acts in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Movie </span><span class="font2">was conducted.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems discussed in this study. Those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of directive illocutionary acts are found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria </span><span class="font2">movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are types of politeness strategies applied in directive illocutionary acts found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria</span><span class="font2"> movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study was designed to fulfill the following aims:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of directive illocutionary acts found in The Young Victoria movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the politeness strategies applied in directive illocutionary acts in The Young Victoria movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from a movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria.</span><span class="font2"> It is a historical movie capturing the early life and reign of Queen Victoria. The movie was directed by</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Marc_Vall%c3%a9e"><span class="font2"> Jean-Marc Vallée </span></a><span class="font2">and written by</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_Fellowes"><span class="font2"> Julian Fellowes.</span></a><span class="font2"> In collecting the data, documentary method and note taking technique were utilized. In analyzing the data, qualitative descriptive method was applied. The data were analyzed using Bach and Harnish’s (1979) classification on directive illocutionary act, Leech’s (1983) parameter of direct or indirect speech acts as well as Brown and Levinson’s (1987) theory of politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bach and Harnish (1979) classify six types of directive illocutionary acts, namely requestives, requirements, questions, prohibitives, permissives and advisories in their theory </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Taxonomy of Communicative Illocutionary Acts</span><span class="font2">. Below are the analyses of directive illocutionary acts found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria</span><span class="font2"> movie</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Requestives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Woman : Mrs. Melbourne!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Melbourne : Good God! What are we coming to!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria : Who was it? I didn’t see</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Melbourne : The Duchess of Montrose. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">That’s the end of her career at court, I hope.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria : If I ban everyone who thinks me wrong, you and I will be alone in the ballroom.</span><span class="font2"> (Fellowes, 2007:74)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance in bold in the conversation is classified as requestives type of directive illocutionary acts. According to Bach and Harnish (1979), requestives is the type of directive illocutionary acts which expresses the desire of the speaker to get the hearer to do something. The conversation above occurred when both of the participants, Victoria and Melbourne, were watching an opera. In uttering his utterance he expressed his desire to get the hearer, Victoria, banning the woman who shouted from the court. In this case, he requested the hearer to do the action. Seen from the syntactic structure of the utterance, it is in declarative form. Meanwhile, according to Leech (1983:114), the syntactic structure which mostly assumed to manifest a directive directly is imperative. It means that the utterance uttered by Melbourne is an indirect speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategies Applied in the Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the aspect of politeness, the utterance is identified applying off record strategy. According to Brown and Levinson (1987:216), off record strategy is done by leaving number of interpretation in the utterance and let the hearer interpret the intended meaning of the speaker by making some inference to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">recover the fact intended. The speaker in this conversation invited his hearer to search for an interpretation that relevant by stating something implicitly. It means that he used give hint strategy in off record strategy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Requirements</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Stockmar : Favourite novels?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Albert : Err…. (He starts to answer in German)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Stockmar : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">English! Always English!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Albert : She hasn’t read many novels. They were forbidden until last year</span><span class="font2">.(Fellowes, 2007:14)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Act</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance in bold in the conversation above is classified as requirements. In this type of directive illocutionary acts proposed by Bach and Harnish (1979:47), the hearer takes the utterance which is uttered by the speaker as a sufficient reason to do an action. The conversation occurred between Stockmar and Albert. It was started by Stockmar who gave Albert question about Victoria’s favorite novel. The intended meaning of Stockmar’s utterance is to instruct which belongs to the class of requirements. Seen from the syntactic structure, it is in the form of imperative. Based on Leech’s parameter on direct or indirect speech act (1983:114) which shows that the syntactic structure which manifest directive directly is imperative, the utterance uttered by Stockmar is classified as a direct speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategies Applied in the Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the aspect of politeness, the utterance uttered by Stockmar applies bald on record strategy. Bald on record strategy is politeness strategy in which the speaker expresses his intended meaning directly to the hearer. Stockmar was ordered by the King of Belgium, Albert’s uncle, to teach Albert everything about Victoria. In other words, Stockmar utterance is task oriented. According to Brown and Levinson (1987:56), when the focus of the interaction is task oriented, like Stockmar’s utterance in the conversation above, face redness may be felt to irrelevant.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Questions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Where’s the duchess?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Footman : In the drawing room, Your Royal Highness</span><span class="font2">(Fellowes, 2007:8)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance uttered by Victoria is classified into question type of directives. Bach and Harnish (1979) state that question is a special case of requirements, in which the required action for the hearer is to provide the speaker some information. In this case, Victoria requested her hearer to provide her some information about her mother. Seen from the syntactic structure, it is in the form of interrogative. Leech’s (1983:114) on his parameter of direct or indirect speech act states that interrogative is the syntactic structure assumed to manifest a question directly. It means, this utterance is a direct speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategies Applied in the Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the aspect of politeness, the utterance applies bald on record strategy. Victoria is a queen and she has greater power and social status compared to the hearer, the Footman. According to Brown and Levinson (1987), in the case of the existence of power or status differences between the participants, in which the speaker status or power is higher than the hearer, the speaker does not have to redness the expression in order to satisfy the hearer’s face. As conclusion, Victoria’s utterance is classified as bald on record strategy particularly the power difference between speaker and hearer strategy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.4 Prohibitives</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Duchess of Kent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: I want to go in!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Footman</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I beg your pardon, Ma’am, but her majesty is with the Prime Minister and cannot be disturbed.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Duchess of Kent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: That won’t apply to her mother!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Footman</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: I’m very sorry, Ma’am.</span><span class="font2">(Fellowes, 2007:56)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above occurred when Duchess of Kent wanted to get into Victoria’s room while she was having a serious conversation with the Prime Minister. Prohibitives is type of requirements that require the hearer not do a certain thing (Bach and Harnish, 1979:47). In this case, the Footman required the Duchess to not enter the room. The syntactic structure of the utterance is declarative. Meanwhile, according to Leech’s parameter on direct or indirect speech act (1983:114), imperative is the syntactic structure which assumed manifest directive directly. It means that the utterance is an indirect speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategy Applied in the Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the aspect of politeness, the utterance applies negative politeness strategy. In order to satisfy the hearer face, the speaker, in this case Footman apologized to the hearer, the Duchess which is aimed to forbid the hearer to enter the room. According to Brown and Levinson (1987), by apologizing, the speaker can indicate his reluctance to impinge on hearer’s negative face.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Permissives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria : Thank you for being my messenger. I only hope I’ve given him enough detail. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You can fill in anything I’ve missed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Albert : He takes a great interest in you</span><span class="font2"> (Fellowes, 2007:62)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation occurred when Victoria handed Albert a letter which was addressed to King Leopold. In permissives, the hearer believes that the speaker’s utterance entitles him to do an action (Bach and Harnish, 1979). In expressing the utterance, Victoria permitted Albert to fill in more information in her letter to the King. Seen from the syntactic structure, it is declarative. However, according to Leech’s (1983:114) parameter on direct or indirect speech act, the syntactic structure which is assumed to manifest directive directly is imperative. It means that the utterance is an indirect speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategies Applied in the Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Victoria’s utterance in the conversation above uses positive politeness strategy.In uttering her utterance, Victoria used Be Optimistic strategy in Positive Politeness strategies to show that their close relationship could make things like fill in details in her letter can be taken for granted by Albert.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Advisories</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Melbourne : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Try to rest before the ball.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria : I will since I firmly intend to dance until dawn.</span><span class="font2"> (Fellowes, 2007:60-61)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation occurred when Melbourne saw Victoria bathing her dog before her coronation day. The utterance was aimed to advice Victoria to take a rest before the ball. The utterance is classified into advisories. In this type of directives, the speaker expresses an utterance which is not the desire that the hearer do a certain action but rather the belief that doing the action is a good idea that is in the hearer’s interest (Bach and Harnish, 1979). The utterance is in the form of imperative which is the syntactic structure that is assumed to manifest directive directly (Leech, 1983:114). It means that it is a direct speech act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Politeness Strategies Applied in the Directive Illocutionary</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, Melbourne gave Victoria advice that shows he cared to Victoria’s health. According to Brown and Levinson (1987), in the case that the speaker conveys that he cares about the hearer, no redness is required. Sympathetic advice as expressed by Melbourne as the speaker in the conversation above may be baldly on record</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After conducting the analysis, some conclusions can be drawn. All types of directive illocutionary acts proposed by Bach and Harnish (1979) are found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Young Victoria</span><span class="font2"> movie. They are requestives, requirements, questions, prohibitives, permissives, and advisories. Questions is the type of directives which most frequently occurred. Most of the directives found are direct speech act. In the aspect of politeness, four types of politeness strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987) were found. Those are bald on record, positive politeness, negative politeness, and off record strategy. The mostly used strategy is bald on record strategy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bach, K. 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Communication and Speech Act.</span><span class="font2">Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, P &amp;&nbsp;Stephen Levinson. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness :Some Universal in Language Usage.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fellowes, J. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Victoria.</span><span class="font2">Downloaded from: </span><a href="http://www.pages"><span class="font2">http://www.pages</span></a><span class="font2"> .drexel.edu/~ ina22/splaylib/Screenplay-Young_Victoria,%20The.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. London:Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle, John. R. 1976. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Classification of Illocutionary Act.</span><span class="font2">Cambridge : Cambridge University Press</span></p>