---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF AMERICAN SLANG USED IN “21 JUMP STREET” MOVIE SCRIPT WRITTEN BY JONNAH HILL AND MICHAEL BACALL"
author: "Sridana Arta Yasa I Putu Gede"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">THE ANALYSIS OF AMERICAN SLANG USED IN “21 JUMP STREET” MOVIE SCRIPT WRITTEN BY JONNAH HILL AND MICHAEL BACALL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Putu Gede Sridana Arta Yasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non- Regular Program of English Departement Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:Artayasa1990@gmail.com"><span class="font2">Artayasa1990@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “The Analysis of American Slang Used in “21 Jump Street” Movie Script Written by Jonnah Hill and Michael Bacall. Tujuan dari penelitian ini ialah untuk mengidentifikasi jenis, fungsi, dan arti dari bahasa popular yang di temukan dalam naskah film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diambil dari naskah film yang berjudul “21 Jump Street” yang di tulis oleh Jonnah Hill and Michael Bacall. Metode yang di gunakan adalah metode dokumentasi dengan teknik mencatat. Teori yang di gunakan dalam penelitian ini berdasarkan teori Allan dan Burridge, yang menjelaskan jenis dan fungsi dari bahasa popular tersebut dan arti dari bahasa popular tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian tersebut menyebutkan bahwa terdapat empat kata bahasa popular dalam jenis yang pertama, lima kata pada jenis yang kedua, tujuh kata pada jenis yang ketiga, dua kata pada jenis yang ke empat dan lima kata pada jenis yang kelima yang di utarakan oleh para karakter pada naskah film tersebut. Dan jenis – jenis kata tersebut memiliki fungsi dan arti yang berbeda-beda. Arti dari kata-kata tersebut sebagian besar mengandung makna mengenai kekerasan dan obat-obatan terlarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : bahasa popular, jenis, fungsi, makna</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A living language such as English is a dynamic flow of spoken and written terms, eternally evolving. Each time a new person is born into a language, each time a person who speaks that language dies, the language becomes something different. Whenever people use the language they cause it to flow in and around itself, creating new meanings, new ways to express, new ways to think about that language. Slang is informal style of language that everyone use on some occasions but is not easy to define the words itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">While according to Claire (1990:4) slang is term that is used by people in social situation where they feel comfortable with their friends. Slang is usually used in non formal situation. It can make a conversation become more intimate. Slang term is used in almost all oral languages and usually used to express people`s feeling and creativities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background above, there are some problems, which can be analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of slang are used in the movie script “ 21 Jump Street” ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of slang used in the movie script “21 Jump Street”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of slang used in the movie script “21 Jump Street”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the formulated problems above, the aims of this study are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the type of slang words and phrases used in the movie script “ 21 Jump Street “.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze functions of slang used in the movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze meaning of slang used in the movie script.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source in this study are the primary data. The primary is the initial material that is collected during the research process. The data of this study are taken from the movie script entitled 21 Jump Street by Jonah Hill and Michael Bacall. It is an American movie directed by Phil Lord Chris Miller, it was produced by Colombia Pictures. The movie is action movie about an undercover cop in a local high school, they risk their lives to investigate a violent and dangerous drug ring. But they find that high school is nothing like they left it just a few year earlier and neither expects that they will have to confront a terror and anxiety of being a teenager again and all the issue they thought they had left behind. American slang in the “21 Jump Street” movie script are used as a data source because this movie contains American slang language that representing a reason when used by a drug seller, thief, gangster, and police. So that will be interesting to analyze what the type and the function in this movie script are.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in this study used documentation method. Documentation is the way of collecting data by giving a record report of facts of something, especially by using picture, note taking and recording. The data used in this study were taken from the 21 Jump street movie script that was found from the internet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method used was qualitative to describe the type, the function, meaning of American slang are based on the theoretical framework and still limit of the scope discussion. Qualitative method is a method that does not involve measurement of statistics. The data that have been collected would be identified and then classified in accordance with their type of slang and the function of slang</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of American Slang in Movie Script</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The type of slang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are five types of slang : Fresh and Creative, Flippant, Imitative, Acronym, Clipping.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fresh and Creative Type</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Fresh and creative mean that slang language has totaly new vocabulary, informal variety, cleverness, imagination, and it also can be an up to date words. In addition, some words which are already familiar with our mind possibly will be slang words as we not realize it. The reasons why slang words become familiar in our mind because those slang words come about long time ago. The data categorized into fresh and creative type are the slang word such as faggots, jackoff, muthafuckas, and fryfrynay. They are data with following codes:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fresh and creative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Slang words</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What up, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Faggots</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Data 1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Muthafuckas</span><span class="font2"> be wilding out &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Data 3)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">FryFrynay</span><span class="font2">? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Data 2)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. Acronym</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Acronym type is the slang word composed by result of the initials from several words. Acronym is the result of forming a word from the first letters of each word in a phrase or acronym is made up of initials or syllables from a group of words. The slang words such as : H.F.S, and ASAP. They are following codes :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Acronym Type</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Slang Words</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">H.F.S</span><span class="font2">”? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Data 17)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I`ll be there </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ASAP</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Data 18)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The function and meaning of slang language</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To intimate atmosphere</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">One of slang function in this type is to form intimate atmosphere.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Slang can be one alternative way to alleviate the relationship between the stangers will flow smoothly so that they can reduce social distance and more comfortable. The data are following :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zack : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It`s where the party is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fryfrynay</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jenko : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whats fryfrynay ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fryfrynay</span><span class="font2"> mean Friday night. The speaker used </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fryfrynay</span><span class="font2"> because that is a secret language to invite another person to come to their private party in the Friday night.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Initate relax conversation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Another function is to initiate relax conversation. Sometimes the speakers prefer to use slang word rather than standard variant of vocabulary to create relax conversation. They have tendency to use slang word to initiate relax conversation in purpose of having smooth conversation in formal situation. Someone who has close relationship with other tends to use certain vocabulary in order to make the conversation runs more relax so that they can feel more comfortable. The data are following :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schmidt : Molly`s been threatened, she`s at Shadow Ranch Park. You`re closer than me, go make sure she`s okay and i`ll be there </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ASAP</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jenko : Roger that. Hey man, you`re not gonna believe this but I think I cracked the formula for the shit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ASAP</span><span class="font2"> in that conversation means As Soon As Possible. Schmidt and Jenko are in dangerous situation, Schmidt need Jenko to go to make sure where Molly is okay because he is closer to the Molly`s place, and Schimdt will be there as soon as possible.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>6. Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis conclusion can be made I find there are five type of slang employed by the characters in this movie. They are fresh and creative, flippant, imitative, acronym, and clipping. The occurance of imitative type dominated the slang type used by the characters in 21 Jump Street movie script. Meanwhile, acronym type is the fewest slang type in this movie script. The speakers require significant knowledge of slang vocabulary to use it thus acronym type become the fewest slang type. The next problem is the function of the slang language, I find there are three slang functions discovered in fresh and creative type, there are to address, to form intimate atmosphere and express impression. Meanwhile in the flippant type there are five different functions, those function are intimate atmosphere, express impression, hummilate, show intimacy and reveal anger. In the meantime, in the immitative type, I find four different functions of slang, they are to intimate atmosphere, to address, initate relax conversation and express</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">impression. In addition, there are two functions to address and initate relax conversation in acronym type. In meantime I find three different functions in clippin type, they are to reveal anger, express impression, to initate relax conversation. The meaning of American slang used by the character in 21 Jump Street movie script mostly consists about a drug and violence because this movie is about a drug dealers and drug users in the school area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Allan, K., Burride, K., 2006 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Forbidden Words : Taboo And The Cencoring Of Language. Cambride : CUP</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Angela, Reyes. 2005. Appriation of African American slang by Asian American</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">youth. Volume 9 number 4 November 2005</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Claire. 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistictheory : Linguistic Variation and its social</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">significance. Oxford etc : Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dalzell, T. 2008. The Slang Of Sin. Merriam-Webster Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Djereng, Anjasari. 2009. The Analysis Of American Slang Words And Phrases</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Found In The Movie Script Entitled “8 Mile” Written By Scot Silver.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hill, Jonah. 2012. 21 Jump Street. Available from: http//script.com/21-jump-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">street.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 1974. Oxford Advanced Learner Dictionary. London</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kumara, Sabrina. 2011. Form And Meaning Of American Slang Used In</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Pineapple Express” Movie Script Written By Seth Rogen.Denpasar :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">UniversitasUdayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lyons, John. 1955</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Linguistic Semantic : An Introduction. London : Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">University Press</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patridge, Erick. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang Today and Yesterday. London :Routledge and Sean</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paul</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Spears. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation, Translation. Amsterdam/New York: Rodopl</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Spolsky, Bernard. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics. London : Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardana, Heny. 2010. Types And Meaning Of Slang Used in “American Pie” Movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar :UniversitasUdayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Whitman, Walter. 1885. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang in America. The North American View</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wolfram, Walter. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Linguistic Variable: Fact And Fantasy. In: American</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech</span></p>