---
layout: full_article
title: "FASHION TERM BORROWINGS FOUND IN ARTICLE TRANSLATION IN COLOURS MAGAZINE"
author: "I Gusti Agung Maitreya Adi Santa"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21896 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-21896"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-21896"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Fashion Term Borrowings Found In Article Translation In </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Colours</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Magazine</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Gusti Agung Maitreya Adi Santa </span><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:maitreyakaya@gmail.com"><span class="font2">maitreyakaya@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font1">Master Study of Linguistics, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Made Budiarsa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:madebudiarsa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">madebudiarsa@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Master Study of Linguistics, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I Nyoman Sedeng</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:nyoman_sedeng@hotmail.com"><span class="font0">nyoman_sedeng@hotmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Master Study of Linguistics, Udayana University</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Nyoman Udayana</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:udayana2011@gmail.com"><span class="font1">udayana2011@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1"> Master Study of Linguistics, Udayana University</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This paper discusses the borrowing technique used to translate fashion terms.The theory of borrowing proposed by Molina and Albir (2002) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Umum Ejaan Bahasa Indonesia Yang Disempurnakan</span><span class="font2"> (2009) were used to analyze the data. There are two types of borrowing which are found, namely: pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing. Pure borrowing is the process when a source language word or term is taken purely or without any changes to the receptor language. This is done by a translator to keep the textual meaning in the source language for the sake of the accuracy of meaning through the form. While naturalized borrowing takes words or terms in source language but they are then naturalized or adapted to the norm of the receptor language (mostly the spelling rule). This is done to increase the readability of receptor language text. The application of borrowing is mostly in the form of adjustments of the spelling based on Indonesian language norm. There are two reasons why the translator used the borrowing technique: a) The translator doesn’t find the equivalent of the word being translated in receptor language; b) The translator is eager to create the stylistic effect mostly in fashion or s/he considers the word in receptor language is less popular than source language word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing, fashion term.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Makalah ini membahas teknik peminjaman (borrowing) di dalam menterjemahkan istilah-istilah mode. Teori peminjaman yang dikemukakan oleh Molina dan Albir (2002) dan Pedoman Umum Ejaan Bahasa Indonesia Yang Disempurnakan (2009) digunakan untuk menganalisa data. Ada dua tipe peminjaman ditemukan, yaitu: peminjaman murni dan alamiah. Peminjaman murni ketika kata atau istilah diambil secara murni atau tanpa perubahan. Peminjaman ini dilakukan untuk mempertahankan keaslian makna melalui bentuk. Sedangkan peminjaman alamiah ketika kata atau istilah dipinjam tetapi kemudian dirubah atau disesuaikan dengan kaidah bahasa penerima (terutama ejaannya). Hal ini dilakukan untuk meningkatkan keterbacaan teks bahasa penerima. Penggunaan teknik pinjaman terutama dengan perubahan ejaan sesuai dengan norma bahasa Indonesia. Dari kecenderungan penerjemah menggunakan teknik peminjaman, ada dua alasan mengapa</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">penerjemah meminjam kata atau istilah, yaitu: a) Penerjemah tidak menemukan padanan kata atau istilah di dalam bahasa penerima; b) Penerjemah ingin menciptakan efek stilistik mode atau penerjemah menganggap padanan kata atau istilah dalam bahasa penerima kurang populer dibandingkan dengan kata dari bahasa sumber.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata kunci : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kata pinjaman, istilah fesyen</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Translation is always complicated in different levels. The reason is that there are some differences in linguistic system and culture between source language (SL) and receptor language (RL). These differences sometimes make the concepts of words being translated not available in RL (Larson, 1998:61). This makes the equivalent of the word being translated is difficult or even cannot be found in RL. To solve this problem, linguists such as Vinay and Dalbernet, Molina and Albir proposed some techniques of translation which can be used by a translator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Borrowing is one of the translation techniques proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet. Borrowing is taking a word or expression straight from another language (Molina and Albir, 2002: 510). Vinay and Dalbernet add that borrowing is used to overcome a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lacuna</span><span class="font2">. A </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lacuna </span><span class="font2">is usually a metalinguistic one such as new technical process or an unknown concept. Borrowing is also applied in order to create a stylistic effect. For instance, in order to introduce the flavor of the SL culture into RL, foreign terms may be used, they give examples such as the Russian word “roubles” and “datchas”, “dollar” and “party” from the American English (Vinay and Dalbernet in Venuti 2000: 85).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although it is a simple technique, the translator should be more careful in using this technique, since it will influence the readability of text in RL. The reason is that the borrowing word is probably not known by the reader in RL. Considering it an interesting topic to be discussed, in this small research, borrowing is the topic of the discussion. Data in this research were collected from one article entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Samuel Wongso Tailored For Success </span><span class="font2">taken from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Colours</span><span class="font2"> magazine (former <sup>1</sup> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">da</span><span class="font2"> magazine) June 2015 edition. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Colours</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">magazine (CM) is a monthly bilingual magazine published by Garuda Indonesia Airlines, the magazine is used as the data source since this magazine is a bilingual magazine containing some borrowing words as well as an example of modern writing and translation work, where some new phenomena of borrowing technique application appear. Kind of borrowing which is chosen is fashion term borrowing that is words or phrases used or connected with a popular style of clothes, hair, etc, at a particular time or place (Hornby, 2010: 563&amp;1541).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Some studies about borrowing also have been conducted by some researchers such as Widiastuti (2011) in her paper entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation of Balinese Traditional Architectural Terms into English,</span><span class="font2"> identified the kinds of Balinese traditional architectural terms and their translation equivalents into English and described the translation strategy used by the translator to transfer the message from the source language into the target language. She found that borrowing strategy is the only strategy applied by the translator in translating the Balinese cultural terms especially the Balinese architectural terms. Patini (2011) in her thesis entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Borrowing in Mirror Image and Its Translation Belahan Jiwa</span><span class="font2">, also discussed borrowing topic mostly types of borrowing and how borrowing strategies are adopted in translation. She found there are three techniques of borrowing used by the translator, they are: pure borrowing, naturalized and cultural borrowing. Another topic about borrowing is also discussed by Jupriono (2012) in his descriptive article entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Serapan Bahasa Sansekerta Dalam Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> He found that Indonesian language also absorbed many words from Sanskrit language to enrich its vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All of the studies stated above are discussed borrowing topics. Although their topics are similar with this study, but since the data source used in this study is different, the finding is different as well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background stated above, there are two problems discussed in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of fashion term borrowing are found in the translation of CM article?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the borrowing technique applied in the translation of CM article?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the problems stated above, this study is intended to describe the types of borrowing as well as the application of borrowing in the translation of CM article. This study also hopefully can give more information and knowledge to the readers and researchers who are interested in the topic of borrowing.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">A combination of observation, note taking technique, and descriptive – qualitative method are used in this research. Observation and note taking technique were used to collect the data by closely reading, identifying and finally noting the data. While descriptive – qualitative and quantitative method are used to analyze and describe the data by classifying, calculating, analyzing and finally describing the analyzed data (Sudaryanto, 1993; Sutopo, 2002; Creswell, 2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data are analyzed based on theory of borrowing proposed by Molina and Albir, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Umum Ejaan Bahasa Indonesia Yang Disempurnakan</span><span class="font2"> abbreviated into PUEBIYD as theoretical framework.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems stated above, there are two topics of discussion discussed in this writing, they are: types of borrowing found in the translation of CM and the application of the borrowing technique in translating the fashion term in CM article.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Types of Borrowing Found in Translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Colours</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Magazine Article</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">There are two types of borrowing found in the translation of the fashion term in CM article, namely: pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing. Pure borrowings refer to SL words or terms which are taken over purely or without any change to the RL (Molina and Albir, 2002: 510). It can be seen from the table below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Pure Borrowing</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language (English)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Receptor Language (Indonesian)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.Tuxedo (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">2.Fashion show (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Fashion show</span><span class="font2"> (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3.Sartorial (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sartorial</span><span class="font2"> (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">4.Tailors (CM, 2015:88)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Tailors (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The second borrowing type is the naturalized borrowing, that is, the borrowing by taking words or terms in SL but they are then naturalized or adapted to the norm of the RL mostly the spelling rules (Molina and Albir, 2002: 510).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Naturalized Borrowing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language (English)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Receptor Language (Indonesian)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.Boutique (CM, 2015:88)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Butik (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">2.Fashion (CM, 2015:88)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Fesyen (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3.Models (CM, 2015:88)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Model (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">4.Trend (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Tren (CM, 2015:90)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">5.Design (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Desain (CM, 2015:89)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Application of the Borrowing Technique in Translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Colours</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Magazine Article</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This part discusses how the borrowing technique is applied in translating the fashion term in CM article. The discussion is divided into two parts based on types of borrowing which are found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Pure Borrowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It has been stated above that the pure borrowing is the process when a SL word or term taken over purely or without any changes to the RL. This is done by the translator to keep the textual meaning in the source language for the sake of the accuracy of meaning through the form. The translator prefers to take the word purely without any adjustment although it seems unnatural to the RL readers. (Brata, 2012: 1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From Table 1 presented above, it can be seen that there are 4 (four) pure borrowings of the fashion term found in the data source, they are: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo, fashion show</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data PB.01</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When English footballer Emile Heskey came to Jakarta in 2014 for a World Cup gala dinner and was in need of a </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2">, he came to Wong Hang at the referral of the British embassy, the catch: he needed one less than 24 hours. Samuel almost refused the order, but ultimately took the opportunity as a new creative challenge. The Wong Hang team finished in 12 hours and Heskey was more than satisfied with his dapper dark and blue </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">tux</span><span class="font2">.(CM, 2015: 89)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ketika pesepak bola Emile Heskey tiba di Jakarta di tahun 2014 untuk menghadiri acara makan malam Piala Dunia dan membutuhkan satu pasang </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2">, sang pesepak bola datang ke Wong Hang atas rekomendasi kedutaan Inggris. Intinya Emile harus memakai </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> dalam waktu kurang dari 24 jam. Samuel hampir menolak, namun akhirnya dia melihat kesempatan itu sebagai sebuah tantangan kreatif baru. Tim Wong Hang berhasil menyelesaikan dalam 12 jam dan Heskey sangat puas dengan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> biru tua dan hitamnya yang necis. (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data PB.02</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Samuel finished his degree and immediately went to work on his first </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">fashion show</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">in 2010. (CM, 2015: 89)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wongso menyelesaikan kuliah dan langsung melakukan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">fashion show</span><span class="font2"> pertamanya di 2010 (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Data PB.03</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It was an energizing kind of stress and Samuel was quick to embrace his newfound sense of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">sartorial</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">style (CM, 2015: 89)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tekanan itu sesungguhnya menyegarkan , dan Samuel dengan cepat menemukan gaya </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sartorial</span><span class="font2">-nya(CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data PB.04</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From its humble beginnings as a small shop in Surabaya 82 years ago, Wong Hang a member of the Asian Federation of Master </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Tailors</span><span class="font2">, now stands as a flourishing family business with 12 branches across Indonesia, and an international appointment only boutique in Singapore. (CM, 2015: 88)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Berawal dari sebuah toko sederhana di Surabaya 82 tahun yang lalu, Wong Hang, anggota dari Asian Federation of Master </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Tailors</span><span class="font2">, kini merupakan simbol bisnis keluarga sukses dengan 12 cabang di seluruh Indonesia serta sebuah butik internasional hanya dengan perjanjian di Singapura. (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuxedo, fashion show</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2"> in SL text are translated by simply borrowing them into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo, fashion show</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. It can be seen that the forms of the terms between SL and RL do not change although the three words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo, fashion show</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> are typed in different ways, where the words in SL text are typed normally while the words in RL are in italics. The translator borrowed those terms purely or without any changes. The translator only changed the types of those words but the forms are preserved. Based on PUPI, the absorption of foreign term without spelling and pronunciation is made when the spelling and pronunciation do not change in many modern languages and the terms should be italicized. For example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">allegro moderato -&gt; devide et impera; aufklarung-&gt; dulce et utele; status quo -&gt; in vitro; esprit de corps -&gt; vis-à-vis.</span><span class="font2"> The absorption of foreign term without spelling and pronunciation is made when the term is widely used as common vocabulary, but the term is not italicized. For example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">golf-&gt;</span><span class="font2"> golf; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet-&gt;</span><span class="font2"> internet; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lift-&gt;</span><span class="font2"> lift; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">orbit -&gt;</span><span class="font2"> orbit. (Hidayati, 2012: 82). Hence, the two words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> which are not known by the Indonesian readers are reasonable to be typed in italic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is different from the term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show;</span><span class="font2"> this term is actually widely used in the Indonesian language mostly in the fashion world. Since that, this term doesn’t need to be typed in italic. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Fashion show</span><span class="font2"> actually has equivalent, that is, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragaan busana / mode</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 445). In paragraph 4 (four) the translator also translated </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pertunjukan fesyen</span><span class="font2">. The translator translated the phrase by combining translation and absorption; this is also based on PUEBIYD that the Indonesian term can also be formed by translating and absorbing foreign term at once. For example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bound morpheme</span><span class="font2"> -&gt; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">morpheme terikat</span><span class="font2">; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">clay colloid</span><span class="font2"> -&gt; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">koloid lempung</span><span class="font2">; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subdivision</span><span class="font2"> -&gt; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subbagian</span><span class="font2"> (Hidayati, 2012: 97)</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">Term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragaan busana</span><span class="font2"> is also widely used in RL, but the translator preferred to preserve the concept of the word by borrowing the term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">purely in RL text. It has been stated above that borrowing is also applied in order to create a stylistic effect, for instance, in order to introduce the flavor of the SL culture into RL, foreign terms may be used (Vinay and Dalbernet in Venuti, 2000: 85). Grosjean (in Jendra, 2007: 132) stated further four reasons why a translator borrowed a word: 1) The bilingual cannot find the word which is being transferred to the language being spoken; 2) The word does not exist in the speaker’s language or the speaker hasn’t known the word yet; 3) The word (which does exist in the language being spoken) is less popular, then s/he prefers a word which is considered more popular; 4) The bilingual is in tired, stress, lazy mental and physical condition so that s/he tends to use the word which is “available”. From the factors stated above, from the tendency the translator applied the borrowing technique, the translator was eager to create the stylistic effect or the translator considered the term in RL less popular.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(dinner suit) a black or white jacket and trousers/ pants, worn with a bow tie at formal occasions in the evening origin from Tuxedo Park in New York, where it was first worn.</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 1608), while in Indonesian </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo (tuksedo)</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jas untuk makan malam</span><span class="font2"> (Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 1218). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> is part of the western culture and does not exist in the Indonesian culture. Since then, there has been no word in Indonesian which is quite equivalent to the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2">. Although there is no equivalent of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> found in RL from the comparative meaning, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> can actually be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jas makan malam </span><span class="font2">in Indonesian which is similar to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2">, although the concept does not completely match the SL words. But it can be seen that the translator preferred to translate by simply borrowing the word in RL. Whenever borrowing considered a better solution, in borrowing the word it is better to adapt the word to RL norm to increase the readability of the text in RL. Based on PUEBIYD the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">x</span><span class="font2"> in some position should be changed into consonant cluster </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ks</span><span class="font2"> , as can be seen in the words such </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ecutive &gt;&nbsp;e</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ks</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ekutif, ta</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i &gt;&nbsp;ta</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ks</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i, late</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&gt;&nbsp;late</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ks</span><span class="font2">. While the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">x</span><span class="font2"> in the beginning of a word should be preserved such as in the words: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">anthate &gt;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">antat, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">enon &gt;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">enon, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ylophone &gt;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">xi</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lofon</span><span class="font2"> (Hidayati, 2012: 68). Hence, based on PUEBIYD, the spelling of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tu</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">x</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">edo</span><span class="font2"> in English should be adjusted to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tu</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ks</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">edo</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. As can be seen in the text, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tux</span><span class="font2"> in SL text which is the clipping form of word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> in RL text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Like the two previous words, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> in data PB.03 is also translated by borrowing it purely. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sartorial</span><span class="font2"> in English means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">relating to clothes, especially men’s clothes, and the way they are made or worn</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 1608). In Indonesian </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yang berkenaan dengan tukang jahit</span><span class="font2"> (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 500). There is no equivalent of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> found in Indonesian. It is the same as the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tuxedo</span><span class="font2"> in data PB. 02, although there is no equivalent of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> found in RL, from the comparative meaning between the SL word and RL word, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> can actually be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menjahit</span><span class="font2"> in this context, although some concepts of the word mostly the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">men’s clothes</span><span class="font2"> will be lost if it is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menjahit</span><span class="font2">, but it will be more acceptable and understandable by RL text readers. On contrary, as can be seen in the text, it is better to translate the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stress</span><span class="font2"> by borrowing it to preserve the concept of the word rather than translating it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tekanan</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian which is very vague in meaning for RL readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Unlike the three previous terms, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2"> in data PB.04 is also fully preserved without any change including the type of the word is not changed either. This absorption is also based on the Indonesian norm stated above that the term which is widely used as a common lexical item does not need to be typed in italic. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailor</span><span class="font2"> which actually can actually be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">penjahit</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian is widely used in Indonesian (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 577). Besides, since this word is attached to the phrase “Asian Federation of Master Tailors” which is a name of an organization and all words are preserved fully; hence,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">it is reasonable to preserve the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2"> fully or purely. Not all the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailors</span><span class="font2"> in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">article are translated by borrowing them in RL text, most of them are translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">penjahit </span><span class="font2">which is the equivalent of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tailor</span><span class="font2"> in RL as stated above.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Naturalized Borrowing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Unlike the pure borrowing, the naturalized borrowing takes words or terms in SL but they are then naturalized or adapted to the norm of the RL (mostly the spelling rules). The naturalized borrowing is used for the sake of natural readability and acceptability of RL readers (Brata, 2012: 1). It has been stated above that since the naturalized borrowing is adapted to the norm of RL (Indonesian), PUEBIYD and PUPI are used as the basis for analyzing the data. Based on PUEBIYD and PUPI, there are some adjustments occur in absorbing the word or term from English into Indonesian. The adjustments can also be found in borrowing words in the translation of CM article.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Data NB.01</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From its humble beginnings as a small shop in Surabaya 82 years ago, Wong Hang a member of the Asian Federation of Master Tailors, now stands as a flourishing family business with 12 branches across Indonesia, and an international appointment only </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">boutique</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">in Singapore. (CM, 2015: 88)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Berawal dari sebuah toko sederhana di Surabaya 82 tahun yang lalu, Wong Hang, anggota dari Asian Federation of Master Tailors, kini merupakan simbol bisnis keluarga sukses dengan 12 cabang di seluruh Indonesia serta sebuah </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">butik</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">internasional hanya dengan perjanjian di Singapura. (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> in the SL text is translated by borrowing it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">butik</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. It can be seen that the forms of SL word is different from that of RL word: b</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">ou</span><span class="font2">ti</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">que </span><span class="font2">-&gt; b</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">u</span><span class="font2">ti</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">k</span><span class="font2">. The reason is that the translator borrowed the word and adapted to the norm of RL that is Indonesian. Based on the Indonesian norm, double vowel combination </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ou</span><span class="font2"> should be adjusted into the vowel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">u</span><span class="font2"> as can be seen in the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">g</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ou</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">verneur</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">g</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">u</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bernur</span><span class="font2">; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">c</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ou</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pon</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">u</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pon</span><span class="font2">; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cont</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ou</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">r</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kont</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">u</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">r</span><span class="font2"> etc (Hidayati, 2012: 65). The adjustment also occurs in the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">q </span><span class="font2">which is adjusted to the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font2"> and the imitation of the double vowel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ue</span><span class="font2"> in the end of the word which is also based on PUEBIYD. This absorption is a kind of the term of absorption in point two in PUPI, that is, the absorption with spelling adjustment without pronunciation modification, in which the adjustment occurs in the spelling only while the pronunciation is preserved. The spelling is adjusted based on the Indonesian language norm and the pronunciation is preserved since the pronunciation is the same as the pronunciation in the Indonesian language. The example of this absorption can be seen in the words: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">de</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sign</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">-&gt; de</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sain</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">; f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ile</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">-&gt; f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ail</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">; s</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">cience</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">-&gt; s</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ains</span><span class="font2"> (Hidayati, 2012: 82-83). This is the same as the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2">, since the pronunciation of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> /bu:’ti:k/ is suitable to Indonesian language norm (Hornby, 2010: 164); hence, the adjustment is in spelling of the word only while the pronunciation is preserved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is no equivalent of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> found in Indonesian. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Boutique</span><span class="font2"> in English means (noun) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a small shop/store that sells fashionable clothes or expensive gifts; (adjective) (only before noun) (of a business) small and offering products or services of a high quality to a small number of customers: a boutique hotel that offers an escape from the outside world, a boutique investment bank.</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 164). In Indonesian </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">butik</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">toko pakaian eksklusif yg menjual pakaian modern, yg sesuai dng mode mutakhir, dng segala kelengkapannya.</span><span class="font2">(Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 182). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Boutique</span><span class="font2"> is part of the western culture and does</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">not exist in Indonesian. The concept of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> in English is also quite complicated</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to be translated. Hence, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> which is translated by borrowing it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">butik</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian is reasonable. But in borrowing the word, it is better to give some extra explanation [equivalence by modifying a loanword as stated by Beekman and Callow (1974) in Larson (1998: 179-190)] to increase the readability of the text in RL.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Data NB.02</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">…and strengthening the brand with annual </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">fashion</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">shows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">…serta memperkuat merek dengan mengadakan pertunjukan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">fesyen</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">tahunan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can be seen that the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> in the SL text is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fesyen</span><span class="font2"> in the RL text. From the comparative spelling, the spelling of the SL word is different from the RL word: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ashion</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">-&gt; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">esyen</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">The reason is that the translator translated it simply by borrowing and adapting it to the norm of the Indonesian language. Similarly, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> in data NB.01 is also a kind of absorption with spelling adjustment without pronunciation modification, in which only the spelling of the word is adjusted, while the pronunciation is preserved. It also occurs in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> which is absorbed into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fesyen</span><span class="font2">. The spelling of the word is adjusted to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ashion</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">-&gt; f</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">esyen</span><span class="font2"> , while the pronunciation /fæʃn/ (Hornby, 2010: 536) is preserved in the Indonesian word. As we know that the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show</span><span class="font2"> in the previous discussion is preserved fully (purely) by the translator, but in this part the translator translated the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> by borrowing and adjusting it based on the Indonesian language norm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> in English means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a popular style of clothes, hair, etc at a particular time or place; the state of being popular</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 536). In Indonesian, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> can actually be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font2"> (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 234). The word</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> (in paragraph 1) in this article is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">busana</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. It can be seen that the translator is inconsistent in translating a word or term. The translator’s decision translated the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> by simply borrowing it in this context shows the same case as data PB.02 in pure borrowing discussion, from the tendency of the translator to apply the borrowing technique, the translator is eager to create the stylistic effect or the translator considers the term in RL less popular.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Data NB.03</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">…, people frantically running back and forth getting the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">models</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">in wardrobe and flawlessly ready to hit the runaway. (CM, 2015: 88)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">…orang-orang tampak sibuk ke sana kemari menyiapkan pakaian bagi para </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">model</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">yang akan melenggang di atas catwalk. (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Data NB.04</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ever eager to extend his learning, these days Samuel uses his holidays to absorb the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">trends</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">abroad and take in the sartorial culture of wherever he travels. (CM, 2015: 89) RL Text:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Karena sedang bersemangat memperluas ilmu, akhir-akhir ini Samuel memanfaatkan hari liburnya untuk menyerap </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">tren</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">di luar negeri dan menenggak budaya </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sartorial</span><span class="font2"> ke manapun dia pergi (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">models</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trends</span><span class="font2"> in SL text are translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tren</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. It is the same as the two previous words, in which the translator translated the word by borrowing the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">word and adjusting to the norm of RL, since the spelling between SL words and that of RL</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">words are different: mode</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">ls</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">-&gt; mode</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">l</span><span class="font2">; tre</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">nds</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">-&gt; tre</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">n.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">It can be seen that the last consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">s </span><span class="font2">in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">models</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trends</span><span class="font2"> are omitted. This adjustment is based on the Indonesian language norm that in translating foreign words which have plural form, the plural marker is omitted in Indonesia. This kind of absorption can be seen as in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">:</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">alumni -&gt; lulusan; master of ceremonies -&gt; pengatur acara; charge d’affaires -&gt; kuasa usaha.</span><span class="font2"> (Hidayati, 2012: 80) This also occurs in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trends</span><span class="font2"> in the text, where the plural marker is omitted. While in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">models</span><span class="font2"> in data 03 the plural marker </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font2"> is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">para (para model)</span><span class="font2"> in RL text</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Para</span><span class="font2"> means plural in Indonesian language (Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 828). Apart from the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font2">, the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">d</span><span class="font2"> in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> is also omitted; there is no rule in PUEBIYD whether the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">d</span><span class="font2"> in the word such </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> should be omitted or not, but the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tren</span><span class="font2"> is widely used in Indonesian (Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 1210).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2"> in English means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a person whose job is to wear and show new styles of clothes and be photographed wearing them</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 952). In Indonesian, there are words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawati</span><span class="font2"> which are equivalent to the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2"> (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 234). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Peragawan</span><span class="font2"> is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pria yang memperagakan busana dari berbagai mode (a man whose job is to wear and show new styles of clothes from any kind of mode)</span><span class="font2"> while </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Peragawati</span><span class="font2"> is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanita yang memperagakan busana dari berbagai mode ( a woman whose job is to wear and show new styles of clothes from any kind of mode )</span><span class="font2"> (Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 1210). From the comparison of meaning the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawati</span><span class="font2"> are equivalent with the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2">. But in this context since the clothes which are showed are the men’s clothes, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawan</span><span class="font2"> is equivalent to the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2"> is also widely used in the fashion world, even this word is more popular now days than its equivalent </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">peragawati</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Like the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">model</span><span class="font2"> in data NB.03, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> is also borrowed and adjusted to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tren</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> in English means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a general direction in which a situation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">is changing or developing</span><span class="font2"> (Hornby, 2010: 1593). In Indonesian </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tren</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gaya mutakhir </span><span class="font2">(Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 1210) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kecenderungan</span><span class="font2"> (Echols and Shadily, 2003: 234). From the meaning comparison stated above, it can be seen that both the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gaya mutakhir</span><span class="font2"> and the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kecenderungan</span><span class="font2"> are not suitable to be used as the equivalent of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> in this context. Hence, it is reasonable to translate the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> by borrowing it in RL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Data NB.05</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL Text :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">“ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I love it. I took a short suit </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">design</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">course in Hong Kong and lived there for a while, so it’s a little nostalgic for me. (CM, 2015: 89)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">RL Text:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">“ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Saya cinta Hong Kong. Saya mengambil kursus pendek </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">desain</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">jas dan tinggal di sana selama beberapa waktu, jadi negara itu berkesan untuk saya. (CM, 2015: 90)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> in SL text is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. It can be seen that the form of the SL word is different from that of RL : de</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">sign</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">-&gt; de</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">sain.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">The reason is that the translator translated the word and it was then adapted to the Indonesian language norm. It is similar to the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boutique</span><span class="font2"> in data NB.01 and the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion</span><span class="font2"> in data NB.02, the absorption of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font2"> is a kind of absorption with spelling adjustment without pronunciation modification based on the Indonesian language norm as have been stated above (Hidayati, 2012: 82-83).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Not all the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">designs</span><span class="font2"> in SL text are translated by borrowing them into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. In paragraph 9 the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">membuat</span><span class="font2"> while in paragraph 12 the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">designing</span><span class="font2"> is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">merancang</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">designer</span><span class="font2"> is not translated by borrowing them in RL text either, but it is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">perancang</span><span class="font2"> (paragraph 1, paragraph 11, paragraph 12, paragraph 14). The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">merancang, membuat</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian (Pusat Bahasa, 2007: 257). But as can be seen in the text presented above, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">translated by simply borrowing it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font2"> in RL text. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">design</span><span class="font2"> in this context can also be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">merancang (merancang jas)</span><span class="font2"> but the translator preferred to translate it by borrowing and adapting it to the norm of RL. Besides, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">desain</span><span class="font2"> is also widely used in Indonesian mostly in the fashion world. It is the same as the term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show</span><span class="font2"> (data PB.02), from the tendency that the translator applied the borrowing technique, the translator probably was eager to create the stylistic effect mostly in fashion or s/he considered the word in RL less popular than SL word.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the discussion above, some conclusions can be drawn:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are two types of borrowing found in the translation of CM article namely: the pure borrowing and naturalized borrowing. The pure borrowing is the process when a SL word or term is taken over purely or without any changes to the RL. This is made by the translator to keep the textual meaning in the source language for the sake of the accuracy of meaning through the form. While the naturalized borrowing takes words or terms in SL but they are then naturalized or adapted to the norm of the RL (mostly the spelling rules). This is made to increase the readability of RL text.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The application of borrowing found in the translation of CM article is mostly the adjustment of spelling. The adjustments of those words are based on the Indonesian language norm. But the adjustment of the consonant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">d</span><span class="font2"> in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trend</span><span class="font2"> is not regulated in PUEBIYD, although the borrowing form </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tren</span><span class="font2"> is widely used in Indonesian. The absorption of the term </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fashion show</span><span class="font2"> is not standard based on the Indonesian norm, since according to PUEBIYD, the term which is widely used; therefore, it does not need to be italicized. From the tendency that the translator applied the borrowing technique, there are two reasons why the translator used the borrowing technique: a) The translator did not find the equivalent of the word being</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">translated in RL; b) The translator was eager to create the stylistic effect mostly in fashion or s/he considered the word in RL less popular than SL word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although borrowing is the simplest way in translating SL word, a translator should be</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">more careful in using this technique since it will affect the readability of RL text. In borrowing a word, the translator better considers whether the word is shared or not by the RL reader. Whenever borrowing is really needed, the borrowing should be adapted to the norm of RL to increase the readability of RL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Brata, Frans I Made. 2012. Teknik Peminjaman Dalam Penerjemahan. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah lengkap Seminar Nasional Bahasa Ibu V Dalam Rangka Memperingati Hari Bahasa Ibu Internasional.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar, 17-18 Februari 2012.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Creswell, John W. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative, quantitative and Mixed Methods Approach</span><span class="font2">. University of Nebraska. Lincoln. Sage Publication. [Accessed on May 15, 2015] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;available</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">from:URL</span><a href="http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic"><span class="font2">:</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic</span><span class="font2">1</span></a><span class="font2">334586.files/2003_Creswell_A%2 0for%20Design.pdf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Echols, John M and Hassan Shadily. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Inggris- Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hidayati, Inoer. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Buku Pintar EYD</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Indonesia Tera.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advance Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jendra, I Wayan. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolingfuistik: Teori dan Penerapannya</span><span class="font2">.Surabaya. Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jupriono,D. 2012. Kata Serapan Bahasa Sansekerta Dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Journal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Surabaya: Universitas 17 Agustus 1945</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to Cross- Language Equivalence. The 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition.</span><span class="font2"> Boston: University Press of America,Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Molina, L &amp;&nbsp;Albir, A.H. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach.</span><span class="font2"> Spain: Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patini, Ni Putu Ika. 2011. Borrowing in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mirror Image</span><span class="font2"> and Its Translation in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Belahan Jiwa</span><span class="font2">. (Thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pusat Bahasa Departemen Pendidikan Nasional.2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta : Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta : Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sutopo, H.B. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodelogi Penelitian Kualitatif, Dasar Teori dan Terapannya Dalam Penelitian</span><span class="font2">. Surakarta: Universitas Sebelas Maret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Venuti, Lawrence. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font2">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Widiastuti, Ni Made Ayu. 2011. Terjemahan Istilah-Istilah Arsitektur Tradisional Bali kedalam Bahasa Inggris. The Translation of Balinese Traditional Architectural Terms into English. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Lengkap Seminar Nasional Bahasa Ibu Dalam Rangka Memperingati Hari Bahasa Ibu Internasional.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar, 21 Februari 2011.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Data Source:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Colours Magazine June 2015 edition.</span></p>