---
layout: full_article
title: "THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JIM AND HUCKLEBERRY FINN IN TWAIN’S THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN"
author: "Wawan Sukrisna Jaya I Gede"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JIM AND HUCKLEBERRY FINN IN TWAIN’S THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I GEDE WAWAN SUKRISNA JAYA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam studi ini novel dipakai sebagai sumber data penulis Amerika Mark Twain yang berjudul The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Tokoh dalam novel ini yaitu seorang anak laki-laki remaja yang bernama Tom Huckleberry Finn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode menganalisis data dalam studi ini adalah deskriptif. Data yang dikumpulkan dari sumber data dianalisa berdasarkan teori William Kenney dalam bukunya How to Analyze Fiction, dan teori Warren dan Wellek dengan bukunya Theory of Literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Seperti kebanyakan karya sastra, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn menggabungkan beberapa tema yang dikembangkan di sekitar alur cerita untuk menciptakan sebuah cerita yang menarik. Dalam hal ini, cerita ini dari seorang anak muda, Huck, dan seorang budak yang melarikan diri, Jim. Selama pengembaraan menyusuri Sungai Mississippi mereka menghadapi banyak konflik dengan masyarakat yang ditemui. Tetapi dalam pengembaraan bersama Jim, Huckleberry Finn mempelajari dan mengalami perkembangan moral, etika, dan kemanusian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ketika Huck dan Jim berusaha mencari kebebasan dengan mengarungi sungai Mississippi, makna kebebasan yang mereka dapat sangat bertolak belakang dengan peradaban dan budaya masyarakat yang ada dan berdiam di sepanjang sungai Mississippi yang panjang dan besar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada akhir cerita ini, Huck keluar dari masyarakat yang penuh dengan peraturan yang ketat karena keinginannya untuk pergi ke Oklahoma, dan kota-kota lainnya. Sedangkan Jim adalah satu-satunya karakter yang keluar dari masyarakat Amerika Selatan yang mendukung perbudakan dan menuju ke daerah Amerika Utara di mana daerah tersebut mempunyai paham anti perbudakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: rasisme, kebebasan, persamaan hak.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To analyse a literary work is to identify the separate parts that make it up, to determine the relationships among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole (Kenney, 1966:5). Novel is one of the examples of fictional prose that describes character and introduces more than one impression, effect or emotion. Character is one of the important aspects because it carries the author's message that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education, and many other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Novel is one of the forms of literary works; it is a fictional piece of prose that is usually written in a narrative style. Novels tell stories, which are typically defined as a series of events described in a sequence. It has been a part of human culture for over a thousand years, although its origins are somewhat debated. Regardless of how it began, the novel has risen to prominence and remained one of the most popular and treasured examples of human culture and writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To analyse a literary work is to identify the separate parts that make it up, to determine the relationships among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole (Kenney, 1966:5). Character is one of the important aspects because it carries the author's message that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education, and many other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study is focused on Huckleberry Finn as the main character and the reason to analyse the main character is because it takes an important part in the story and appears continually from the beginning until the end of the story which makes it occupy the central position in the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background mentioned above, the focus of this study is limited to the study of the problems which appear in this story. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The relationship between Jim and Huckleberry Finn in this novel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What message does the writer want to convey through </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study is intended to fulfil three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to novella in order to get better understanding of Mark Twain’s novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out the metaphorical meaning of the story and what message the writer wants to convey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department to write a scientific work which gives contribution to this department, so this writing can be used as a reference to help the students write the analysis of this novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three aspects of the research in this study; they consist of data source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected from the story entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn</span><span class="font1"> by Mark Twain (cited from The Materials Development and Review Branch English Language Programs Division United States Information Agency). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn</span><span class="font1"> was one of the first novels to be written entirely in dialect. Huck is an uneducated boy from a particular region of the country, and the language and sentence structure in which he tells his story reflect that. Mark Twain wrote </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn</span><span class="font1"> as a sequel to his best-selling children's book, however, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn's</span><span class="font1"> language and its themes make it too difficult for children to comprehend. Twain intended it for adults.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through reading the story intensively and noting down all the information relevant to Tom Sawyer as the focus of discussion. Then the data were identified in accordance with their type then descriptively presented. The data were collected as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The story was selected and carefully noted down the selected items on the related topic.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does Huckleberry Finn make a relationship with Jim, the nigger and how they inter-relate each other?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis correlates to the problems that were formulated. The method used for analyzing the data was descriptive. The data were collected from the above data source and were analyzed using the theory proposed by William Kenney. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">, and theory of Warren and Wellek entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1"> written in 1962.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Characters are the most important component of any narrative. Without them, there would be no story. Character development is an important skill to master because characters are important parts of any creative writing for novels or short stories.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the previous novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1"> written by the same writer, it ended with Tom and Huckleberry finding a stash of gold some robbers had hidden in a cave. The boys received $6,000 apiece, which the local judge, Judge Thatcher, put into a trust. The money in the bank now accrues a dollar a day from interest. Then, the Widow Douglas adopted and tried to “civilize” Huck. Huck couldn't stand it, so he threw on his old rags and ran away. He has since returned because Tom Sawyer told him he could join his new band of robbers if he would return to the Widow “and be respectable.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What is stressed about Huck’s character is that his moral sense – his</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ability to distinguish between right and wrong in his actions – is not yet developed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What is the “first” thing Huck does in the novel?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He runs away, from Widow Douglas and her attempts to “civilize” him. But what happens? Tom Sawyer – he hunted Huck up and said he was going to start a band of robbers, and Huck might join if he would to go back to the widow and be respectable, so he went back.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Now, can a person be a robber and “respectable” at the same time? No, not really. But Huck does not see the inconsistency, nor does Tom. In their youthful romantic view of life, a person can be a robber and “respectable” at the same time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Now, although he isn’t able to distinguish between right and wrong, Huck knows that they exist. He is not an amoral person (one who never bothers to question whether an action is right or wrong. His problem is that he does not know what authority he can trust in to decide what is right and what is wrong. Can he believe what widow Douglas tells him about right or wrong? Can he believe Tom Sawyer?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What happens to Huck is that as a result of his journey down the Mississippi with Jim, Huck learns that it is best if he trusts in himself and his own humanitarian instincts to decide if an action is right or wrong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But before Huck can learn to trust in himself and his developing sense of morality, he must overcome beliefs and people who prevent him from believing in himself. Now let’s go back to the beginning of the book:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">- Who is Huck living with? He lives with Widow Douglas and Miss Watson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">- What are they trying to do to Huck? They are trying to civilize him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">- What does civilizing a person involve? Someone who does not yet know what kind of behavior is right and what kind of behavior is wrong in his or her culture in this store American culture. So he needs to be taught.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Widow Douglas and Miss Watson are trying to teach Huck society’s rules about what is right and what is wrong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Society’s moral rules are largely based on the religion of the people in the society. So the two women set about teaching Huck about the people in the Bible. Widow Douglas wants to teach Huck about Moses, the man who received the Ten Commandments from God, which are supposed to form the basis of Christianity’ s system of morality. But what happens?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Huck says that Moses had been dead a considerable long time; so then he does not care no more about Moses, because he does not believe in what dead people say.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The moral rules of previous generation may not no longer fit the present generation. For example: In USA abortion used to be illegal because they ended the life of the baby’s life. But now they are legal because with the coming of the Women’s Liberation Movement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Along with Huck, Jim is the other major character in the novel and one of the most controversial figures in American literature. There are several possibilities in terms of the inspiration for Jim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the beginning of the novel, Jim is depicted as simple and trusting, to the point of gullibility. These qualities are not altered during the course of the novel; instead, they are fleshed out and prove to be positives instead of negatives. Jim's simple nature becomes common sense, and he constantly chooses the right path for him and Huck to follow. For example, when Huck and Jim are on Jackson's Island, Jim observes the nervous actions of birds and predicts that it will rain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jim's prediction comes true as a huge storm comes upon the island. The moment is an important one, for it establishes Jim as an authority figure and readers recognize his experience and intelligence. Jim's insight is also revealed when he recognizes the duke and the king to be frauds. Like Huck, Jim realizes he cannot stop controlling the raft when the float comes in the river of Mississippi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jim's most important quality, however, is his &quot;gullible&quot; nature. As the novel progresses, this nature reveals itself as complete faith and trust in his friends, especially Huck. The one trait that does not fluctuate throughout the novel is Jim's belief in Huck. After Huck makes up a story to preserve Jim's freedom in Chapter 16, Jim remarks that he will never forget Huck's kindness. Jim's love for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Huck, however, extends past their friendship to the relationship of parent and child.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When Huck and Jim come upon the dead man on the floating house, Jim warns Huck not to look at the man's face. The gesture is kind, but when readers learn later that the man was Finn’s Pap, they realize the affection Jim has for Huck. Jim does not want Huck to suffer through the pain of seeing his dead father, and this moment establishes Jim as a father figure to Huck.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jim's actions, no doubt, are partly a result of his inability to distance himself from the society in which he has been conditioned. His existence has been permeated by social and legal laws that require him to place another race above his own, regardless of the consequences. But as with Huck, Jim is willing to sacrifice his life for his friends. There are countless opportunities for Jim to leave Huck during the tale, but he remains by Huck's side so the two of them can escape together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When Huck and Jim become separated in the fog, Jim tells Huck that his heart would mostly break because Huck would be lost. He did not care no more what happened to him and the raft. Jim's freedom, then, is not worth the price of Huck's life, and readers are constantly reminded that Jim would readily risk his own life to aid Huck.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When Huck is taken in by the Shepherdsons, Jim waits in the swamp and devises a plan where both of them can continue down the river. Moreover, when Jim has the chance to be free at the end of the novel, he stays by Tom Sawyer's side, another example of his loyalty. Jim's logic, compassion, intelligence, and above all, his loyalty toward Huck, Tom, and his own family, establish him as a heroic figure. To think of things to mention about a character is to give more insight into his/her life. His/her family: relationships, beliefs, habits, religion, activities, and his/her strong point: strength, determination, forgiveness, and so forth. This trait may help the character to overcome hardship in the narrative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Possibly the most troubling aspect of the novel's close is the realization that all has been for naught. Jim has, technically, been a free man almost the entire time. All of Huck's moral crises, all the lies he has told, all the societal conventions he has broken, have been part of the story In a way, the knowledge of Jim's emancipation erases the novel that has come before it. Then, we are left questioning the meaning of what we have read: perhaps Twain means the novel as a reminder that life is ultimately a matter of imperfect information and ambiguous situations, and that the best one can do is to follow one's head and heart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Perhaps Twain, finishing this novel twenty years after the Civil War concluded and slaves were freed, means also to say that black Americans may be free according to the law, but that they remain chained by a society that refuses to acknowledge their rightful and equal standing as individuals.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the end, Huckleberry Finn moves beyond questions of slavery, to broader questions of morality and race. Unfortunately, these questions seldom have straightforward answers, and thus the ending of the novel contains as many new problems as solutions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Forster, E. M. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Aspects of the Novel</span><span class="font1">. Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. How to Analyse Fiction. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker,, K.L. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">. USA: Holt, Rinehart, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner, Kathleen. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font1">. Chicago: NTC Publishing Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tarigan, Henry Guntur.1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Twain, Mark.1988. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Washington: The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Materials Development and Review Branch English Language Programs Division United States Information Agency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>