---
layout: full_article
title: "THE CHARACTER ANALYSIS IN PEARL S. BUCK’ S THE ENEMY"
author: "Ora Adenois Corry I Putu"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE CHARACTER ANALYSIS IN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PEARL S. BUCK’ S THE ENEMY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I PUTU ORA ADENOIS CORRY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah karya sastra yang dibuat berdasarkan imajinasi penulis dan umumnya mencerminkan kondisi sosial, yang menggunakan lingkungan sosial di sekitarnya sebagai dasar. Wellek dan Warren (1973:39) menyatakan bahwa karya sastra itu sendiri membenarkan semua kepentingan kita dalam kehidupan seorang penulis, dalam lingkungan sosial dan seluruh proses sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Untuk menganalisis sebuah karya sastra diperlukan identifikasi bagian-bagian terpisah untuk menentukan hubungan antara bagian-bagiannya untuk menemukan hubungan bagian tersebut dengan karya sastranya (Kenney, 1966:5). Novel adalah salah satu contoh prosa fiksi yang menggambarkan karakter dan memperkenalkan lebih dari satu kesan, efek atau emosi digambarkan sebagai cerita lama untuk menulis dalam sebuah buku. Karakter merupakan salah satu aspek penting, ia membawa berita dari penulis yang dapat membawa berbagai nilai dalam kehidupan manusia seperti moralitas, pendidikan dan banyak lainnya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam studi ini, cerita berjudul The Enemy dipilih untuk dianalisis. Dalam kisah The Enemy Dr. Sadao dibesarkan dalam budaya khas Jepang. Ayahnya adalah seorang patriot besar. Dalam cerita ini, seorang tahanan Amerika yang terdampar di depan rumah Sadao setelah melarikan diri. Dokter dan istrinya terpecah antara pertanyaan kemanusiaan dan patriotisme. Mereka ragu apakah mereka harus menyelamatkan manusia ini atau menyerahkan pada pemerintah Jepang. Sadao adalah ahli bedah penting bagi negara sehingga tidak dikirim ke medan perang. Kemudian Sadao mengungkapkan tentang tahanan tersebut kepada sang Jenderal dan Jenderal itu setuju untuk membantu dia dengan mengirim pembunuh untuk membunuh orang Amerika itu. Pada akhirnya kemanusiaan mendominasi patriotisme dan tahanan dibiarkan bebas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Etnik, kemanusiaan, patriotisme</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literary work cannot be separated from human life. The expression of literary form is language. Literature is an act of language, it is inseparable from life because it presents and describes the events that can happen in real life in society. Through literary work, which usually reflects our life, we can experience through our imagination and also we learn about human being.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A literary work is created based on the imagination of the writer and it generally reflects the social condition, which uses the social surrounding as the foundation. Wellek and Warren ( 1973:39 ) state that the works of literature themselves justify all our interests in the life of an author, in this social environment and the whole process of literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To analyse a literary work is to identify the separate parts that make it up, to determine the relationship among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole (Kenney, 1966:5). Novel is one of the examples of fictional prose that describes character and introduces more than one impression, effect or emotion described as a long story to write in a book. Character is one of important aspects, it carries the author's massage that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education and many others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">An American-trained Japanese surgeon working in Japan during World War II, pulls a wounded American sailor, presumably an escaped POW, from the surf behind his home. Against the advice of his wife, he hides the sailor, operates on him, and preserves his life temporarily.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Becoming fearful for his family, he reports what he has done to his patient, an official in the Japanese military. The officer says he will arrange to have the American assassinated in order to spare possible retribution against Sadao, the surgeon, and his family. It doesn’t happen, and Sadao is left with determining how to rid himself of this hazard he has brought into his home and healed. He makes a series of decisions that lend themselves to widely varying interpretations in terms of his motivation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background mentioned above, the focus of this study is limited to the study of character. The problems then appear in this story are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why does Sadao the Japanese surgeon help the enemy?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What message does the writer want to show to the readers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study is intended to fulfil three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to short story in order to get better understanding of Pearl S Buck’s short story entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Enemy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out what message the writer actually wants to say.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department to write a scientific work which gives contribution to this department, so this writing can be used as a reference in literary analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three aspects of the research of the study; they are; data source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected from the story entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Enemy</span><span class="font1"> Pearl S. Buck (cited in </span><a href="http://tlc.cet.ac.il/ShowItem.aspx?ItemID=36ccb108-d73c-4db3-ad15-4112881f0c74&amp;lang=EN"><span class="font1">http://tlc.cet.ac.il/ShowItem.aspx?ItemID=36ccb108-d73c-4db3-ad15-4112881f0c74&amp;lang=EN</span></a><span class="font1"> Inc).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.2. Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through reading the story intensively and making notes all the information relevant to the narrator and his father as the focus of being</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">discussed and then the data were identified in accordance with their types then descriptively presented. They are several types of collecting data :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading the story carefully, selecting and taking note of the selected items based on the related topic.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Find out the moral decision of the Japanese surgery to help the enemy in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Enemy</span><span class="font1"> and what message the writer wants to convey to the readers?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis correlates to the problems that are formulated. The method for analyzing the data is descriptive. The data were collected from the data source and through the data collection, and were analyzed using the theory of William Kenney. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">, theory of Warren and Wellek. 1962. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">, and other supporting theory of Knicbocker and Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">An American-trained Japanese surgeon working in Japan during World War II, pulls a wounded American sailor, presumably an escaped POW, from the surf behind his home. Against the advice of his wife, he hides the sailor, operates on him, and preserves his life temporarily.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Becoming fearful for his family, he reports what he has done to his patient, an official in the Japanese military. The officer says he will arrange to have the American assassinated in order to spare possible retribution against Sadao, the surgeon, and his family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This story raises the high-level moral questions about ethics in the time of war. Does one’s obligation to country supersede obligation to family? When is an enemy to be treated as threat? How are ethical principles prioritized when they are in conflict of this nature? And, in terms of the story itself, how does one examine</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the motives that drive Sadao to make his decisions? Are they virtue-based? Based in his culture as Japanese or his culture as surgeon?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sadao had taken this into his mind as he did everything his father said, his father who never joked or played with him but who spent infinite pains upon him who was his only son. Sadao knew that his education was his father’s chief concern. For this reason he had been sent at twenty-two to America to learn all that could be learned of surgery and medicine. He had come back at thirty, and before his father died he had seen Sadao become famous not only as a surgeon but as a scientist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sadao knew, that there was some danger that the American soldier might need an operation for a condition for which he was now being treated medically. Now Sadao remembered the wound, and with his expert fingers he began to search for it. Blood flowed freshly at his touch. On the right side of his lower back Sadao saw that a gun wound had been reopened. The flesh was blackened with powder. Sometimes, not many days ago, the man had been shot and had not been tended. It was bad chance that a rock had struck the wound.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But he did not answer. At this moment he felt the tip of his instrument strike against something hard, dangerously near the kidney. All thought left him. He felt only the purest pleasure. He probed with his fingers, delicately, familiar with every atom of this human body. His old American professor of anatomy had seen to that knowledge. “Ignorance of the human body is the surgeon’s cardinal sin, sirs!” he had thundered at his classes year after year. “To operate without as complete knowledge of the body as if you had made it – anything less than that is murder.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“This man,” he thought, “there is no reason under heaven why he should live.” Unconsciously this thought made him ruthless and he proceeded swiftly. In his dream the man moaned, but Sadao paid no heed except to mutter at him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Groan,” he muttered, “groan if you like. I am not doing this for my own pleasure. In fact, I do not know why I am doing it.” The man sank again into silence so profound that Sadao took up his wrist, hating the touch of it. Yes, there</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">was still a pulse so faint, so feeble, but enough, if he wanted the man to live, to give hope.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He turned as swiftly as though he had never paused and he took the man’s wrist again. The pulse under his finger fluttered once or twice and then grew stronger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The young man woke, so weak, his blue eyes so terrified when he perceived where he was.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When Sadao came in the third day after the operation, he found the young man sitting up, his face bloodless with the effort.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Lie down,” Sadao cried. “Do you want to die?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He forced the man down gently and strongly and examined the wound. “You may kill yourself if you do this sort of thing,” he scolded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“What are you going to do with me?” the boy muttered. He looked just now barely seventeen. “Are you going to hand me over?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For a moment Sadao did not answer. He finished his examination and then pulled the silk quilt over the man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I do not know myself what I shall do with you,” he said. “I ought of course to give you to the police. You are a prisoner of war – no, do not tell me anything.” He put up his hand as he saw the young man about to speak. “Do not even tell me your name unless I ask it.” They looked at each other for a moment, and then the young man closed his eyes and turned his face to the wall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He stood for a moment on the veranda, gazing out to the sea from where the young man had come that other night. And into his mind, although without reason, there came other white faces he had known – the professor. He remembered his old teacher of anatomy, who had been so insistent on mercy with the knife, and then he remembered the face of his fat landlady. He had had great difficulty in finding a place to live in America because he was a Japanese. The Americans were full of prejudice, and it had been bitter to live in it, knowing himself their superior. But then, white people were repulsive, of course. It was a relief to be openly at war with them at last. Now he remembered the youthful, haggard face of his prisoner – white and repulsive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Strange,” he thought, “I wonder why I could not kill him?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the story </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Enemy,</span><span class="font2"> Dr. Sadao had been brought up in a typical Japanese culture. His father was a great patriot. It is the time of the world war. An American prisoner is washed ashore in front of Sadao's house after escaping. The doctor and his wife are torn between the question of humanity and patriotism. They were in doubt whether they should save this man or hand him over. Sadao being an important surgeon to the general of the country is not sent for the war. Later, Sadao reveals about the prisoner. The general agrees to help him by promising him that he would send assassins to kill the American.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Again they confront an opportunity to save him; the doctor gives him a boat, clothing, and food so that he may escape to a neighboring island and wait for a fishing boat. Days later, the doctor confesses to the general that the American has somehow escaped, and in a strange reversal, the general realizes with considerable anxiety that he has forgotten his promise to the doctor. The general then begs the doctor not to reveal their secret to the authorities, and the doctor willingly swears to the general’s loyalty before returning home. At the end humanity dominates over patriotism and the prisoner is left free.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Adventures in American Literature</span><span class="font1">. 1968. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buck, Pearl S. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Enemy</span><span class="font1"> (cited in</span></p>
<p><a href="http://tlc.cet.ac.il/ShowItem.aspx?ItemID=36ccb108-d73c-4db3-ad15-"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://tlc.cet.ac.il/ShowItem.aspx?ItemID=36ccb108-d73c-4db3-ad15-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">4112881f0c74&amp;lang=EN Inc).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Forster, E. M. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Aspects of the Novel</span><span class="font1">. Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. How to Analyze Fiction. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker,, K.L. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">. USA: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Scannell, Vernon. 1984. How to Enjoy Novels. London: Judy Piatkus, Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith. A. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature; Stories, Poems, Plays, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Essays. Fourth Edition.</span><span class="font1"> New York: The McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tarigan, Henry Guntur.1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Webster, Roger. 1990. Studying Literary Theory: An Introduction. London: Edward Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiyatmi. 2006. Pengantar Kajian Sastra. Yogyakarta: Pustaka</span></p>