---
layout: full_article
title: "Analysis of Women's and Men's Language in Customer's Conversation at Warung Santai"
author: "Indri Novita Sari, Ida Ayu Made Puspani, I Wayan Mulyawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 17.1 Oktober 2016: 140 - 146</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Analysis of Women's and Men's Language in Customer's Conversation at </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Warung Santai</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Indri Novita Sari<sup>1*</sup>, Ida Ayu Made Puspani<sup>2</sup>, I Wayan Mulyawan<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:indrii_ns@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[indrii_ns@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:dayupuspani@gmail.com"><span class="font2">dayupuspani@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:moelya01@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[moelya01@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>*</sup></span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi dengan judul &quot;Analysis of Women's and Men's Language in Customers Conversation at Warung Santai&quot; bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi ciri linguistik dari wanita dan pria serta untuk fokus mencari tahu fungsi ciri linguistik wanita dalam percakapanya dengan pelanggan di Warung Santai.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lingkup skripsi ini hanya untuk menganalisis ciri bahasa antara wanita dan pria dalam percakapan antara pelanggan di Warung Santai. Teori yang digunakan dalam skripsi ini adalah The Features of Women Language yang oleh Lakoff pada tahun 1975, The Features of Men's Language oleh Coates pada tahun 2003. Teori lain yang digunakan yaitu The Linguistic Function of Women's Language oleh Lakoff serta The Theory of Miscommunication between Women and Men oleh Coates pada tahun 1986.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisis menunjukan ciri linguistik wanita yang terdapat dalam percakapan pelanggan di Warung Santai sebagai berikut: penggunaan tanda tanya, pertanyaan intonasi dalam pernyataan deklaratif, permintaan maaf, penerimaan kata sifat, batas leksikal, dan kurangnya selera humor. Ciri linguistik pria yang terdapat di percakapan pelanggan yaitu: penggunaan topic stereotip maskulin, hanya lelaki, perhatian yang baik secara detail, satu dari percakapan pelanggan tersebut ditemukan menggunakan “theory of miscommunication between women and men”, maksudnya topik yang dibicarakan melompat dari satu topik ke topik lainnya. Yang terakhir mengenai analisis fungsi ciri linguistik wanita yang terdapat dalam beberapa percakapan pelanggan antara lain: fungsi dari batas leksikal, tanda tanya, intonasi tinggi, bentuk paling sopan, kata sifat, penekanan yang tegas, dan yang terakhir adalah fungsi dari penggunaan kata umpatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Wanita, Pria, Ciri Linguistik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Every communication certainly uses language indeed. Language itself can be described as a very important thing for people who need to communicate each with another. Language can also be defined as a tool for communication. The language can have an important role in society, because with language, relationship grows up directly. Conversation is the ways how people communicate and interact with each other. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">conversation, people usually need to communicate with each other using language for many purposes, such as: asking question, giving information, having conversation, helping each other, and having gossip in their community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Women and men speak differently in any community and recently sociolinguistics has begun to pay attention to the co-variation of language and sex. The customers can be described as persons who have visited some restaurants, hotels or other places to enjoy facilities, food, or everything they indeed. Analyzing conversation by customer has not been discussed by previous students. In the other reason analyzing the women and men language in conversation is very interesting to do, because the people in this world both women and men always talk different style with their partner or their friends.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background that has explained above, the problems of this study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of linguistic features are used in the women’s and men's language in the customer conversation at Warung Santai?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the linguistic functions of women's language in customer's conversation at Warung Santai?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what kinds of linguistic features are used in the women's and men's language in the customer's conversation at Warung Santai.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what are the linguistic functions of women's in customer's language in the conversations at Warung Santai.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Methodology is the way or procedure that is used in order to examine certain objects. It is the way or process and amount of procedures how to apply approaches the problems to find the answer through the finding, collecting, and analyzing the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The qualitative research method was used in this research. According to Cresswell (2002) &quot;Qualitative is an inquiry approach in which the inquirer: analyzes and codes the data for description and themes, interprets the meaning of the information drawn from the personal reflection and past research, and writes the final report that includes personal bases and a flexible structure&quot;.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken by observing and recording of the customer's conversations between men and men, men and women, and the last between women and women at Warung Santai. The data of this is study were inn the form of 10 conversations with mix person</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The methods applied to this research were observing and recording the conversation of the customers at Warung Santai. The recording data is a method of collecting data by recording the conversation and observiation method is listening and analyzing the customer's conversation at Warung Santai. The data were collected from November 2015 until January 2016.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The techniques of collecting data of this study were presented as follows: The first one the tool (hand phone) was prepared to record the conversation at Warung Santai. The second one was asking for the permission to the owner of Warung Santai. The third one was asking for the permission to the customer. The fourth was recording the customer's conversations at Warung Santai, between women and women, between women and men, and between men and men. The fifth one was listening carefully the conversation of the customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analyzing was about the linguistic features and the linguistic function of women and men language used in their conversation. The data were analyzed based on theories about the features of men and women language proposed by (Lakoff, 1975) and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Coates, 2003) and the function of women linguistic features proposed by (Lakoff, 1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Women Linguistic Features</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Conversation 1</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use of Tag Questions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Almost every woman in the world uses tag questions to get what she needs. Tag question is the usage between outright statements and yes no question. There is one example of tag question found in conversation 1, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. Shanti: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">It is good?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Allan: Ya ya good</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The explanation of the example Tag Question is as follows: a). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;It is good?&quot;</span><span class="font2"> has meaning that the question needs yes or no answer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark20"></a>2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use of Question Intonation in Declaratives Statements</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It contains the statement or form of a declarative answer to a question. There is one example of question intonation in the declarative statement found in conversation 1, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. Shanti: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Now its like totally different ya</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Allan: Ya ya I know it coming</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The statement from Shanti to Allan &quot;Now its like totally different ya?&quot; consists of declarative statement because in that sentence there is explanation about the differences between the old Bali and Bali nowadays. Then Allan answers with the confidence that the changes definitely come, so he said &quot;Ya ya I know it coming&quot;. He thinks that everything surely changed, it depends about the time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use of Apologies</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Women apologize more than men do, it's the fact. Apologies are inexorably related to the concept of politeness. We know that women more polite than men. There is one apology found in conversation 1, such as :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shanti: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I am sorry,</span><span class="font2"> where are you from?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this case, Shanti said &quot;I am sorry&quot; to ask and pardon that she just interrupt the conversation between Otmar and Allan. Shanti used the form &quot;I am sorry&quot; because she knows that she was wrong. She wants to apologize for both Allan and Otmar for interrepting their conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of the Men’s Linguistic Features</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Conversation 2</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use of Miscommunication between Women and Men</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In another condition, according to Holmes (1992), the theory about Men’s vs Women’s behavior was found as the fact that men on the other hand jumps from one topic to another. It was found in these dialogues:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zack: I have not from match so what we go to the water park?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tina: Oh cool, any wanna get the lower wet happy the ride or you like any key too see the cops?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zack: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Aaa who probably take a newborn</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence that Zack said &quot;Aaa who probably take a newborn?&quot; is not related to the previous topic from Tina. It means that men did the jumping topic from one to another and it is related to one of the theory of miscommunication between men and women.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Function of Women's Linguistic Features</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Conversation 3</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Function of Lexical Hedge</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The lexical hedge found in the first conversation, that is, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am sorry</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shanti: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I am sorry</span><span class="font2">, where you from?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The function of hedge could be as an apology for making an assertion. &quot;I am sorry&quot; in this example represents that an apology statement by Shanti to her friend. This conversation consists of the dialogue from Shanti, that she said &quot;I am sorry&quot; to interrupt the conversation between Shanti, Otma, and Allan. She felt uncertainty about interuping</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">conversation then she said that word to get attention and asked the conversation even she was not sure for what she did. She knows if her measure was wrong, hence she said sorry to Allan and Otmar. In this content she wants to know where Allan comes from, because Allan never told her before.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The topic of this discussion in this study is about women's and men’s linguistic features and the function of the women's linguistic features. The discussion is focused based on two problems. The first problem is about women and men linguistic features used in customer's conversation and the second problem is about the women function used in the customer's conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The result of discussion found that women and men were almost the same when they talked with their friends or partners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">First, overall the women linguistic features found in customers conversations from conversation 1, conversation 2 and conversation 3 were: the use of tag question (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it is good?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do you think?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">totally changes?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">really?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">are you serious?</span><span class="font2">), the use of question intonation in declaratives statements (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">now it's like totally different ya?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">totally changes?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">really?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">thirty minutes?</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">may be?</span><span class="font2">), the use of apologies (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am sorry</span><span class="font2">………), the use of empty adjective approval (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cute</span><span class="font2">), the use of lexical hedge (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you know</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I think</span><span class="font2">), and the use of sense of humor lacking (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Big no</span><span class="font2">..).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Second, all of the men in the world certainly love to communicate with their friends. The men’s features found in these data from conversation 1, conversation 2 and conversation 4 were the use of stereotypically masculine topic (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it seem similar</span><span class="font2">, , </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">looking for the cheapest beer</span><span class="font2">), the use of men only (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I bought my keep puss already…., So I go to Amlapura …., I miss the junction I take the wrong way…, Oh really good, it's really Bali</span><span class="font2">), the use of great attention on detail (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let's go there</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">no I don't think</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it's plenty place</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that’s why I like Sanur</span><span class="font2">), in one of the conversation the theory of miscommunication between women and men found; men on the other hand jumped from one topic to another. Men also used one of the women's linguistic features, that is, hedge form (e.g. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I think</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of using tag question in these conversations show that those conversations consist of yes no question and statement. The function of using rising intonation is to emphasize the fact found in those conversations. The function of using super polite form is to show that women in these conversations are well-known as delicate creatures who tend to use the super polite in their speech. As we know women are more polite than men in every single way. The function of using empty adjective approval is to explain admiration for something. The function of using emphatic stress in these conversations shows judgment on something from someone to the other. The last one is the function to avoid strong swear words to show the strength of emotion to something.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1990. Hedges and Boosters in Women's and Men's Speech. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language &amp;&nbsp;Communication</span><span class="font2">. Vol.10(3), pp:185-205.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coates, Jennifer. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men, and Language</span><span class="font2">. Harlow, Essex: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font2">. London: Pearson Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, Robin. 1975. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman's Place</span><span class="font2">. New York: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">146</span></p>