---
layout: full_article
title: "FLOUTING MAXIMS IN THE MOVIE FIFTY SHADES OF GREY"
author: "Ni Wayan Evitayani, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati, I Made Winaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.2 Agustus 2016: 195-199</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">FLOUTING MAXIMS IN THE MOVIE </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">FIFTY SHADES OF GREY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Ni Wayan Evitayani <sup>1*</sup>, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati<sup>2</sup>, I Made Winaya<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>123</sup>[English Department Faculty Of Arts Udayana University]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:evitayani@ymail.com"><span class="font3"> evitayani@ymail.com</span><span class="font0">]</span></a><span class="font0"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:sosisowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font3">sosisowati@yahoo.com </span></a><span class="font0">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:winayamade1@gmail.com"><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font3">winayamade1@gmail.com</span><span class="font0">]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi jenis maksim yang dilanggar dan untuk mengetahui jenis pelanggaran maksim yang paling banyak terjadi di dalam film berjudul Fifty Shades of Grey.Teori “Flouting Maxims” olehHerbert Paul Grice (Grice1975:49) digunakan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis maksim yang dilanggar. Metode deskriptif kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisa data. Hasil penelitian ini adalah tiga jenis maksim dengan sengaja telah dilanggar dan maksim kuantitas merupakan maksim yang paling banyak dilanggar oleh pemain utama di dalam film.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: pelanggaran, maksim, film</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Conversation always involves two people or a group of people. In oder to make the conversation run smoothly, the speaker and the interlocutor should be cooperative in communicating to each other. A misuderstanding often happens in the conversation and it is caused because one of them is not being cooperative, in this case, the speaker or the interlocutor says something which is hard to understand and it leads to misunderstanding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Therefore, Herbert Paul Grice proposes“Cooperative Principle” which enables effective and efisien comunication in a conversation by following the rules “Conversational Maxims”. This Conversational Maxims can be divided into four maxims, such as; maxim of quality, maxim of quantity, maxim of relevance and maxim of manner.In addition, if the speaker or the interlocutor fails to obey the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">maxim, &nbsp;then they are flouting it and this will not make the conversation run</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">smoothly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The speaker or the interlocutor in a conversation may fail to fulfill a maxim in various ways, such as; violati the maxims, opti out the maxims, clashi the maxims, and flout the maxims in which the maxims are being exploited. Thus, it is interesting to analyze whether flouting maxims have occured or not in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In relationship to the background, there are two problems that can be raised:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of maxims are flouted in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of flouting maxims mostly occuring in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Objectives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The objectives of the study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of maxims that are flouted in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To know the types of flouting maxims mostly occuring in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were taken from a movie entitled Fifty Shades of Grey directed by Sam Taylor- Johnson. Actually, this movie is based on a novel written by E.L. James and published on 20 June 2011 and has topped best-seller lists around the world. It is an erotic romance movie and tells story about the relationship between a girl college graduate with a business young man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were some reasons why this movie was chosen to be the data source. First, the dialogue in this movie mostly happens between the main characters and they have differentsocial statuses, professions, and especially the tastes of romance.; therefore, it may contain a lot of flouting maxims, the second one this movie has never been used for the data source and the last one, the story line in the movie isgreat, making this movie interesting to analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method of collecting data used in the present study is the documentation method. The movie and the script were obtained by downloading from the internet. The techniques of collecting data in this study were watching, listening, reading and note taking. First, watching and listening to the movie carefully. Then, reading the script play in order to catch the missing words. Last, selecting the relevant data by note-taking of the dialogue or utterance which is related to Grice’s Maxims .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A descriptive qualitative method was used to analyze the flouting maxims.The first step was classifying the utterances found in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font3"> based on the kinds of conversational maxims, especially the utterances which disobey the maxims whether they are the maxim of manner, maxim of quality, maxim of quantity or maxim of relevance. After classifying, the flouting maximswere analysed by using the Grice’s theory“Flouting the Maxim”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the observation in the movie and the script,only three maxims were flouted out of four conversational maxims, andthe maxim of quantity mostly occuredin the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flouting the Maxim of Quantity</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Data 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Christian : Miss Kavanagh, I'm Christian Grey, are you all right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : Actually Ms. Kavanagh was unavailable so she sent me. I hope you don't mind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Christian : And you are?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : Anastasia Steele. I'm studying English literature at Washington State.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the dialogue above, Anastasia flouted the maxim of quantity because she gave too much contribution to answering the Christian’s question. In order to follow the maxim of quantity, she should say her name.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data 2</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : You're very young to have amassed such an empire. To what do you owe your success?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Christian : Business is all about people, Miss Steele, and I'm very good at judging people. I know how they tick, what makes them flourish, what doesn't, what inspires them, and how to incentivize them. I employ an exceptional team, and I reward them well. My belief is to achieve success in any scheme, one has to make oneself master of that scheme, know it inside and out, and know every detail. I work hard, very hard to do that. I make decisions based on logic and facts. I have a natural gut instinct that can spot and nurture a good solid idea and good people. The bottom line is, it's always boils down to good people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this dialogue, it is shown that Christian gave too much explanation to answer the Anastasia’s question and Christian flouted the maxim of quantity.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data 3</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : Do you always make such personal observations?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Christian : I hadn't realized I was. Have I offended you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the dialogue above, Christian has flouted the maxim of quantity. He should been aswered it by Yes/ No to follow the maxim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flouting the Maxim of Relevance</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Data 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : Why did you send me the books?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Christian : Anastasia, are you okay? You sound strange.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the dialogue above, Christian has flouted the maxim of mnner because he was not aswering Anastasia’s question. It can be seen that the dialogue was unmatched.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flouting the Maxim of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">You have his cell number?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anastasia : I have his cell phone number.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the dialogue above, Kate has flouted the maxim of manner because her utterance was ambigous.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the previous analysis it can be concluded that maxim of quantity, maxim of manner and maxim of relevance werefloutedand it was flouted mostly by the main character in the movie. Moreover, the flouting of maxim of quantity mostly occured in the conversation. It can be assumed that in order to make an effective and well conversation, the characters in the movie must follow four conversational maxims as they did not flout the maxim of quality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Grice, Herbert Paul., 1975, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Logic and Conversation</span><span class="font3">, New York: Academic Press. Wijana, I DewaPutu, 1996, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatik</span><span class="font3">, Yogyakarta: ANDI Yogyakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tracy, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shades &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Grey</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Resources</span><a href="https://londontracy.files.wordpress.com/"><span class="font3">:</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://londontracy.files.wordpress.com/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">199</span></p>