---
layout: full_article
title: "The Three Dimensions  Of The Main Character In “Snow White And The Huntsman” Movie Script"
author: "Luh Wulan Astarin, I Gede Putu Sudana, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 154-162</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">The Three Dimensions</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Of The Main Character In “Snow White And The Huntsman” Movie Script</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Luh Wulan Astarini<sup>1*</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>2</sup>, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>123</sup>English Department Facultyof Arts Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:wulanastarini@gmail.com"><span class="font4">[wulanastarini@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font4"> <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:iputugedesudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">iputugedesudana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:isnu.maharani@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">isnu.maharani@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Studi yang berjudul The Three Dimensions of the Main Character in “Snow White and the Huntsman” Movie Script fokus menganalisa tiga dimensi yaitu fisiologis, psikologis dan sosiologis dari Snow White sebagai karakter utama. Studi ini juga menganalisis hubungan antara tiga dimensi, yaitu dimensi fisiologis dan psikologis, psikologis dan sosiologis, serta sosiologis dan fisiologis. Tujuan studi ini adalah menganalisis tiga dimensi dan hubungan ketiganya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ada tiga teori yang digunakan sebagai referensi dalam studi ini. Teori pertama mengadopsi buku berjudul Theory of Literature oleh Wellek dan Warren (1955). Teori kedua Practical Psychology oleh Karl S. Bernhardt (1953). Teori ketiga Theory of Sociology: An Introduction oleh Roucek dan Warren (1963).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil studi ini menunjukkan bahwa dari dimensi fisiologis, Snow White digambarkan sebagai wanita dewasa yang cantik. Dimensi psikologis, Snow White digambarkan sebagai gadis yang berhati tulus. Dimensi sosiologis, Snow White digambarkan sebagai seseorang dengan kepribadian pemimpin. Hubungan antara dimensi fisiologis dan psikologis Snow White adalah kecantikan wajahnya sejalan dengan kebaikannya. Hubungan antara dimensi psikologis dan sosiologis adalah bahwa ia menggabungkan kepribadiannya yang dapat meyakinkan orang dan sikapnya yang tidak pernah mudah menyerah. Hubungan antara dimensi sosiologis dan fisiologis dilihat dari kasta dan usia. Snow White mendapat kasta sebagai seorang putri ketika dia masih kecil dan menjadi ratu ketika dia dewasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Karakter Utama, Tiga Dimensi, Karakter Analisis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Literature is a creation which communicatively presents the author’s intent for aesthetic purpose. Literature has its genre; it can be divided into fiction and non-fiction. Fiction is an imaginative story or fantastical work; like fairy tales, short stories even</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">novels. And non-fiction is the opposite of fiction; it contains facts such as autobiographies, diaries and essays.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The fiction of literature can be analyzed using two approaches; they are intrinsic and extrinsic approaches. The intrinsic approach analyzes the internal part of a story; it consists of the analysis of theme, plot, setting and characters in the story. While the extrinsic approach analyzes what comes from outside the story which affects and is still related to the flow of the story in literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A movie script, as one of the fiction literature, used as the data source in this study is a fantasy movie entitled “Snow White and The Huntsman” which narrates a beautiful princess named Snow White and a huntsman, as her friend, who helped her defeat Ravenna, her stepmother, who killed Snow White’s father and usurped her father’s throne and power in the kingdom. The analysis focuses more on the character Snow White as the main character in this movie script. Character is a person who takes a role in a story and pictured by the specific description of three dimensions of the character; they are physiology, which is the study of the human body (Tokay, 1957: 1) and psychology that includes the human motivation, feeling and emotion (Bernhardt, 1953:45) and sociology which is the study of human beings in their group of relationship which studies interaction within and among groups of people (Roucek and Warren, 1963:3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Analyzing the main character in the movie script is interesting because it gives a different sense to analyze the three dimensions of the main character by reading the movie script. The main character is analyzed by seeing the description of the three dimensions of the character; the physiological, psychological and sociological dimensions. The description is given in detail in the movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the background above, there are three problems of interest to be discussed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are physiological, psychological and sociological dimensions of the main character in the “Snow White and The Huntsman” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the relation among the three dimensions of the main character in the “Snow White and the Huntsman” movie script?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain what are physiological, psychological and sociological dimensions of the main character in the “Snow White and the Huntsman” movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the relation among the three dimensions of the main character in the “Snow White and the Huntsman” movie script.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The primary data in this undergraduate paper were a movie script entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White and the Huntsman</span><span class="font4">. The method and technique used in collecting data was documentary method. The data in this study were analyzed qualitatively based on the physiological theory by Tokay (1957: 1), psychological theory by (Bernhardt, 1953:45) and the sociological theory by Roucek and Warren (1963:23-112).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into two parts. The first part analyzes the three dimensions of Snow White as the main character in this movie script and the second part analyzes the interrelation among the three dimensions of Snow White. The first part analyzes the physiological, psychological, sociological dimensions. The second part analyzes the interrelation among the physiological and psychological, psychological and sociological dimensions and also the interrelation among sociological and physiological dimensions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Three Dimensions of Snow White</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological dimension</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The physiological dimension can be analyzed from age, sex, and face of the main character in the movie script. The analysis of the physiological dimension of the main character “Snow White” is discussed as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sex and age</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At the beginning of the story in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White and the Huntsman</span><span class="font4"> movie script, Snow White was identified as a newborn baby girl who was being carried by his father, King Magnus.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 1 SCENE 2 INT. ROYAL BEDROOM - DAY. 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ERIC (V.O.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Soon after, a daughter was born to the Queen and was named &quot;Snow White.&quot; With a radiant smile, the Queen offers SNOW WHITE to her proud father, KING MAGNUS.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Face</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Snow White was pictured as a most beautiful girl, even her beauty beat Ravenna’s beauty. It was proofed at the time when Ravenna asked the magic mirror about who the most beautiful girl, then the mirror replied that Snow White was the prettiest.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 20 SCENE 35 INT. MIRROR CHAMBER - DAY. 35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">RAVENNA stares into her mirror now, rejuvenated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">RAVENNA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who is the fairest of them all?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">MIRROR MAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ravenna is shocked by this, staggers a bit.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological dimension</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Psychology is the study of human behavior. The psychological dimension is related to the human mentality and emotion. The psychological dimension of the character can be seen through the analysis of the human motivation, feeling and emotion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human motivation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Snow White was pictured as someone who never easily gives up on something. It is proofed when she kept trying to attack Ravenna, her wicked stepmother, to defeat Ravenna in a fight, in order to give a freedom to her people.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">213 INT. MIRROR CHAMBER - DAY. 213</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE (GRUNTING)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I will... defeat... you... I am the only...</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">RAVENNA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">You cannot defeat ME?.you are but a child!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(whispers to Ravenna)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">By fairest blood... it is undone!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ravenna looks down. Three drops of blood fall onto Snow</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">White's armor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">RAVENNA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NO!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ravenna is aging at an incredible pace. Her body gives way and she slumps to the floor, below the mirror.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">She looks at the mirror above her, gasping, reaching out,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">her pale eyes looking for a friend, a miracle... but</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nothing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Felling and emotions</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Snow White was pictured as someone with high empathy. This characteristic of emotion was shown by her when she saw the death of her dwarf friend, Gus. It made her so anguished when she saw her friend sacrificing himself to save her.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 71 SCENE 135 EXT. ENCHANTED FOREST - DAY. 135)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">GUS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">PRINCESS!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gus launches himself -- and takes the arrow meant for Snow</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">White. Before Aldan can load another arrow -- William</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fires an arrow of his own, striking him in the chest. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yakut topples over, dead at last but still astride his</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">horse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White falls to her knees in anguish, cradling the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dying Gus. He smiles weakly, holding her gaze, then whispers:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">GUS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I shan't leave you, Miss.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological dimension</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Sociological dimension is the study between one person and the society or social interaction. The sociological dimension is divided into personality and social status system.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personality</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Snow White was described as someone who had a personality of a commander because she succeed to convince everyone to join her to come together to attack Ravenna and everyone was kneeling in front of her as a sign that they all followed her and became the leader in this attack.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">If Ravenna comes for me, I will ride to meet her. And if she doesn't, I will ride to meet her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alone if I must.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">But if you would join me, I will gladly give my life for you. For this land and its people have lost too much. Duke Hammond stares at her for a moment, then BOWS. A beat, then William follows, then all the Lords and Knights. His eyes fixed on Snow White, Eric bows too. Then Beith. Then Muir and his son, Quert. Then Coll and Duir. And finally even Gort and Nion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White stands alone, overwhelmed by the faith of the kneeling warriors, and the responsibility on her shoulders.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social status system</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The caste of Snow White in this movie script was described as a royal princess of the royal family. She got this caste because of her birth as a royal descent from the marriage of King Magnus and his Queen.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 1 SCENE 2 INT. ROYAL BEDROOM - DAY. 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">We find ourselves in a crowded chamber full of MIDWIVES and PHYSICIANS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Soon after, a daughter was born to the Queen and was named &quot;Snow White.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Interrelation among the Three Dimensions</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological and psychological dimensions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">On the physiological dimension, Snow White was described as a beautiful girl, and her beauty was adored by everybody in the Kingdom. By her beauty, it did not make her arrogant. Precisely, in her psychological dimension, she was described as a girl with a sincere heart who helped and cared for others. Her beauty face was in line with her beauty heart, which is why she said that she had a rare beauty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 2 SCENE 7 INT. ROYAL BEDROOM - DAY. 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">YOUNG SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">We found it in the woods.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Queen takes the wounded magpie from Snow White.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">QUEEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">It will heal in time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White's eyes are fixed on the little bird.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I'll look after it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">QUEEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">You possess a rare beauty, my love. In here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(She touches Snow white's heart)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Never lose it. Hold it dear. You will need its strength to one day become Queen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological and sociological dimensions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The relation between the psychological and sociological dimension is that she combines her commander personality; as someone who can convince people with her manner; who never easily give up to anything.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 85 SCENE 171 INT. GENERAL'S TENT - NIGHT. 171)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I am ready to ride by your side, my lord, when you face the Queen in battle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Duke looks speechless for a moment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DUKE HAMMOND</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">There will be no battle, your highness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The best thing you can do for your people is stay safe behind these walls.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DUKE HAMMOND</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Queen cannot be defeated. She cannot be killed. And</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">therefore there can be no victory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White hesitates, her heart pounding, then replies:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I can vanquish her. Defeat her. I am the only one. She told me so herself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">If Ravenna comes for me, I will ride to meet her. And if she</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">doesn't, I will ride to meet her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alone if I must.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">But if you would join me, I will gladly give my life for you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">For this land and its people have lost too much.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Eric and the dwarves couldn't look prouder.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Duke Hammond stares at her for a moment, then BOWS. A beat, then</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">William follows, then all the Lords and Knights.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Snow White stands alone, overwhelmed by the faith of the kneeling warriors, and the responsibility on her shoulders.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological and physiological dimensions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The relation between the sociological and physiological dimensions of Snow White could be observed from the relation between her caste and age. Snow White gets her</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">caste as a princess when she was a little girl and becomes a queen when she is grown up.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 1 SCENE 2 INT. ROYAL BEDROOM - DAY. 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ERIC (V.O.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Soon after, a daughter was born to the Queen and was named &quot;Snow White.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The baby's CRIES grow louder as the King cradles her gently in his arms, turning towards a mirror.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(PAGE 98 SCENE 222 INT. CATHEDRAL - DAY 222)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SNOW WHITE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Backlit in a golden hue. A crown is placed on her head.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">We're in...</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Packed for the coronation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">BEITH</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hail to the Queen!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">And then the huntsman smiles and leaves.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">It can be concluded that the character Snow White already described the three dimensions of character; physiological dimension, psychological dimension and sociological dimension. The three dimensions of Snow White had been described in detail by seeing the dialogue in the movie script which is associated to the description of each dimension.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font4"> Toronto: McGraw-Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tomkins, Silvan. 1978. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Script Theory</span><span class="font4">. New York: Other Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ventura, Thomas. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Psychoanalysis</span><span class="font4">. All psych journals: psychoanalysis. Allpsych Journal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">162</span></p>