---
layout: full_article
title: "Foreword"
author: "Foreword Foreword"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-23524 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-23524"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-23524"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">FOREWORD</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">International Journal of Bioscience and Biotechnology (IJBB) previously published by Udayana University Bioscience and Biotechnology Forum. Based on committee meeting in the 6<sup>th</sup> ICBB (International Conference of Bioscience and Biotechnology) that held on 18-19 September 2015 the journal will managed by Asia-Oceania Bioscience and Biotechnology Consortium that was established since that meeting. The consortium was established by the committee that consist of scientists from Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia, Japan, Korea, India, and Timor Leste.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The IJBB published twice per year that is on April and September. We welcome all research articles, review, note, and short communication in the fields of bioscience and biotechnology from the region of Asia and Oceania and other region of the world. We also conduct an International Conference on Bioscience and Biotechnology every year on September in Udayana University, Bali, Indonesia as the secretariat of the consortium. The selected papers will be published in the journal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Articles published in this number come from manuscripts submitted by presenters on the 6<sup>th</sup> ICBB 18-19 September 2015. We appreciate and thank you very much for your kind participation for the conference and submission of the manuscripts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chief Editor</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Prof. I Gede Putu Wirawan, Ph.D</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">iv </span><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">asia oceania biosciences and biotechnology consortium</span></p>