---
layout: full_article
title: "The Character Analysis Of “To The Cuckoo” By William Wordsworth"
author: "Putu Ayu Tresna Dewi, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 252– 256</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Character Analysis Of “To The Cuckoo” By William Wordsworth</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Putu Ayu Tresna Dewi<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih<sup>2</sup>, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya, Universitas Udayana <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayutresna@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ayutresna@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">alit_ida@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:aw_edu@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">[aw_edu@yahoo.co.id]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Dalam studi ini dibicarakan tentang bagaimana Wordsworth mempercayai bahwa alam selalu memberikan kegembiraan pada hati manusia &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bahkan ia</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">menganggap alam merupakan tempat latihan yang bisa menyembuhkan hati manusia yang sedih atau menderita. Ada dua teori yang diaplikasikan dalam membahas dan menganalisis puisi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> yaitu pertama, Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963) yang menulis </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Intrepreting Literature</span><span class="font2"> dan yang kedua, adalah teori pendekatan biografi dari Wellek dan Warren dalam bukunya </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2"> di mana teori melakukan pendekatan ekstrinsik untuk mendapatkan hubungan antara kehidupan si penulis dan isi puisinya yang ditulis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pembahasan dalam studi ini berfokus pada latar belakang William Wordsworth sebagai penulis </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> dan pembahasan puisinya dilihat dari pesan yang ada dalam puisi tersebut dan pengalaman hidup dari Wordsworth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Akhirnya dapat disimpulkan bahwa pesan yang disampaikan oleh Wordsworth dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> merupakan ungkapan pengharapan dan keyakinan manusia tanpa adanya rasa ragu-ragu dan khawatir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cuckoo, nature, Romanticism</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As a poet of Nature, Wordsworth stands supreme. He is a worshipper of Nature, Nature’s devotee or high-priest. His love of Nature was probably truer, and more tender, than that of any other English poet, before or since. Nature comes to occupy in his poem a separate or independent status and is not treated in a casual or passing manner as by poets before him. Wordsworth had a full-fledged philosophy, a new and original view of Nature. Three points in his creed of Nature may be noted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wordsworth believed that the company of Nature gives joy to the human heart and he looked upon Nature as exercising a healing influence on sorrow-stricken hearts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wordsworth believed that people can learn more of man and of moral, of evil and good from Nature than from all the philosophies. In his eyes, Nature is a teacher whose wisdom we can learn, and without which any human life is vain and incomplete. He believed in the education of man by Nature. In this he was somewhat influenced by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a philosopher who contended that man is essentially good when in the &quot;state of nature&quot;, and that good people are made unhappy and corrupted by their experiences in society. He viewed society as &quot;artificial&quot; and &quot;corrupt&quot; and that the furthering of society results in the continuing unhappiness of man. This inter-relation of Nature and man is very important in considering Wordsworth’s view of both.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> shows Wordsworth's view that nature can bring back memories. He uses the Cuckoo that he hears as a man and it reminds him of when he was a schoolboy trying to search for it. The cuckoo brought back so many memories to the Wordsworth that he could think of them for hours.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, William Wordsworth’s poem is analysed. The title of the poem is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2">. In this poem of Wordsworth is welcoming the spring in the most elegant way. He says that when the spring starts, a bird, which he later named as cuckoo starts singing in the most rejoicing manner. He says that he is in search of the bird, and he is unable to find it. He says that when he was</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a school boy he used to search for this bird all round the clock. He says that the voice of the cuckoo is like a mystery. He also says that he hears that pleasure some voice through the woods and where ever there is greenery. In the end Wordsworth says that he shall listen to this sound while he lays there on the green plains. A deeper understanding about this poem is discussed by looking at Wordsworth’s biography.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Through highlighting, there are two problems which need to be discussed; they are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the message in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> that the poet intended to deliver to the readers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does Wordsworth’s biography help the readers to understand the poem?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is intended to fulfil three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to poetry in order to get better understanding of the poems of William Wordsworth entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out the critical estimate of the poem and what message the poet wants to convey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department to write a scientific work which gives contribution to this department, so this writing can be used as reference to help the student who takes the same topics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of Collecting and Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method that is used in collecting the data in this study is observation method. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In this study observation was done by observing the data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">source. In observing the data source, the poem is read repeatedly and carefully to be able to find the ideas used in the poem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the poem is related to the theoretical basis in order to be able to find message conveyed in the poem and to determine their meanings through an interpretation. The analysis of the data is presented descriptively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter discusses about the biographical approach to the study of literature, which in principle tries to find the interrelation between the life of the author and his works. The concepts which are related to the features of literature and biography of the author are also presented in this chapter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most obvious cause of a work of art is its creator, the author; and hence an explanation in terms of the personality and the life of the poet has been one of the oldest and best established methods of literary study because the biography itself can explain and illuminate the actual production of poetry</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">which directly advocates the intrinsic interest of biography and shifts the centre of attention to human personality. Biography can even provide materials for a science, especially which is connected with the psychology of artistic creation (Warren and Wellek, 1962: 75).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> by Wordsworth is poem of joy and happy memories. The little song-bird, cuckoo comes to England in early spring. Wordsworth hears the twofold shout of the cuckoo and looks around but the bird is nowhere</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to be seen. He rejoices to hear the old familiar cry of joy that passes from hill to hill. It casts a spell over him and he is back in his childhood. It was the period of joy, wonder and innocence. In those days the songs of the cuckoo fascinated him. He wandered through greens and woods to catch a glimpse of the bird. He looked for the cuckoo in tree, bushes and in open skies. But it was never seen by the poet. Even now when he is hearing it talk to the valley, he cannot see it. He wonders whether this is a real bird or only a wandering voice. This wandering voice still makes him forget everything and enter the world of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">imagination. The everyday world turns into a fairyland, and he becomes a child once again full of joy and wonder.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this poem, Wordsworth is welcoming the spring in the most elegant way. He says that when the spring starts, a bird, which he later named as cuckoo starts singing in the most rejoicing manner. He says that he is in search of the bird, and he is unable to find it. He says that when he was a school boy he used to search for this bird all round the clock. He says that the voice of the cuckoo is like a mystery. HE also says that he hears that pleasure some voice through the woods and where ever there is greenery. In the end the poet says that he will listen to this sound while he lays there on the green plains.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this poem, there is an element of nostalgia that makes Wordsworth feel warmed from hearing the Cuckoo´s voice &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I hear thee and rejoice</span><span class="font2">&quot; (Line 2) Wordsworth describes the bird as a &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wandering voice</span><span class="font2">&quot; (Line 3) and this creates a sense of freedom in the birds independent nature &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wandering</span><span class="font2">&quot; gives the sense of going forward in life, cautiously, but at no particular aim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wordsworth uses an extended metaphor to portray how he wants to find the bird &quot;still longed for but never seen&quot; which is almost like he is trying to find his freedom. </span><span class="font1">255</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This brings him back to the time when he was a child, &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the golden time again</span><span class="font2">&quot; (Line 28) where he is young, innocent and most importantly evident in this poem, free.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The end of the poem offers a revelation promising, the “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">unsubstantial, fairy place”</span><span class="font2"> (Line 31) that is the counterpart of the day-to-day life in the world we generally inhabit.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To the Cuckoo</span><span class="font2"> is an expression of hope, faith, and not of fear and doubt.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Abrams, M.H. 1971. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Glossary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font2">. Third Edition. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Di Yanni, Robert. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading Fiction, Poetry, Drama, and the Essay</span><span class="font2">. Pleasant Ville: Pace University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Encyclopedia Americana</span><span class="font2">. Volume 4. International Edition. New York: American Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jones, Edward.H. 1968. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Outlines of Literature</span><span class="font2">. New York: The Mac Millan Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Willard H. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature.</span><span class="font2"> USA: Holt Renehart and Wilson Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morner, Kathleen and Rausch, Ralph. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary.</span><span class="font2"> USA : NTC Publishing group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan, Prof. Dr. M. Pd. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Pengkajian Sastra</span><span class="font2">. Yogya: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Smith, Sybille. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry</span><span class="font2">. Pitman Publishing Ltd : London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austen Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">256</span></p>