---
layout: full_article
title: "Conflicts And Psychological Aspects Of American Singer In The Novel The Selection"
author: "Ida Ayu Ika Sarita Dewi, I Nyoman Udayana, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 17.2 Nopember 2016: 103 - 109</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Conflicts And Psychological Aspects Of American Singer In The Novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Selection</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Ayu Ika Sarita Dewi<sup>1*</sup>, I Nyoman Udayana<sup>2</sup>, Ni Wayan Sukarini<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:ikasaritadewi@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[ikasaritadewi@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:udayana2011@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[udayana2011@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">[wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>*</sup></span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi yang berjudul Conflicts and Psychological Aspects of America Singer in The Novel The Selection. Studi ini difokuskan pada analisa konflik yang terjadi pada karakter America Singer, dan melalui konflik tersebut dapat terlihat aspek psikologi dari karakter tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini menggunakan metode kualitatif dan metode deskripsi. Data yang digunakan dalam studi ini berupa novel The Selection dari Kiera Cass. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa data adalah teori dari Karl S. Bernhardt (1953) dalam buku Pratical Psychology, serta teori dari Gail and Myers (1992) dalam buku The Dynamic Of Human Communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temuan dari studi ini menyatakan bahwa melalui konflik yang terjadi, kita bisa melihat psikologi dari karakter Amerca Singer bahwa dia adalah orang yang tertutup.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword: Tokoh Utama, Konflik, Psikologi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Novel is one of literary works which belong to fiction. Novel is a medium that describes what is in the mind of the author and expresses imagination and deep human feelings pouring through several elements such as character and plot. Character is the most important part in a novel because it has a function to introduce various characteristics to the reader to make the story interesting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Selection</span><span class="font2"> was chosen as the topic because it has lots of characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study focuses on the analysis of the character America </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Singer</span><span class="font2"> because she is the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">center of the novel. And the plot made by arrangement of conflict of America Singer as the main character problems.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems of the study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of conflict happen in character of America Singer?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the author describe the character of America Singer in term psychological aspect?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the character America Singer.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze internal and external conflicts in the character America Singer.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the character America Singer in terms of psychological aspect.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The primary data in this undergraduate paper was the novel from Kiera Cass entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Selection</span><span class="font2"> that was released on April 24, 2012 through Harper Collins Publishers. The method and technique used in collecting data was the documentation method. The analysis of this study applied the theory of psychology proposed by Karl S. Bernhardt (1953), theory of conflict proposed by Gail and Myers (1992) and the supporting theory proposed by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">America Singer is a young lady who lives in the country called Illeà. This country uses caste system society through the job. America Singer is the fifth; the number of her caste is for a musician. America life changes because of the competition in the country called The Selection. The selection is where the prince (Prince Maxon) of the country is looking for a wife and the girls of this country will be selected for a crown and become a lady of the country but for America Singer the competition is a ridiculous thing and she has already had a boyfriend named Aspen. But, she should do it for her family, because they need compensation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this story America has two conflicts; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This story tells that America does not want to go to the selection but she is supposed to because her family needs the compensation from the Royal family. The source of her conflict is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Incompatible Roles</span><span class="font2">. Her families always want her to join the selection but she does not know what she really wants. It can seen from this quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">But there were things – important things – in this world that I loved. And that piece of paper seemed like a brick wall keeping me away from what I wanted. Maybe what I wanted was stupid. Maybe it wasn’t even something I could have. But still, it was mine. (Page.5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">America has an important thing that she really wants, she wants to get married to a man that she loves, and the selection makes it a getaway from what she really wants. The type of this conflict is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">personal conflict</span><span class="font2"> with her own mind that the things that she wants are impossible to achieve.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This story tells about America Singer having a boyfriend before she is chosen to the selection in the palace. Aspen is the Sixth (social status). The conflict between America and her boyfriend is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">interpersonal conflict.</span><span class="font2"> They have argument about joining the selection, the conflict occurs when Aspen asks America about the selection. It can be seen from the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Are you going to enter the Selection”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“No! Of course not! I don’t want anyone think I’d even consider marrying some stranger. I love you.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“You want to be a Six? Always hungry? Always worried?” he asked.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Aspen, we’ll make it. We’re smart. We’ll be fine.” I willed it to be true</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“You know that’s not how it’ll be, Mer. I’d still have to support my family; I’m not the abandoning type. And when we had kids. And we’ll just be careful about it. Who says we have to have more than two? You know that’s not something we can control!” (Page.19)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the quotation above, Aspen does not want America to live in misery with him. He just wants her to get a proper life. The conflict causes different opinion about the future life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Psychology of America Singer includes the human motivation; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appetite</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">America has appetite to marry her boyfriend Aspen, it can be seen from the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Do what?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Enter the Selection. I think you should do it. All I want is for you to enter. I just want you to try. And if you go, then you go. And if you don’t, then at least I won’t have to beat myself up for holding you back.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Are you out of your mind? But I don’t love him, Aspen. I don’t even like him. I don’t even know him.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“No one knows him. That’s the thing, though, maybe you would like him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Aspen, stop. I love you.” (Pages. 19-21)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the quotation above, America really wants to be with Aspen. She does not care about the caste and she even rejects the competition only to be with him. Not only that, she also convinces Aspen so they could be fine when they are together.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Want</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">America wants to survive while in the palace until the selection ends. Because, her family wants her to become the winner and has compensation. This can be seen in the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“If you would be willing to let me stay, even for a while, I’d be willing to make a trade,”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“A trade?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Yes. Let me stay, and I’ll help you. I’ll be your friend.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“I’ve met nearly every woman in this room, and I can’t think of you one who would make a better friend. I’d be glad to have you stay.” (Page.130)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">America is sad because she is leaving her home to do something ridiculous thing ‘The Selection’. When she at the first time meet with the prince, she gets angry about this ridiculous competition, it can be seen from the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Excuse me, dear, are you going to keep crying?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Don’t call me that! I am no more dear to you than the thirty-four other strangers you have here in your cage.” (Page.114)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the quotation above, America does not like that Maxon calls her “dear”, because she does not respect this competition. It is a foolish thing to her life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and attitude</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">America is feeling nervous in front of people, it occurs during the photo shoot when all the contestants turn to take pictures with the prince. In the conversation below</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the prince is trying to keep her calm so that photo shoot keep going well. The situation can be seen from the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“I don’t like everyone looking at me.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Just look at me like you can’t stand me. See, it’s not so bad.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“I guess.” (Page.215)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social motive</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this story, prince Maxon gives America motivation that we must be professional when doing something; no matter when we feel sad or bad, we must calm. The situation can be seen from the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I knew we were supposed to get back to the pictures, but Maxon didn’t seem nearly so interested in it all now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Are you all right?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Just all those people.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Maybe we should stop.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“One thing you must master in this profession is the ability to appear calm when you feel anything but. Please smile, America. Please don’t say anything. It’s imperative you’re discreet.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Of course.&quot; (Page.217)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the data analysis above, it can be concluded</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this novel the author describes that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">America Singer</span><span class="font2"> as the protagonist and the narrator itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on this novel, within the conflict the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">America Singer</span><span class="font2"> psychological aspect can be noticed. America Singer can keep secret on something that happens in her life and she resolves her problem itself without asking for opinions to everyone, the type of her temperament is phlegmatic person. She has a good heart and she wants to make other people around her happy. But she has felt doubtful to place her heart to a man. She thinks she feels better with.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From this analysis, we can assume that a character cannot only be analyzed from one aspect, because the characterization has three dimensions: physiological, psychological and sociological aspects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Message: Do not be high expecting of something, if it might not be possible to happen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bernhardt, S. Karl. 1953. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font2">. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cass, Kiera. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">New York Time Bestseller: The Selection</span><span class="font2">. New York: Harper Collins Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Deetz, Stanley. A and Sheryl. L. Stevenson. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication</span><span class="font2">. New York: Chapter &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Myers, &nbsp;Gail E. And Michele F. &nbsp;Myers. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Dynamic Of Human</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Communication:A Laboratory Approach</span><span class="font2">. Singapore: McGrow Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">109</span></p>