---
layout: full_article
title: "Morphological Process of Suffix -shii in Japanese"
author: "Ni Putu Luhur Wedayanti"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25506 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-25506"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25506"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Morphological Process of Suffix</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"> –S</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">HII </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">in Japanese</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Ni Putu Luhur Wedayanti</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Japanese Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:luhur_wedayanti@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">luhur_wedayanti@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Japanese has many compound words which are used productively in daily life. Compounding words is done in various ways in accordance with the morphological processes required. Compounding basic words discussed in this article begins with the reduplication process of basic words and continues with the process of affixation by adding the suffix -</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">shii</span><span class="font3"> on the reduplication results. The data is collected from articles on social media and related references. The discussion shows that some of the words experiencing the morphological process has changes in their word class and their meaning but most of them does not have any change either their word class or their meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: morphological processes, suffixes -shii, Japanese language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Morphology is a field of science in pure linguistics that examines forms and changes that occur in morpheme up to word as its largest unit. Tsujimura (1996: 125) defines the morphology of language as a field of science that analyzes how a word is formed and the internal structure of a word. Hence, the object of study of morphology is units of morphology, morphological processes, and tools in morphological process. The units of morphology are morpheme (root or affixes) and words, while morphological process involves basic components (basic form), forming tool (affixes, duplication, composition, acronymization, and conversion) and grammatical meaning (Chaer, 2008: 7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Japanese as an agglutinative language has many words that experienced suffixation on the root word. The productive agglutination process in Japanese is used to indicate the grammatical function of the word. Studies that focuses on the elements and structure formation of the Japanese word has been done many times. However, in this article the author tries to identify the type of bound morpheme ~ shii as an adjective marker, to analyze the process of word formation attached by bound morpheme ~ shii, as well as whether there is change of meaning that occurs after the morphological process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Suffixes ~ shii is added at the end of the root word. Tsujimura (1996 143--146) explains that the suffix is an affix that emerged after the basic shape. In Japanese, the suffix morpheme is located on the right side of the noun, adjective noun, and adjective roots. For example, adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ookii</span><span class="font4"> 'great' consists of an adjective root </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ooki</span><span class="font4"> 'great' and morpheme -i as the suffix. Similarly, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">atarashii</span><span class="font4"> 'new', consists of a basic form </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Atarashi</span><span class="font4"> 'new' and -i as the suffix.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">II MATERIALS AND METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data in this study were collected from the data written in the article on the Internet. The collection of data from the internet is based on the effectiveness of time in collecting data and the data obtained are also more varied. The analysis of affixation process of suffix ~ shii uses the theory of word-formation by Tsujimura (1996). The theory gives a fairly detailed explanation of the process and can represent a significant portion of word formation processes occurring in Japanese. Then, the data have been analyzed are described clearly and objectively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Morphological processes is defined by Chaer (2008: 25) as the process of word formation of a basic form by adding an affix (in affixation process), repetition (in reduplication process), merging (in composition process), shortening (in acronymization process), and changes of status (in conversion process). Furthermore, to analyze the process of morphological suffixes ~ shii, the article uses the word-formation theory by Tsujimura (1996: 148-155).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are two types of final results after the occurrence of morphological processes; the first one is the inflection type that change the form of a word to define its relationship with the other words in the sentence, or in marking the syntactic relationship. The second morphological processes is the derivation type that alter a word into a new word which generally has different classes or types and different meanings of its origin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word formation in Japanese is classified into five processes, namely: affixation (affixation), the process of merging / composition (compounding), the process of repetition (reduplication), the decoding of words (clipping), and the process of borrowing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.1</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Affixation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Affixation process consists of prefixation and suffixation process of a morpheme to the base form. Example of word formation by affixation process is the basic word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">odor</span><span class="font4"> 'to dance' get agentive suffix -te to be </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">odorite</span><span class="font4"> 'dancer'. The results of this process of affixation suffix -te change the word class verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">odor</span><span class="font4"> 'to dance' into noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">odorite</span><span class="font4"> 'dancer'.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.2</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Process of Merging Words (Compounding)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The process of merging words (compounding) is the process of word formation by combining two or more words. The combined words can be an independent word (lexeme) or it can be a morpheme. According to Shibatani (1990: 240-255) the process of compounding in Japanese can be formed in four processes: combining an original Japanese vocabulary (native words), for example </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">akizora</span><span class="font4"> 'autumn sky'; combining the loanwords from Chinese (Sino-Japanese words), for example </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kisoku</span><span class="font4"> 'rules'; the merger between the original vocabulary with loanwords, and between loanwords (hybrid compounds) eg garasumado 'the window'. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">garasumado</span><span class="font4"> is derived from the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Garasu</span><span class="font4"> means ‘glass' and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mado</span><span class="font4"> 'window' which is a native Japanese vocabulary. The last is dvandva compounds that combines two words which</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">preserve each of their original meanings in the compounded word, for instance </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oyako</span><span class="font4"> 'parent and child' which comes from the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oya</span><span class="font4"> 'parents' and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ko </span><span class="font4">'child'.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.3</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Process of Repetition (Reduplication)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Reduplication is defined by Kridalaksana as the process and result of repetition units of language as a phonological or grammatical tool. Reduplication is classified into anticipatory reduplication, phonological reduplication, grammatical reduplication, idiomatic reduplication, conservative reduplication, morphological reduplication, non-idiomatic reduplication and syntactic reduplication (Kridalaksana, 2008: 208). For example in phonological reduplication, repetition occurs phonologically (not lexeme repetition), thus it does not cause the formation of new meanings, such as pipi, papa etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The process of reduplication in Japanese is defined as the process of repetition of part or whole word to create new word (Tsujimura, 1996: 148). Reduplication delivered by Tsujimura is a mimetic reduplication (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gera-gera </span><span class="font4">‘laugh out loud’) and reduplication </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">renyoukei</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nakinaki kaetta</span><span class="font4"> 'go home while sobbing').</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.4</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Process of Clipping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The process of clipping is the process of word formation by shortening (chop / cut) words, for example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Keisatsu</span><span class="font4"> → </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satsu</span><span class="font4"> 'police'; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gakusei waribiki</span><span class="font4"> → </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gakuwari</span><span class="font4"> 'special discount for student'. The process of clipping can be done in 4 ways: removing the first syllable, the second syllable, third syllable, or multiple parts from multiple words. For example, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gakuwari gakusei </span><span class="font4">derived from the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gakusei</span><span class="font4"> 'student' and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">waribiki</span><span class="font4"> ‘discount’. Both of the second syllable was removed from their original words and combined into one word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gakuwari</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.5</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loan Process (borrowing)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Borrowing is defined as adopting elements of phonological, grammatical, or lexical in the language or dialect from other languages (dialects) because of contact or imitation (Kridalaksana, 2009: 178). In Japanese, all non-native Japanese vocabularies (native words) are considered as loan words, including the Chinese vocabularies which are widely used in daily life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">III &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Here is the process of affixation of suffixes ~ shii:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-1) Wakawakashii</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nihonjin wa mita me wa wakaku mieru to iwaremasu ga, yahari toshi o toru sore souou no fashon o suru koto ni yotte, dandan to wakawakashisa ga nakunatte iku youni omoimasu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘At a glance, Japanese people look young, but that youth will gradually disappear depends on the appropriateness of clothing they wear’</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakawakashisa</span><span class="font4"> on the data is a compound word which has repetition process on its root and later get the affixation process suffix -shii. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Wakawakashisa</span><span class="font4">, which means 'youthfulness, freshness', derives from word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakai</span><span class="font4"> meaning 'young'. Word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakai</span><span class="font4"> is an adjective that consists of two morpheme; free morpheme on word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">waka</span><span class="font4"> 'young' as the root and the suffix -i as bound morpheme. The root word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">waka</span><span class="font4"> 'young' has process of repetition (reduplication) followed by affixation process suffix -shii which becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakawakashii</span><span class="font4"> 'young, fresh'</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakai</span><span class="font4"> 'young' is commonly used in sentences such </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">as kare wa watashi yori 2 sai wakai</span><span class="font4"> 'He is two years younger than me'. After the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakai</span><span class="font4"> 'young' receives compounding process, it becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakawakashii </span><span class="font4">'young, fresh'. There is no significant change in meaning or word class because both words still means 'young' and remain as adjectives. However, the data has nominalization process by getting suffix -sa as nominalisator. In the data above, the compound word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wakawakashii</span><span class="font4"> after receiving suffix -sa which is the nominalisator, the meaning and the word class has changed into ‘youth; freshness' and becomes a noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-2) Naganagashii</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">naganagashii janpaa to mattaku onaji janpaa kita moderu mitsukemashita</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'I have found a very long jumper which is exactly the same like what I wear'</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The compound word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganagashii</span><span class="font4"> 'very long’ 'is a word that comes from adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagai'</span><span class="font4"> long '. The adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagai</span><span class="font4"> 'long' is usually used in sentences that generally contain the word ‘long’, for example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kami ga nagai </span><span class="font4">'she/he has long hair', etc. The compound word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganagashii</span><span class="font4"> is derived from adjective nagai 'long' then the suffix -i is removed and the root word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naga</span><span class="font4"> has reduplication and becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganaga</span><span class="font4"> then continues with the affixation process by adding the suffix -shii. However there is no change in word class and meaning of both words nagai and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganagashii</span><span class="font4">. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganagashii </span><span class="font4">is still an adjective and its meaning still contains characteristic ‘long’. However, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naganagashii</span><span class="font4"> emphasize the characteristic “long” deeper than </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagai</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3. Bakabakashii</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Otto no uwaki de rikon suru hotte takusan iru to omoundesukedo, doumitemo bakabakashii to omoimasu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'It looks like a lot of divorce happens due to husband's jealousy, however it is really a silly thing.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The compound word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bakabakashii</span><span class="font4"> in Matsuura (1994: 53) dictionary means 'stupid; imbecile’. It is derived from word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baka</span><span class="font4"> ‘stupid; foolish'. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baka</span><span class="font4"> is often used in a sentence, for example, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baka na machigai</span><span class="font4"> 'stupid mistake', etc. Adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baka</span><span class="font4"> is na type adjective a which receives the process of reduplication then becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bakabaka</span><span class="font4">. Later, it is attached with suffix -shii.and turns into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bakabakashii</span><span class="font4"> In na type adjective, there is no deletion of suffix –i as bound morpheme that attached to adjective since adjective na is an irregular adjective. After receive the process of reduplication and affixation, na type adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baka</span><span class="font4"> has changed its word class into (type) i adjective, but did not experience any significant change in meaning, because it still contains the meaning of 'dumb or stupid'.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-4) Mizumizushii</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kanojo wa mizumizushii kao o shite iru</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“His/her face shines so brightly”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The compound word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizumizushii</span><span class="font4"> in Matsuura (1994: 649) is translated into “fresh; smooth; moist”. It is derived from noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizu</span><span class="font4"> 'water' that received reduplication process and proceed with affixation process by adding suffix -shii. The noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizu</span><span class="font4"> 'water' is a noun which is used daily to refer to word which means water, for example </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kirei na omizu</span><span class="font4"> 'clean water'; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizu o nomu </span><span class="font4">'drinking water', etc. The noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizu</span><span class="font4"> has process of reduplication that becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mizumizu</span><span class="font4"> then gets the addition of suffixes –shii. The processes creates shift on both meaning and word class of the word. The word mizu which is a noun turns into adjective after compounding process, then the original meaning also changed from ‘water’ into ‘fresh, moist’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">IV &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The compounding process by adding the suffix -shii as on the discussion can occur in adjective (type) i, adjective (type) na and noun. The compounding process of begins with reduplication followed by affixation process by adding the suffix -shii. Basically the compounding process occurs due to add the suffix –shii. The compounded word’s word class turns into a (type) i adjective word class which is literally marked with the word -i. Some of the compounded words have changes in word class and meanings, but some of them remains their meanings and word classes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research still requires more in-depth study, especially the acceptability of compounding of suffixes -shii. Due to the concept of compounding is preceded by reduplication and followed by suffixation -shii, there are many words with the compounding that has not been entered as entries in the official dictionary. In addition, the concept of compounding of suffixes -shii still can not be found due to the creativity of the Japanese who tend to compound then add the suffix -shii irregularly and does not obey the rules in Japanese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chaer, Abdul. 2008. Linguistik Umum, Jakarta: PT Rineka Cipta</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kridalaksana, Harimurti. 2008. Kamus Linguistik, Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Matsura, Kenji. 1994. Kamus Bahasa Jepang Indonesia. Kyoto Sangyo University Press, Kyoto, Japan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Shibatani, Masayoshi. 1990. The Languages of Japan. Australia, Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tsujimura, Natsuko. 1996. An Introduction to Japanese Linguistics. Australia, Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://hotissuekrjp3.blogspot.com/2012/07/blog-post_4643.html"><span class="font4">http://hotissuekrjp3.blogspot.com/2012/07/blog-post_4643.html</span></a><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(accessed</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">February 15, 2015)</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ren-ai.jp/31083"><span class="font4">http://ren-ai.jp/31083</span></a><span class="font4"> (accessed February 15, 2015)</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.hokurokusousui.com/concept/"><span class="font4">http://www.hokurokusousui.com/concept/</span></a><span class="font4"> (accessed February 15, 2015)</span></p>
<p><a href="http://komachi.yomiuri.co.jp/t/2012/0603/513007.htm"><span class="font4">http://komachi.yomiuri.co.jp/t/2012/0603/513007.htm</span></a><span class="font4"> (accessed April 27, 2016)</span></p>