---
layout: full_article
title: "CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTIONS IN JAVANESE"
author: "Yana Qomariana"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-21159 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-21159"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-21159"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Causative Constructions in Javanese</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Yana Qomariana</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:yqomariana@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">yqomariana@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This paper aims at analyzing causative constructions found in Javanese. The data were taken from low register of Javanese spoken in Malang, a city in eastern part of Java Island through observation and note taking techniques. Furtehrmore they were analyzed descriptively against theory of causative construction by Kroeger (2004). The result showed that three types of causative construction: lexical, analytical and morphological causatives exist in Eastern Javanese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: causative, lexical, analytical, morphological, Javanese</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are various relationships between arguments within a sentence. One of the relationships is named causative construction. In this construction, the subject becomes agent that causes an event to occur that affect the object of the sentence. Causative construction can be realized by using verbs with meaning to cause something or by marking verbs with causal morpheme.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Causative construction is found in many languages. The construction is found in Indonesian, a language from the same language family, consider the following examples from Indonesian:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ibu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mem-bersih-kan Sayuran</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mother Caus-clean-Caus Vegetables</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Mother cleaned the vegetables” (Sukarini, 2015)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kakak &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;me-nyebab-kan Adik &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sedih</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Older sibling &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Caus-cause-Caus little sibling &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sad</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Older sibling caused little sibling to be sad” (Sukarini, 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sentence (1) and (2) illustrate causative construction in Indonesian. Suffix –kan is attached to verbs which gives the causative effect. In sentence (1) causative construction is build by using only one predicate membersihkan ‘clean’, while in sentence (2) there are two predicate menyebabkan ‘cause’ and sedih ‘sad’. The previous study shows that causative construction is also found in Central Javanese. This paper attempts to analyze the causative in Javanese spoken in Malang, East Java.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1.1</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Causative Construction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Kroeger (2004) mentions that causative “describe semantically complex situations in which one event causes another.” The term to name a process of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“cause to X”. The characteristics of this process is presence of one of the following entity: causer which is the actor that conducts the activity X, the causee which is the entity to which the action X occurs and the ‘caused event’ which is the action X.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are three types of causative constructions (Comrie, 1989; Kroeger, 2004), they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Periphrastic or analytic is name given to causative construction which uses two verbs. This type of causatives found in English:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Mayor caused my cat to die. (Kroeger, 2004)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Causative involves the use of verbs that their lexical meaning is causing an event. In English, there are verbs which have the cause as part of its lexical meaning such as kill, cut destroy and wash (Kroeger 2004, Haspelmath, 2008)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Morphological refers to causative meaning that is formed through morphological process.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Morphological causative shows addition of argument which leads to increase in valency. “The semantic valence of the causative verb will always be one greater than the valence of the base verb” (Kroeger, 2004:193).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Haspelmath (2008) divides verbs in causative constructions into two categories: plain verbs and causal verbs. Causal verbs are verbs denotating causing subevent and a resulting situation. The other category, the plain verbs denoting only the resulting situation of the causal verb. Examples for the plain verb category are: verb kawaku from Japanese which means ‘become dry’, laugh, and wanu-chi from Quechua which means ‘kill’. Whereas, the causal verbs includes: kawak-asu ‘make dry’, make laugh and wanu-chi-chi ‘make kill’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Previous research shows that causative verbs can be derived from transitive and intransitive roots. For sentence with causative verbs derived from intransitive roots, usually the causee is the direct object. While the causative verbs derived from transitive roots, the root’s patient is realized as either OBJ2 or OBL. In addition, the theme of ditransitive root is realized as object. (Baker in Kroeger, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Related to the above, Haspelmath (2008) proposes universal rule regarding causative. The universal rule mentions that if a language has causative verbs derived from transitive root, then it also has causative verbs derived from intransitive roots.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Discussion part of this paper presents analysis of data based on the above aspects of causative construction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1.2 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Causative Construction in Javanese</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Previous study on causative in Javanese was done by Subiyanto (2013) who analyze analytic causative in Central Javanese. In his paper, he mentions two types of causatives in Central Javanese, the analytical and morphological, with the following examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nggawe &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ibu-ne &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seneng</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Adi</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Act-made</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">mother-poss &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Happy</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Adi make her mother happy”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nyeneng-ake &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ibu-ne</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Adi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;made-Caus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mother-Poss</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Adi made her mother happy”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sentence (3) above is the example of analytic causative found in Central Java. While sentence (4) shows morphological causative construction by using suffix – ake. This study shows that causative construction exist in Javanese. Discussion in a later part of this paper also show that causative construction are also found in East Javanese and also how causative construction in East Javanese is different to one found in Central Javanese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">II MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data in this paper are sentences that contains causative construction of low register of Javanese (Ngoko) taken from speakers of Javanese spoken in Malang by using elicitation. The data is described descriptively using theory by Kroeger (2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">III RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Generally, causative construction is characterized by the presence of causer that cause an event and causee which is an entity to which the event is affected.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analytic Causative in Malang Javanese</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The characteristic of analytic causative is that the cause event is shown by two verbs. The sentences below demonstrates the analytic causative in Javanese.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-1) Panganan iki Nggawe arek iku &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;loro.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Food &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that Made &nbsp;child that &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sick</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“This food caused that child to be sick”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-2) Masalah ikunggara-i Bapak &nbsp;ngamuk.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Problem thatCause Father &nbsp;Angry</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“This problem caused father to be angry”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentences above show two verbs in every sentence that cause an event to occur. In sentence (3-1) the verbs are nggarakno ‘cause’ and loro ‘sick’. While in sentence (3-2) the verbs are nyebabno ‘cause’ and ngamuk ‘angry’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Lexical Causative</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">There are verbs in Javanese that mean to cause an activity which belongs to lexical causatives. The verbs includes nutup ‘close’ (to cause something close), ngobong ‘burn’, ngadem ‘to cause something to be cool’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bapak nutup lawang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Father Close Door</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“father closed the door”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-3) Wong sing demo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngobong ban.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">People who demonstrated burnt &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tire</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“People who demonstrated burnt tires”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-4) Aku Kate ngadem.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will cool down</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“I will cool down”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentences above shows causative relationship between causer and cause. The causer are: father, wong sing demo and aku; the causer are lawang and ban.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.3 </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Morphological Causative</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Morphological Causative in Javanese is realized by suffix –no and -i. Verbs used in the construction can be derived from transitive or intransitive verbs. As mentioned in part 2 of this paper, there are languages that show morphological verbs derived from intransitive root.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.3.1</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Morphological Causative derived from intransitive roots</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The following are sentences which verbs are derived from intransitive roots.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Putra Guyon</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Putra had fun</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Putra had fun”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-6) Putra ng-guyon-i &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;adik-e</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Putra Act-had fun with-Caus little sibling-poss</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Putra had fun with his little sibling|”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-7) Penjahat-e &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mati</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Criminal-Det &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;died</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“The criminal died”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-8) Polisi iku &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mate-ni &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;penjahat-e</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Police that &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kill-Caus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;criminal-Poss</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“That policeman killed the criminal”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-9) &nbsp;&nbsp;Tamu-ne &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;m(p)ecah-no &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;piring</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Guess-the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;broke-Caus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plate</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">”The guess broke the plate”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-10 Adik &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngrusak-no &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dulinan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Little sibling &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;damaged-Caus toy</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Little sibling damaged the toy”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">All causative verbs above are derived from intransitive verbs, and after the causative process the verb can take additional argument Object. Arguments in the subject position are the actors which causes the event that affect the arguments in the object position. The sentences also show that all the causee are direct object. This confirms Baker’s generalization (in Kroeger, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The use of suffix to form morphological causative is similar to strategy found in Central Javanese; although suffix which is used in Central Javanese is –ake.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.3.2</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Morphological Causative Verbs Derived from Transitive Roots</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Sentences below demonstrate morphological verbs in Javanese that are derived from transitive roots.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-11) &nbsp;Pak Guru &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mbukak lawang kelas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mr Teacher &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Opened door &nbsp;&nbsp;class</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Mr. Teacher opened the class door”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-12) &nbsp;Pak Guru &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mbukak-no &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;murid &nbsp;lawing kelas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mr Teacher &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;open-Caus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Students door &nbsp;&nbsp;class</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Mr. Teacher opened the students class doors”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentences above show causative verbs derived from transitive roots. The causee in sentence (3-11) is Object 2. This also confirms Baker’s generalization (in Kroeger, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Malang Javanese shows causative verbs derived from intransitive roots as well as transitive roots. This agrees with Haspelmath universal rule of deriving causative verbs as mentioned in part 2 of this paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">IV CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Three types of causative constructions are found in Malang Javanese, they are: lexical, analytic and morphological. For morphological causative Malang Javanese shows similar strategy to Central Java in deriving morphological causative verbs, which is by using suffix. However, the suffixes employed by Malang Javanese are –i and –no. This is different with suffix –ake which is used in Central Javanese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Causative verbs can be derived from intransitive or transitive roots which confirms the rule proposed by Haspelmath (2008). The change of argument structure after the causative morphological process agrees to Baker’s generalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is suggested to analyze morphological causative verbs with a larger data. Specially to draw the parameter for the use of suffix –i and –no.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Comrie, B. 1989. Language Universal and Linguistic Typology. London: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Haspelmath, Martin. 2008. Syntactic Universal and Usage Frequency. Causatives and Anticausatives. Leipzig Spring School and Language Diversity. Available on </span><a href="https://www.google.com/search?q=haspelmath+causative&amp;ie=utf-8&amp;oe=utf-8"><span class="font4">https://www.google.com/search?q=haspelmath+causative&amp;ie=utf-8&amp;oe=utf-8</span></a><span class="font4"> 29/04/2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kroeger, Paul R. 2004. Analyzing Syntax. A Lexical-Functional Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nurhayani, Ika. 2012. Javanese Applicative Construction. In Coyote Papers 19 (2012). University of Arizona Linguistics Circle. Tucson, AZ, U.S.A. (Available online at </span><a href="http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/bitstream/10150/231151/1/"><span class="font4">http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/bitstream/10150/231151/1/</span></a><span class="font4"> Nurhayani2012JavaneseApplicativeConstruction.pdf)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sofwan, Ahmad. 2010. Applicative Construction in Javanese. In: Linguage Circle. Journal of Language and Literature. (Available online at </span><a href="http://journal.unnes.ac.id/nju/index.php/LC/article/view/1984"><span class="font4">http://journal.unnes.ac.id/nju/index.php/LC/article/view/1984</span></a><span class="font4">, Accessed on 2014-11-24)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Subiyanto, Agus. 2013. Analytic Causatives in Javanese: A Lexical Functional Approach. Parole. Vol.3 No.2, Oktober 2013. Available on: </span><a href="http://download.portalgaruda.org/article.php?article=142745&amp;val=130"><span class="font4">http://download.portalgaruda.org/article.php?article=142745&amp;val=130</span></a><span class="font4"> 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sukarini, Ni Wayan.2013. Causative Construction in Indonesian Language. OJS Unud. Available on </span><a href="https://www.google.com/search?q=causative+construction+bahasa+in"><span class="font4">https://www.google.com/search?q=causative+construction+bahasa+in</span></a><span class="font4"> donesia+ni+way+sukarini&amp;ie=utf-8&amp;oe=utf-8. 29/04/2016</span></p>