---
layout: full_article
title: "Existentialism On The Novel “The Trial” By Franz Kafka"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Mita Cestalia Putri, I Made Winaya, Putu Ayu Asty Senja Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 109 – 117</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Existentialism On The Novel “The Trial” By Franz Kafka</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I Gusti Ayu Mita Cestalia Putri<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Winaya<sup>2</sup>, Putu Ayu Asty Senja Pratiwi<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font3"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:cestaliamitha@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">cestaliamitha@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:made_winaya@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">made_winaya@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:senja.dananjaya@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">senja.dananjaya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ini diambil berdasarkan novel “The Trial” oleh Franz Kafka. Novel ini mengisahkan pria bernama Josef K. yang berusaha memasuki dunia pengadilan dan bertemu dengan berbagai macam orang. Studi ini dipilih karena hanya ada beberapa sastra yang membahas mengenai eksistensialisme. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori eksistensialisme yang menjelaskan mengenai karakteristik dari eksistensialisme. Teori selanjutnya adalah teori karakter oleh Wellek dan Warren. Hasil dari studi ini menunjukan bahwa cerita ini memiliki beberapa poin yang berhubungan dengan eksistensialisme. Hasil lain dari studi ini adalah karakteristik Josef K. di dalam novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kata Kunci: eksistensialisme, karakteristik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain existentialism in the novel The Trial.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse existentialism reflected in Josef K.’s life.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data source of the story is novel The Trial. It was a novel published in 1925. The novel is consisted of 271 pages. The Trial was later translated by Willa and Edwin Muir in 1937.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The paper used documentation method of technique and collecting data. There were some steps to collect the data. First, there was comprehensive and intensive reading to know the idea of The Trial. Next, was to analyse the component of novel related to existentialism. The other step to find the main character of The Trial was analysed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In method and technique of analysing data provided information with qualitative analysis. The technique was divided into several steps to analysis the data. The first step was to learn about the story of novel “The Trial”. The second step was to interpret the story based on the main character inside the data. The last step was to relating between the interpretation of story and existentialism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Existentialism Reflected in Life of Josef K.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philosophy as A Way of Life</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In philosophy as a way of life, there is an immanence where people study philosophy from inside. Something has to be acted, felt and lived. In Josef K.’s situation, he preferred to think instead of doing the act itself. The example is when K.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">failed to free the policemen. He thought he could offer himself as the policemen’s substitution. However, this one was only a scenario on his mind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">If that had been his intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would have taken his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in the policemen’s place. The whip-man would certainly not have accepted this substitution anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violated his duty without gaining any benefit.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 105)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anxiety and Authenticity</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In anxiety, a character will be thinking about their existence, whether they capable of doing something important or asking about their ability in coping with situation. Josef K. was uncertain with possibility of taking his own trial. This leads him to thinking what would happen if he defended himself. He asked himself whether he capable of taking it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">How could he have sat there totally convinced of the need to do his own defence? How would it be later? What would his life be like in the days ahead? Would he find the way through it all to a happy conclusion? Did a carefully worked out defence and any other sort would have made no sense did a carefully worked out defence not also mean he would need to shut himself off from everything else as much as he could? Would he survive that? And how was he to succeed in conducting all this at the bank?</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 158)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Authenticity is the true personality of character. This personality is not influenced by anything or external pressure. This part was also related to the faith or believes of a character. In The Trial, Josef K. true personality is reflected in his thought. The personality related to this part is taking life lightly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">K. was living in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all laws were decent and were upheld, who was it who dared accost him in his own home? </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">He was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, to cross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even when everything seemed under threat.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 6)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5.1.3 . Freedom</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Freedom in existentialism means free in choosing without disturbance from any deity. However, freedom is followed by responsibility. In the story, Josef K. stayed at</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">his place after The Priest called him. He had two choices at that time. The first choice was pretending not to be Josef K. and walked free from cathedral. The second choice was turning around and admitted himself as Josef K. then trapped inside cathedral.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">K. stood still and looked down at the floor. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">In theory he was still free, he could have carried on walking, through one of three dark little wooden doors not far in front of him and away from there. It would simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but chose not to pay attention to it. But if he once turned round he would be trapped, then he would have acknowledged that he had understood perfectly well, that he really was the Josef K.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 250)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Absurdity</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Absurdity in the existentialism means amorality and unfairness in the world. At any point, bad thing can happen to everyone. The unfairness was seen at the very early of the chapter. Two men came to his room at the morning and turned out the two men were police officer. Josef K. then spoke to one of the man and he answered Josef K. had been arrested. The police officer did not tell Josef K. he had been arrested.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“You can’t go away when you’re under arrest.” “That’s how it seems,” said K. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">“And why am I under arrest?” he then asked. “That’s something we’re not allowed to tell you.</span><span class="font3">.”(Kafka, 1937: 4)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Existence</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">ExistencehHuman being has a necessity to do an action and the result of the action proves the existence of human. This means human existence is determined by their action. Every activities Josef K. did in the story proved his existence in real life. One of the example of existence in the story is about Josef K.’s job. He was the financial bank chief clerk and he had high position.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He felt well and confident, he had failed to go into work at the bank this morning but that could easily be excused because of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">the relatively high position he held there</span><span class="font3">. (Kafka, 1937: 10)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>51.6 Situatedness</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Situatedness is a necessity of understanding life and existence from inside by knowing the situation. Josef K. did not show a sign of situatedness in the story. While</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. was thinking a lot based on the situation, he never showed any understanding about life or his existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Perhaps, if he opened the door of the next room or even the front door, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps that would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to a head. But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the ground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had over them.</span><span class="font3"> So he decided on the more certain solution, the way things would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his room without another word either from him or from the policemen. (Kafka, 1937: 10)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Crowd</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The crowd means public opinion about standard how something is accepted in society. This part of existentialism blocks individual preference and desire. Josef K. never did what other defendants did. He did not bother to wait in the court office. He never made application for evidence. He thought it was not necessary for his case.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“A month ago I made some applications for evidence to be heard in my case, and I’m waiting for it to be settled.” “You certainly seem to be going to a lot of effort,” said K. “Yes,” said the man, “it is my affair after all.” </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">“Not everyone thinks the same way as you do,” said K. “I’ve been indicted as well but I swear on my soul that I’ve neither submitted evidence nor done anything else of the sort. Do you really think that’s necessary?”</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 77)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Characters</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of character focused on Josef K. as the story revolved around him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Physiological aspect is an aspect dimension about appearance of character like sex, age, eyes, skin colour, hair, etc. Josef K. was a thirty years old man. This is shown in his conscious thought. He was arrested right at his birthday day. He thought the arresting probably a joke from his colleagues.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set up by his colleagues at the bank for some unknown reason, or also perhaps because today was </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">his thirtieth birthday</span><span class="font3">. (Kafka, 1937: 6)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Psychological aspect can be observed through the psychological background as in the behaviour, mentality, ego, personality, emotion, attitude, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Taking life lightly</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. took his life lightly. This is based on his behaviour or attitude. This later affected how he handled his case. He believed he did not need to solve a problem unless it became big. This is the way Josef K. handled his case and lived his life through the story. This is part of authenticity is exitentialism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">K. was living in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all laws were decent and were upheld, who was it who dared accost him in his own home? </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">He was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, to cross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even when everything seemed under threat.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 6)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hardworker</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. was a financial chief bank. He was described a hard working man, spending most of his time on his work. Josef K. became important person in the bank. His effort in working was proving his existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the bank, for example, I am well prepared, nothing of this sort could possibly happen to me there, I have my own assistant there, there are telephones for internal and external calls in front of me on the desk, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">I continually receive visits from people, representatives, officials, but besides that, and most importantly, I’m always occupied with my work</span><span class="font3">, that’s to say I’m always alert, it would even be a pleasure for me to find myself faced with something of that sort. (Kafka, 1937: 25)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indeceive</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Despite looking determined and firm, Josef K. was indeceive. He tend to do nothing and let everything went according the course. One of the example was how Josef K. thought about</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Perhaps, if he opened the door of the next room or even the front door, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps that would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to a head. But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the ground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had over them. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">So he decided on the more certain solution, the way things</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his room without another word either from him or from the policemen.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 10)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shrewd</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. was rather manipulative person. This part includes in exitentialism because this was proving his freedom. Josef K. would do anything to achieve his goal. He used Mrs. Grubach to make sure she listened to everything he said. Josef K. knew Mrs. Grubach was dependable to him and had to believe his explanation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Although this might be unpleasant for you you’re not in any real danger. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">You know how much esteem Mrs. Grubach has for me, she’s the one who will make all the decisions in this, especially as the captain is her nephew, but she believes everything I say without question</span><span class="font3">. (Kafka, 1937: 35)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ignorance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. tend to ignore situation. He could not learn from the other defendants. Josef K. prefered to ignore his trial and pretended it did not exist. This is related to his anxiety. He was never worried about his case but it changed because he had lawyer repe and had little awareness with people around him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“When I first came here with my uncle you probably noticed </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">I wasn’t greatly concerned about my case, and if I wasn’t reminded of it by force, as it were, I would forget about it completely.</span><span class="font3"> But my uncle insisted I should allow you to represent me and I did so as a favour to him. I could have expected the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the point of taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of its weight. But what actually happened was the opposite. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Before, the trial was never such a worry for me as it has been since you’ve been representing me. When I was by myself I never did anything about my case, I was hardly aware of it,</span><span class="font3"> but then, once there was someone representing me, everything was set for something to happen, I was always, without cease, waiting for you to do something, getting more and more tense, but you did nothing. (Kafka, 1937: 222)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agitated</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">At first, Josef K. did not care about his case. As time go, he showed sign of disturbed about his case. In existentialism, this led to anxiety. The case finally started disrupting Josef K.’s head. His trial finally disturbed his work. He focused on making his document for the court and neglected some of his work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">He remembered one morning when, already piled up with work, he suddenly shoved everything to one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketched out some of his thoughts on how documents of this sort should proceed.</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 151)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unable to receive advice</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. was unable to received feedback. People are free to follow or listened to any advice but Josef K. was somehow lack of reflection to himself. A lot of people told him about his future, but he did not pay mind to it. Josef K. somehow made a reason not to do any advice people suggested.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">“You look for too much help from people you don’t know,” said the priest disapprovingly, “and especially from women. Can you really not see that’s not the help you need?</span><span class="font3">” “Sometimes, in fact quite often, I could believe you’re right,” said K., “but not always. Women have a lot of power. If I could persuade some of the women I know to work together with me then I would be certain to succeed. (Kafka, 1937: 252)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In Sociological aspect, most of people related to Josef K. was used for his purpose. This showed his shrewd personality. He got close to people to get information about the court. The example was his relationship with the painter, Titorelli. However, Titorelli knew Josef K. tried to get on his good side.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The painter immediately put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his hands together and looked at K. with a smile. “Always straight out with the truth,” he said. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">“You want to learn something about the court, like it says in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking about my pictures to get me on your side. Still, I won’t hold it against you, you weren’t to know that that was entirely the wrong thing to try with me. Oh, please!”</span><span class="font3"> (Kafka, 1937: 175)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Josef K. relationship with other people also reflected existentialism. This was proven from his relationship with Deputy Director. K. thought this was an effort he made to improve their relationship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“One question, Mr. K.: Would you like to give me the pleasure of joining me on my sailing boat on Sunday morning? There’s quite a few people coming, you’re bound to know some of them. One of them is Hasterer, the state attorney. Would you like to come along? Do come along!” K. tried to pay attention to what the deputy director was saying. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">It was of no small importance for him, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he had never got on very well, meant that he was trying to improve</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">his relations with him.</span><span class="font3"> It showed how important K. had become in the bank and how its second most important official seemed to value his friendship, or at least his impartiality. (Kafka, 1937: 39)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are some parts of existentialism included in the story. In anxiety, Josef K. was worried about his case and became impatient. Authenticity showed about his true belief to take life ligtly and only believed in himselves. Freedom as in existentialism showed in K.’s way of choosing and leading the story from his choice. Absurdity in the story was about the unfairness of the court and how abrupt Josef K. life ended. In story The Trial, Josef K. proved his existence through his works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Existentialism is a philosophy regarding individual existence, finding self and freedom of choosing. It was obvious K. was lack of understanding life as in philosophy as a way of life and situatedness. Another example of existentialism denied in story was the crowd. Josef K. did the oppossite of the other defendant in defending himself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Anonymous. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2002). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Existentialism</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Internet]. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.allaboutphilosophy.org/existentialism.htm"><span class="font3">http://www.allaboutphilosophy.org/existentialism.htm</span></a><span class="font3"> [Accessed 27<sup>th</sup> of May 2015].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Burnham, Douglas and Papandreopoulos, George. (n.d) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Existentialism</span><span class="font3"> [Internet]. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.iep.utm.edu/existent/%23H1"><span class="font3">http://www.iep.utm.edu/existent/#H1</span></a><span class="font3"> [Accessed 27<sup>th</sup> of May 2015].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mastin, Luke. (2008). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Existensialism</span><span class="font3"> [Internet]. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.philosophybasics.com/branch_existentialism.html"><span class="font3">http://www.philosophybasics.com/branch_existentialism.html</span></a><span class="font3"> [Accessed 27<sup>th</sup> of May 2015].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Welek, Rene and Warren, Austin. 1978. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. Penguin Book, Great Britain</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">117</span></p>