---
layout: full_article
title: "The Types Of Meaning And Language Function Found In The Script Of Movie Entitled 50/50"
author: "Rien Damayanti, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 266 - 271</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Types Of Meaning And Language Function Found In The Script Of Movie Entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">50/50</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Rien Damayanti<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>2</sup>, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:rien.damayanti@ymail.com"><span class="font2">rien.damayanti@ymail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian yang berjudul The Types of Meaning and Language Function Found in the Script of Movie Entitled 50/50 dilakukan dengan tujuan untuk mengidentifikasi tipe makna dari istilah-istilah medis yang terdapat di dalam skrip film yang berjudul 50/50. Selain itu, penelitian ini juga bertujuan untuk menganalisa fungsi bahasa pada kalimat yang mengandung istilah medis. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa penelitian ini ada berdasarkan teori makna oleh Lyons (1996) dan teori fungsi bahasa oleh Halliday (1973). Hasil yang ditemukan pada penelitian ini adalah terdapat beberapa istilah medis yang digunakan di skrip film yang dipilih untuk dianalisa. Tipe makna yang ditemukan setelah menganalisa data adalah makna denotatif saja. Selain itu, hanya ditemukan lima fungsi bahasa yang terkandung di dalam dialog.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata Kunci: Istilah Medis, Makna, Fungsi Bahasa</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Technical terminology is often thought of as shorthand, a way of gaining great depth and accuracy of meaning with economy of words. Same language may have similar form but different function and meaning. It can be found in many purposes, for instance in movie script. Meaning is the essential part of a word while a word represents a meaning. Thus to get an effective communication, someone has to find an exact word. Meanwhile, language function is a communication means. Every language has their function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems that the writer would like to discuss in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What medical terms are found in the script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of meaning of the medical terms found in the script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the language functions of the sentence which contain the medical terms?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the medical terms found in the script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of meaning of medical terms found in the script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the language function of the sentence that contains the medical term.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The primary data of this research were collected from script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2"> as the source to find the data. 50/50 is a 2011 American Comedy-drama film directed by Jonathan Levine, from a screenplay written by Will Reiser. There are criteria being the basis of choosing the movie. The movie tells the story of a man who suffers with cancer; therefore, there are many dialogues in the movie script which contain medical terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected using documentary method by reading the script of movie Entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50</span><span class="font2"> intensively. After that, underlining and taking note the medical terms found in the movie script. Furthermore, categorizing the terms based on their groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed qualitatively based on the theory used in this study. First of all, the transcribed medical terms was analyzed by the theory of meaning by Lyons (1996). The terms were analyzed whether it is denotative or connotative. Furthermore, the language function of each sentence which contains the term was analyzed by the theory of language function by M. A. K. Halliday (1973).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synopsis of the Movie</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">50/50 is a 2011 American Comedy-drama film directed by Jonathan Levine, from a screenplay written by Will Reiser, starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Seth Rogen, with Anna Kendrick, Brice Dallas Howard, Serge Houde, Philip Baker Hall, Mat Frewer, and Anjelica Huston in supporting roles. The film is loosely inspired by Reiser’s own experiencing with cancer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the problems above, there are three problems which discussed in the analysis. In order to answer the problem number one about the medical terms found, there is a table provided which shows the categorization of each term with its meaning and function. Moreover, to answer problems number two and three, there are analysis provided about the meaning and function of each term.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Types of Meaning and Language Function</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two types of meaning used to analyze the terms which found in this study. There are denotative meaning and connotative meaning. There are also some kinds of language function used to analyze the terms, that is: instrumental function, regulatory function, interactional function, personal function, heuristic function, imaginative function and representational function. The function each term was analyzed based on the dialogue of the characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Medical Term Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Medical terminology is language that is used to accurately describe the human body and associated components, conditions, processes and procedures in a sciencebased manner. In this study, it can be found some medical terms used by characters in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50.</span><span class="font2"> The terms found are as follow (Medical dictionary, 2015):</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Period &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;Monthly flow of blood from woman’s body</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biopsy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;The removal and examination of tissue from the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">body of somebody who is ill</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tumor &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;Mass of diseased cells growing in the body</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Denotative Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Period</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A period is the shedding of the endometrium - the uterine lining. It is also known as menstruation. All female humans, as well as some other female mammals, have regular periods during their reproductive age. Menstruation which includes bleeding from the vagina is found mainly among humans and similar animals, such as primates. In many mammals, the endometrium is reabsorbed by the animal. As far as humans are concerned a period is a bleed from the womb (uterus) that is released through the vagina (Medical dictionary, 2015). According to Hornby (Oxford, 2010:1089), period is “(1) Any of the parts that a day is divided into at school, college, etc (2) The flow of blood each month from the body of a woman who is not pregnant. (3) The mark [(.)] used at the end of a sentence and in some abbreviations.” However, the meaning of period in the dialogue refers to the meaning of the flow of blood each month from the body of a woman; therefore, this term has denotative meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The language used by the sentence which contains this term has representational function. It means that the language is used to explain. The character </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adam</span><span class="font2"> is conveying a message or information about something to character </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adam.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biopsy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A biopsy is a sample of tissue taken from the body in order to examine it more closely. A doctor should recommend a biopsy when an initial test suggests an area of tissue in the body isn't normal (Medical dictionary, 2015). Biopsies are most often done to look for cancer. But biopsies can help identify many other conditions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The term biopsy has denotative meaning as it refers to what it really means in the dictionary. As proposed by Hornby (Oxford, 2010: 134) that “biopsy is the removal and examination of tissue of somebody who is ill in order to find out more about their disease.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence of this term in the dialogue has regulatory function as the character in the dialogue is giving instruction to someone to do something since the regulatory function means that the language is used to control. It is shown that the character </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dr. Ross</span><span class="font2"> is talking to someone and instructing him to do something to the patient </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adam</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tumor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tumor is an abnormal mass of tissue (Medical dictionary, 2015). Tumors are a classic sign of inflammation, and can be benign or malignant (cancerous). According to the explanation above, the term tumor has denotative meaning since the meaning of tumor can be found in the dictionary. As proposed by Hornby (Oxford, 2010:1604) that tumor is “a mass of cells growing in or on a part of the body where they should not, usually causing medical problem.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The language of the sentence which contains the term has representational function. Representational means that the language used by sentence which contains the term refers to a way of conveying a message or information. It is shown on the dialogue that the character </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dr. Ross</span><span class="font2"> is conveying information about the disease that the character </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adam</span><span class="font2"> suffers, that is malignant tumor.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the research conducted from the script of movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">50/50,</span><span class="font2"> there are many medical terms which are found. According to the analysis, all of the medical terms found are categorized as denotative meaning. Since, the meaning of each term which used in the dialogue is appropriate with the sentence where the term is contained. Therefore, this study only found one type of meaning which is denotative meaning. There are only five kind of functions found in the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K, and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language , Context, and Text: Aspect of Language in a Social Semiotic Perspective.</span><span class="font2"> Meulborne: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advance Learner’s Dictionary.</span><span class="font2"> London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lyons, John. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Semantic and Introduction.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Medical Dictionary by Farlex.</span><span class="font2"> [Internet]. Farlex, Inc., Pennsylvania. Available from: http</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">://www.thefreedictionary.com/medical dictionary</span><span class="font2"> [Accessed 25 December 2015].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Spears, Richard A ph.d. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Compact English Dictionary.</span><span class="font2"> Chicago: NTC Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Webster, Merriam. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Webster’s New Dictionary of the English Language.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Merriam Webster Incoporated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">271</span></p>