---
layout: full_article
title: "Directness And Literalness Of Speech Acts In The Imitation Game Movie"
author: "I Dewa Ayu Satria Dewi, I Nengah Sudipa, Putu Weddha Savitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 77 – 83</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Directness And Literalness Of Speech Acts In </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Movie</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Dewa Ayu Satria Dewi<sup>1*</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Putu Weddha Savitri<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayusatriadewi@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ayusatriadewi@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:weddha@fs.unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">weddha@fs.unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2">] </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Directness and Literalness of Speech Acts in The Imitation Game Movie”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi tindak tutur yang tergolong dalam tipe tidak langsung dan non-literal yang ditemukan dalam film The Imitation Game dan menjelaskan fungsi serta konteks situasi yang mendukung analisis tindak tutur yang tergolong dalam tipe tidak langsung dan nonliteral.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari sebuah film yang diangkat dari kisah nyata berjudul The Imitation Game yang merupakan film bertemakan sejarah dalam bentuk biografi. Teknik yang digunakan dalam mengumpulkan data yakni teknik mencatat. Dalam penelitian ini ada tiga teori yang digunakan yakni teori jenis tindak tutur oleh Parker, teori kata kerja tindak ilokusi oleh Leech serta teori mengenai konteks situasi oleh Hymes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa (1) terdapat sembilan data tindak tutur yang tergolong dalam tipe tidak langsung dan non-literal yang ditemukan dalam film The Imitation Game. Makna implisit dari tindak tutur dibentuk oleh kalimat berita, kalimat perintah dan kalimat tanya. Kemudian, (2) fungsi dari tindak tutur yang tergolong dalam tipe tidak langsung dan non-literal yang paling banyak muncul adalah direktif dan asertif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: teori tindak tutur, The Imitaion Game, tidak langsung dan non-literal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language is a means of communication, enabling people to have more interaction with by saying utterances and using gestures. In communication, people convey their ideas, feelings, or thoughts through clear statements to make others understand. Communication is successful when the message conveyed by the speaker can be understood by the hearer. (Austin, 1962: 25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On one side, some people do not use clear statements to convey the message. What is stated is different from what is meant. It is different from what the speaker says orally and it relies on the context of situation. According to Yule (1996: 47), a speech act is an action performed through utterances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parker (1986) reveals that speech acts is divided into directness and literalness. Based on directness, speech act can be divided into direct speech act and indirect speech act. An utterance is considered to be direct if the syntactic form of an utterance corresponds to its meaning and function. However, if the syntactic form of the utterance does not correspond to its meaning and function, the utterance is considered to be indirect. For instance: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Can you open the window?</span><span class="font2"> which is in the form of interrogative; however, it is used to perform directive function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">However, based on literal dimension, speech acts can be divided into literal speech act and non-literal speech act. In one situation, one can say </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That is nice</span><span class="font2"> as a response of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">What do you think about my dress?</span><span class="font2"> However, in another situation, we can also use the same utterance to rotor to different thing. For example: a mother who finds out her son watches an adult movie can say </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That is nice</span><span class="font2"> too. In this case, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That is nice</span><span class="font2"> uttered by the mother is considered to be non-literal. Since this phenomenon is often found in our daily life, it is interesting to analyse the types of speech acts related to direct and literal dimensions and their functions in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As mentioned above, language variation occurs frequently in the real life and the depiction of real life can be found, for instance, in a movie. Generally, movie represents the story via dialogue which contains utterances. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2"> movie is chosen as the object of the research because it is a movie based on true story in the form of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">biography. The conversation of the characters represents our daily conversation and reflects the perception of the society at that time. The conversation also contains the types of speech acts related to direct and literal dimensions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What expressions of directness and literalness - speech acts particularly Indirect and Non-literal types are found in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">2.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What functions of directness and literalness speech acts are found in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Specifically the aims of the study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the expressions of directness and literalness - speech acts particularly Indirect and Non-literal types found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse the functions of speech acts found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2"> movie</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study was taken from the dialogues of the movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2"> is a historical movie, with a screenplay written by Graham Moore based on the biography </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Alan Turing: the Enigma</span><span class="font2"> by Andrew Hodges. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2"> was directed by Morten Tyldum and starred Benedict Cumberbatch as real life British cryptanalyst Alan Turing, who in the film is hired to decrypt German intelligence codes for the British government during World War II. This movie was released on November 28<sup>th</sup>, 2014 in the United States.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study bases on library research and documentation method. The method and technique of collecting data was done in three steps. Firstly, the movie was intensively watched from the beginning until the end. Furthermore, the technique was note-taking. In this step, the scene in which the data occurred was captured by using </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">print screen </span><span class="font2">technique. Finally the selected data is transferred into computer to make the process of analyzing data much more easily.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A descriptive qualitative method was used to analyse the directness and literalness - speech acts and its functions used in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">. The selected data was classified into its forms (declarative, interrogative or imperative) and its meaning (literal and non-literal).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Types of Speech Acts theory by Parker (1986) was used to analyze the directness and literalness types of speech acts particularly indirect and non-literal. In this case, the function was analysed using The Illocutionary Verbs by Leech (1983). The Ethnography of Communication theory by Hymes (1974) was used to analyse the context of situation. According to Hymes (1974), the context of situation can describe </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the setting, participants involved, goal, act of sequence, intonation, instrumentality, norms</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">genre</span><span class="font2">. Having the selected data were described and verified, furthermore the conclusion could be drawn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were nine data non-literal indirect type of speech acts found in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">. The analysis of one data was described as follow.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Could you have made a bit more noise, Alan?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Joan Clarke : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Could you have made a bit more noise, Alan?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alan Turing : Sorry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Could you have made a bit more noise, Alan? Not sure you woke up my landlady</span><span class="font2"> does not perform the actual meaning that the speaker wants to convey. By uttering the utterance, the speaker actually wants to say </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t make more noise!</span><span class="font2"> It can be seen from the additional sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Not sure you woke up my landlady.</span><span class="font2"> which means that the speaker warns the addressee to not make more noise. Since what the speaker says is different from the fact, the utterance is considered non-literal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance is considered indirect speech because its form does not correspond to the function. The form of the utterance is interrogative, particularly request. It can be proven by the inversion of the verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Could</span><span class="font2"> followed by the subject </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You</span><span class="font2">. These are the characteristics of interrogative form. The function of interrogative form is asking. However, the function of this utterance is directive. In this case, it has the intended meaning to get the addressee to do something, which is get Alan Turing to not make more noise.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If the utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Have a pleasant trip back to Cambridge, Professor.</span><span class="font2"> is inserted by one of the directive verbs, it can be as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“I [request] you to not make more noise”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By the construction above, S is represented by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I</span><span class="font2"> referring to the speaker </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Joan Clarke</span><span class="font2"> and the command in his utterance is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t make more noise!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context of Situation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Setting and Scene</span><span class="font2">: The conversation takes place in Joan Clarke’s dormitory, specifically in Joan Clarke’s room, near the window. The situation is in a low level of formality. Moreover, the scene occurs at night, almost midnight.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Participants: </span><span class="font2">Joan Clarke as the speaker and Alan Turing as the addressee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ends: </span><span class="font2">The speaker wants to get the addressee to be quiet and not to make noise. Hearing this, Alan Turing says </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sorry</span><span class="font2"> which means that the goal of the speaking in uttering the utterance is received by the addressee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Act of Sequence</span><span class="font2">: The scene portrays that Alan Turing is trying to come into Joan Clarke’s dormitory through the window. Since Joan Clarke’s dormitory is only for girl, he cannot get inside normally by the door.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Key</span><span class="font2">: The tone used by the speaker is rising but the volume is too low and seems whispering. It is kind of angry expression which is delivered in a warning face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Instrumentality: The instrumentality of the utterance is in oral communication since the speech is done in face-to-face communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Norms</span><span class="font2">: The participants are about in the same age and close friends since being together in the same team to break enigma. As the result, they can talk informally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Genre: A small talk between close friends.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are nine data of indirect non-literal type found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game </span><span class="font2">movie. The forms of the data are declarative, interrogative and imperative. Regarding to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the context of situation, the speaker mostly tends to speak using indirect non-literal type since it is more polite.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In accordance to the five functions, not all of those functions are found in the movie of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Imitation Game</span><span class="font2">. The meanings of indirect non-literal speech acts found are assertive and directive. Assertive is used to assert and affirm something meanwhile directive is used to do something respectively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hymes, D. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Foundations of Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach. </span><span class="font2">Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Longman Singapore Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Levinson, S.C. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics.</span><span class="font2"> Melbourne: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parker, F. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics for Non-linguists.</span><span class="font2"> London: Department of English Louisiana State University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, George. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">83</span></p>