---
layout: full_article
title: "Pidginized English Formation By Traders At Kerthagosa Museum"
author: "Made Yuni Swari, Luh Putu Laksminy, I Nyoman Tri Ediwan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 181 – 188</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Pidginized English Formation By Traders At Kerthagosa Museum</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Made Yuni Swari<sup>1*</sup>, Luh Putu Laksminy<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Tri Ediwan<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:swariyuniyuni@gmail.com"><span class="font2">swariyuniyuni@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:luhputulaksminy@gmail.com"><span class="font2">luhputulaksminy@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] </span><span class="font0">3 </span><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup>[tri_ediwan2hotmail.com]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pidgin adalah bahasa yang tidak mempunyai penutur asli dan digunakan untuk berkomunikasi antara orang atau sekumpulan orang yang mempunyai bahasa yang berbeda. Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk mengetahuin bentuk pidgin bahasa Inggris yang digunakan oleh para pedagang acung di Kerthagosa serta untuk mencari faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan pidgin oleh pedagang acung di Kerthagosa.penelitian ini menggunakan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Holmes (1992) dan Wardhaugh (1986). Hasil dari penelitian ini menemukan bahwa ada beberapa penyederhanaan dalam bentuk sintaks dan morfologi. Serta ada empat faktor utama yang mempengaruhi penggunaan pidgin oleh pedagang acung di Kerthagosa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata Kunci: Pidgin, Bahasa Inggris, Pedagang Acung</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Communicative language takes an important role for local people to communicate to foreigners. The traders at Kerthagosa is one of the example of those local people who speak communicative English to communicate to foreign customers, and pidginized English occurred in this situation. They try to to make conversation by creating their own terms, expression, words which are partly or completely different from the Standard English. The English that they use is influenced by their own dialects, combination with local terms, words, and expression. Using pidgin to communicate is very helpful for people who speak different languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems that the writer would like to discuss in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What forms of pidginized English used by the traders at Kerthagosa?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors are contributing to the existence of pidginized English used by the traders at Kerthagosa?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out forms of Pidginized English used by the traders at Kerthagosa.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain factors which influences the use of Pidginized English by the traders at Kerthagosa.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study entitled “Pidginized English Formation by Traders at Kerthagosa” is classified as a field research. This research conducted at Kerthagosa. The data were taken from ten traders as the respondents for this study that filled the criteria being the respondents. However, only six conversations of those ten respondents were taken randomly to be analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data was collected by using observation method with some techniques; they are interviewing the traders, recording and note taking the conversations between the traders and the foreigners, and transcribing the data from note taking and observation transcribed and typed up using a data sheet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There were some steps in analyzing the collected data. First, all the data obtained in the observation that already recorded in the spoken form as transcribed into the written one. Then those six data were classified into some groups according to some sub topics of analysis. Secondly, the data was analyzed based on the related theories. Furthermore, make a conclusion to identify and describe the Pidginized English forms in conversation between the traders and foreigners, and to find out the factors that influence the used of Pidginized English at Kerthagosa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Forms of Pidginized English</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After observing the conversation used by the traders at Kerthagosa and comparing with the Standard English, there were some simplifications of syntactical and morphological forms. Then the data analyzed by the theory proposed from Holmes (1992) and Wardhaugh (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simplification of Syntactical Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Syntax is one of the major components of grammar. After conducting the data of pidginized English used by the traders at Kerthagosa, found there are some simplifications of syntactic forms. Here are below the simplifications of syntactic forms:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of Subject Pronoun</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A subject as an important part of the sentence was often omitted by the traders at Kerthagosa unconsciously. The traders seemed to simplify the sentences by omitting the subject pronoun “it” which will be displayed in some data. They often omitted the role of the subject while they were offering or explaining their goods and doing the transaction with the foreign customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of “to be” After Subject</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As seen in the theory from Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) verb has an important role whether in clauses or sentences. Verb “to be” also appears when the clause or sentence followed by an adjective, noun, and so on. The data showed the traders simplified the sentences by omitting the role of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font2"> “is” and “are” into the simple sentences. The simplification was much influenced by the difference of language system between English and Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of Auxiliary in the Interrogative Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The traders used simple English and usually in a declarative form to ask or offer their goods to the foreigners. Mostly, the traders omitted the auxiliary in offering expression and some of the data showed that the traders omitted the auxiliary in asking a question. The traders omitted the auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">would</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">does</span><span class="font2"> in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">interrogative forms. The traders used simple expression to communicate to the foreigners, supported by gestures and by raising the intonation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deletion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">`Deletion can be defined as removing or deliberately omitting something written or printed and also can be assumed as something left unsaid. Most of the data showed deletion by the traders when communicated to the foreigners were talking about the price of the goods, asking question and offering their goods. Pidginization process probably requires at least three languages, one of which dominantover the others according to Wardhaugh (1986) and the traders here tended to combine three languages (English, Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Omission of Auxiliary verb in Negative Clauses</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the negative sentences the auxiliary usually put after the subject and before the negative marker “not” especially in the declarative sentence. The traders tended to use “no” or “not” as the negator without adding the auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2"> before the negator.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Permutation of Word Order</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The permutation of word order occurred because the traders tended to translate directly from vernacular languages (Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese) to prestigious language (English). The traders simplified the sentences into simple clause and avoided the rules of the grammar of English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of Object Pronoun</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">An object pronoun also called objective pronoun, functions as the object of a verb or preposition, as distinguished from a subject or subjective pronoun, which is the subject of a verb. Here is a list of commonly used objective pronouns: me, you, us, him, her, it, them, and who (m), Quirk and Greenbaum (1973:101). The traders at Kerthagosa omitted the object pronoun </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">them</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font2"> showed from the data which collected when the traders communicated to foreigners.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of Modal Auxiliary “Will” and “Can” in the Positive Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The auxiliary verb “will” cannot be the main (full) verbs alone. It is used as auxiliary verb only and always need a main verb to follow. According to Quirk and Greenbaum (1973:35) “will” and “can” included into modal auxiliary and always followed by infinitive. The traders here omitted the use of auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">will</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font2"> in offering expression in the positive forms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Word Choices</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The traders tended used those words because they seemed have lack of vocabularies. Vocabularies are very important for those who want to speak English. In order to speak English in proper way, the traders should enrich their vocabularies. As seen in one of the data, the trader mentioned the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">finish price</span><span class="font2"> to deliver a message </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the last price</span><span class="font2">. The traders simplified the sentence into the simplest one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simplifications of Morphological Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Morphology, in linguistic, is the study of the forms of words, and the ways in which words are related to other words of the same language. In data collected from the observation which conducted from the traders at Kerthagosa, there were some evidences of simplifications in morphological forms of the spoken language. Those simplifications of morphological forms were divided into some groups of classifications, which were considered to be the characteristics of pidgin.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Absence of Suffix “s” as Plural Marker</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In English, mostly form of the plural noun by adding “s”, however, it has different pronunciation depending on its phonological environment. Quirk and Greenbaum state that “many” only followed by plural countable nouns. The vernacular language here has an important role to the formation of target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The traders at Kerthagosa tended to translate the words from the local terms (Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese). Generally, both of these languages have different regularity and different rules to make or mark the plural noun, and obviously different from Standard English language. In Bahasa Indonesia to make the plural marker in the noun it will be used the repetition word. On the other hand, in English, a noun becomes plural is due to the process of adding the plural marker “-s” or “-es” for the countable noun because this is regular suffix in forming plural.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Addition of Unnecessary Suffix “s” in the Noun</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Different from the previous sub chapter, the simplifications of morphological forms also found some data that showed the addition of unnecessary suffix “s” in the noun. The traders seemed to tend some words by adding suffix “s” in the singular noun. It was because the traders did not know the forms of singular and plural noun in English based on Standard English. The examples of the addition unnecessary suffix “s” in the noun by the traders at Kerthagosa, for instance: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this colors</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one sarongs</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Repetition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Repetition is an instance in using of a word, phrases, or clause more than once in a short passage-dwelling on a point. After conducting the research at Kerthagosa, there were some repetitions of words shown in data. The traders tended to speak English that influenced by their mother tongue “Balinese” and lingua franca “Bahasa Indonesia” to repeat the basic word because in both language were existed the repetition. Here the repetition in Bahasa Indonesia has a function to make the meaning of the word or clause become stronger. The same case found in the repetition spoke by the traders at Kerthagosa, however, they tended to speak English which influenced by the rules of repetition of Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese, for instance: you want </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lilac lilac</span><span class="font2">? and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this slowly slowly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Incorrect Usage of Possessive Pronoun</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A possessive pronoun is a pronoun that can take the place of a noun phrase to show ownership. Quirk and Greenbaum (1973:103) divided possessive pronouns into determiner function (my, our, you, his, her, its, and their) and nominal function (mine, ours, yours, his, hers, its, and theirs). In the data showed the traders said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you guide</span><span class="font2"> to express the possessive </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">your guide</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Incorrect Usage of Degree Comparison</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Degrees of comparison are used when someone or people want to compare one person or one thing with another. There are three degrees of comparison: absolute, comparative and superlative according to Quirk and Greenbaum (1973:130). The traders at Kerthagosa used the incorrect usage of comparative and superlative. Thee incorrect usage of comparative was saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">more cheap</span><span class="font2"> to express </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cheaper</span><span class="font2">. Meanwhile, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">incorrect usage of superlative found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very very good quality</span><span class="font2"> to express </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the best quality </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very cheap price</span><span class="font2"> to express </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the cheapest price</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors that Contribute to the Existence of Pidginized English</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The used of pidginized English used by the traders at Kerthagosa was affected by some aspects of the traders’ background. There were several factors indicated or influenced the use of pidginized English by the traders at Kerthagosa, they are: 5.2.1 The Educational Background of the Traders</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There were 10 traders chosen as the respondents were graduated from junior high school, senior high school, elementary school, and evendid not get a formal education. Furthermore, they started to speak English when they became a trader. Most of them learned English by autodidact. They do not know how to speak English based Standard of grammar English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Linguistic Factor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The traders are able to communicate to the foreigners in English, however, they do not speak in proper grammar based on Standard English. There are many differences in the aspects of syntax, morphology, semantic, and phonology between the vernacular languages (Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese) and the prestigious language (English).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Economic Factor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Since Bali has become one of the most favorite tourist destinations for foreigners, there are some opportunities to work in the tourism sector and it forces them to speak English even though they do not know how to communicate in English in a correct pattern of grammar. They only speak English for trading activities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Lack of Motivation in Learning English</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">If the traders want to improve their ability in speaking English in a proper grammar based on the Standard English, the simplification of English which influenced of Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese could be minimized. However, the traders seem do not interested to learn how to speak English properly based on the Standard English. They tend to improvise English rather than learning it well. Because they assume that it is enough to learn how to speak English for trading activities. Furthermore, some of them assume on their old age they do not need or able to learn any kind of language anymore.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that there are the simplification in the syntactical forms and the simplification in the morphological forms. The simplification in syntactical forms classified into nine forms. Meanwhile the simplifications of morphological forms divided into five forms. These simplifications of English which causes the pidginization of English exist because of several factors, such as: (1) the educational background of the traders at Kerthagosa, (2) the linguistic factor, (3) the economic factor, and (4) the lack of motivation in learning English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. (1992). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hudson, R. A. (1980). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lyons, J. (1981). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Linguistics: An Introduction.</span><span class="font2"> USA: Cambridge University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muhlauser, P. (1986). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pidgin and Creole Linguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Basil.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1973). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A University Grammar of English.</span><span class="font2"> Hongkong: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Spolsky, B. (1998). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Todd, L. (1984). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Modern English: pidgin and creoles</span><span class="font2">. England: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardaugh, R. (1986). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction of Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Great Britain: Page Bros.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">188</span></p>