---
layout: full_article
title: "Various Mappings of Verb 'Seeing' in Lio Language"
author: "Yosef Demon Bataona"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25509 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-25509"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25509"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Various Mappings of Verb</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘S</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">EEING</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">’ </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">in Lio Language</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Yosef Demon Bataona</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Program Studi Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia-FKIP-Universitas Flores</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:yosef.damon@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">yosef.damon@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is based on the theory of semantic. Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) use semantic as a detailed analysis of lexem. Detail analysis lexem is done to avoid the ambiguity of interpretation. Analysis on Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is used to identify the natural meaning of a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Lamaholot Dialek Lamaleras</span><span class="font3"> verb. Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is used because (1) Contact interlanguages, (2) mobilisation of the native speaker and (3) The competence of the bilingualism of the native speaker. This is an activity to documentate the fitures of the natural meaning of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot</span><span class="font3"> language of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaleras Dialect</span><span class="font3"> verb, especially verb that state ‘catch the fish’, such as ‘leo, pasa, tufa, bitu, vəto, tivang, vəda, nuang, pukət, tuba, dopə, blikə, sajo, həpək, tivə kep, baong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Natural Semantic Metalanguage, Lamaholot language, Lamaleras Dialect</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The theoretical framework of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) actually is actually based on the Theory of Semantics. This means that Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) makes use of semantics that is a science which is concerned with meaning as the basis for analyzing a lexeme. A detailed analysis of a lexeme is made to avoid ambiguity resulting from different interpretations. What is meant by different interpretations in this present study is the different interpretations between the speaker and the addressee.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The data are from two languages, namely, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot</span><span class="font4"> Language and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamalera</span><span class="font4"> Dialect. The reason why this language was chosen is that the semantic features are impressed to be further discussed as well that the writer is a native speaker of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot Language Lamalera Dialect</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A detailed analysis of every lexeme or an analysis of the features of a lexeme is absolutely needed so that the features intended by the speaker can be identified. What is meant is that Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) intends to explicate a lexeme clearly. It is this which has made it highly relevant for analyzing the data in every language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In brief, it can be stated that the basic principle of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is that ‘one lingual unit represents one meaning or one meaning is reflected by one lingual unit both lexically and grammatically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is highly needed to analyze the data in all languages for the following reasons:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(2-1) The speech contact causes its speakers to lose his/her linguistic competence as they have a number of words which can be alternately used.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2-2) &nbsp;&nbsp;The speakers’ mobility. The mobility made by the speakers from one</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">place to another, and from one place to another highly affects their cognitive ability and linguistic performance firstly acquired.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(2-3) Bilingual ability. Being able to speak more than one languages equally or unequally causes the speakers to lose a number of lexical items of their first language. This contributes to the diction used.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2-4) &nbsp;&nbsp;The features of lexical items need to be documented so it will be</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">easier for the speakers to have the knowledge of the lexical items they have ever had during a particular period of time which will disappear in another period of time.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">It has been proved that Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) can analyze all languages rather particular languages. Based on the verbal division made by Givon (1984), verbs can be divided into (1) the verbs indicating Situation, (2) the verbs indicating Process, and (3) the verbs indicating Action. This category of verbs also applies to the two languages discussed in the present study. It also suggest that Lamaholot Language Lamalera Dialect has the verbs of situation, the verbs of process, and the verbs of action. The writer tends to choose the verbs indicating ‘action’ to analyze the metalanguage data of this language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The verb of ‘action’ states that (a) someone or something does something; as a result, something happens to another, (b) someone or something is the target of the action done someone or something stated by the verb. In other words, (a) the Agent acts as the executor and (b) the patient or undergoer acts as the target. The agent affects the undergoer so much that the agent can control the undergoer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The verb of ‘action’ chosen in the analysis of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is the verb ‘menangkap ikan’ (catching fish) in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot Language Lamalera Dialect</span><span class="font4">. It is assumed that the verb is a transitive one. This is in line with what is stated by Weirzbicka (1996: 421) who states that the transitive verb has a prototype which needs an argument as the Subject and another argument as the Object. The concept ‘Subject’ in Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) will act as the Agent and the concept ‘Object’ will act as the Undergoer, the argument which receives what is done by the Agent; what is done is stated in the predicate of the transitive verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The choice of the verb of action in this language will be discussed as follows. First, the writer will analyze the verb of catching fish ‘tindakan menangkap (ikan)’ in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot</span><span class="font4"> Language and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamalera</span><span class="font4"> Dialect. The verb of action of catching ‘menangkap’ in Lamaholot Language and Lamalera Dialect is supposed to be the precategorial verb. What is meant is that this verb cannot</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">stand by itself; it will be meaningful if it is attached to the proclitic affix indicating a noun. This means that the verb indicating the action of catching (fish) in Lahamohot Language Lamalera Dialect is ‘məvə ikə’, which has many variants which show the diversity of features the verb has. The semantic structural variant of the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">məvə ikə</span><span class="font4">’ is “X does something and something will happen and “X does something, something which is good takes place’” The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">məvə ikə</span><span class="font4">’ is one of the transitive verbs in Lamaholot Language Lamalera Dialect. The verb məvə ikə’ is one of the transitive verbs in Lamaholot Language Lamlera Dialect which present the variants of features as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.1 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Leo</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PANAH </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">leo</span><span class="font4"> expresses that “X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y”. The verb ‘leo’ expresses that an argent shooting at something using a tool. The tool used is a bow, a binding string and a piece of wood or bamboo. The tool is created in such a way that it is small and round, and its end is tied with wire. The end of the wire is extremely sharp. What is expected from this lingual unit is that when X (the agent) shoots at something ‘leo’, Y will become shot and cannot free itself. This verb can be explicated as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At that time X does something, and, as a result, something happens to Y at the same time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by shooting (straight and direct)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using a particular tool such as bow and arrow</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y become shot and cannot free itself</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Pasa</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TEMBA</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’ </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(shooting)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb pasa states that “X does something and as a consequence something happens to Y”. The verb pasa ‘tembak (me-) indicates that X (the agent) does something, that is, shooting using a gun, and a bar of iron with a hole through which another bar of iron with a diameter of 6 mm is inserted. The iron is 3-4 cm in length. The iron whose diameter is 6 mm will keep Y if it is already shot. Used rubber (the tire of a car or motor cycle) is used to move the iron. The rubber is tied to the end of the gun. The rubber will make the iron to move as a gun. From the use of this lingual form, it is expected that X (the agent) will shoot at Y as the target. At the same time, Y becomes shot and cannot free itself as it is retained by the bar of iron in the end of this iron. This verb can be explained as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At that time, X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X shoot at something (direct and straight)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using a particular gun, a binding string and an arrow (iron)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y becomes shot and cannot free itself</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.3</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tufa</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TUBA </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This lexicon describes that something is done by X (the agent) and, as a result, something happens to Y. The tool used is the root of a tuba tree. The root of the tree can poison Y (the fish). The fish will become confused and powerless; some die as the tuba root contains poison. The root is destroyed before it is spread in the pond. Usually when the sea water goes down, many small ponds appear. In these ponds there are many fishes which are trapped. It is these fishes which will be poisoned using the roof of the tuba tree, The lexicon can be explained as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y” X does it by poisoning the fish using the roof of tuba tree X does it using a particular tool as such the root of the tuba tree and several stones</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y becomes confused, powerless and finally dies</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.4</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bitu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PANCING </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)’</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The information which can be obtained from this lexicon is X (the agent) does something and as a result something happens to Y (the patient). The tools used are ‘bitu’, namely, a branch of ‘aur’ which is from 2 to 4 meters in length, depending how long it is desired, two rolls with 80-100 size, a fish hook, and bait. The bait is tied to the ‘snar’ end more or less 20-25 cm before the ‘snar’ end. The “snar’ end, which the fishhook tied is weighed with a bar of iron. The other ‘snar’ end is tied to the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aur</span><span class="font4"> branch. The iron is used to make the bait sink for the fish to eat. Before the bait is made under water, the bait is attached to the fishhook or the bait will cover the fishhook. Then the bait is released, the length of the snar is adjusted to the depth of sea water. Then the bait is released, the length of the snar is adjusted to the depth of the sea water. The result which is expected is as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something, and, as a result, something happens to Y.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this using by fishing (the fishhook is fully loaded with bait before it is put under the sea water.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this using particular tools such as the ‘aur’ branch which is already mature with ‘snar’ and bait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X will eat the bait (at the same time X raises the ‘aur’; if the bait is eaten of swallowed, then the fishhook Y will be caught)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.5 V</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ƏTO </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MEMANCING </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">ikan tembang’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The information which can be obtained from this lexicon is X (the agent) does something and, as a result, something happens to Y. The tools used in this verb are ‘snar’, several rolls (2-3 rolls) with its size 80-100, a number of fishhooks and a bar of iron (6 mm) and 10 cm long. The ‘snar’s is rolled</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">around a used milk can and so on as desired. The end of the other ‘snar’ is attached to the bar of iron. A number of fishhooks are tied to the bar of iron; the position of the fishhooks is back to back (there are about four or five fishhooks which are tied). The objective is that the bait is thrown away where the fishes get together; the bait will be shrunk by the weight of the bar of iron. At the same time, X raises the ‘snar’ so that the fishhooks can catch the fish. If no fish is caught, the same activities will be done again until Y becomes caught. This is repeatedly done until X response. What can be explained from this verb of action is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something, as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this by fishing (raising the fishhook repeatedly until Y is caught) X does it using particular tools such as ‘snar’ (2-3 rolls) number 60-100), fishhook and a bar of iron as the weight)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will be caught (at the same time X will raise the ‘snar’ repeatedly until Y is caught)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it repeatedly</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.6 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Tivang</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PANCING </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This lexicon naturally expresses that X (the agent) does something and, as a result, something happens to Y. The verb tivang is derived from the verb tivə which is close in meaning to ‘buang’. The information which can be obtained from this lexicon is that X (the agent) goes fishing at the seaside by throwing the bait away into the sea. The fishhook to which the bait is already attached is thrown away without using any weight. This is done as X (the agent) desires that Y is usually on the seawater surface. If so, Y will see the bait and will certainly eat it. When Y eats or swallows it, the ‘snar’ will become withdrawn; as a result, the fishhook will be caught in the Y’s mouth. X will throws away several times until some fishes are caught. The tools used are the ‘snar’ (4-8 rolls), the medium size fishhook and bait. This verb can be explained as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, “something happens to Y”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by fishing (throwing away the bait into the sea which is then left until Y eats or swallows Y)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something using several tools such as the ‘snar’ (4-8 rolls number 300500), fishhook and bait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will be caught (at the same time the ‘snar’ will get withdrawn automatically as X ties it to a stone or something else)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it repeatedly as intended)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;V</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ƏDA </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PANCING </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb of action </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">vəda</span><span class="font4"> informs that X (the agent) does something and that something happens to Y (the patient). This verb indicates the action of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘memancing’ (fishing) by done by two people using a traditional canoe. This activity is done in a special place which is far enough for a relatively long period of time, from two weeks to three months. What is caught is then bartered with foods such as rice and corn. Apart from that, this activity is done every day and sometimes at night. This verb can be explained as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something, and, as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by fishing (almost every day, even from afternoon until at night) X does it using a specific tool such as canoe, snar (4-8 rolls) number 300-500, fishhook and bait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will eat the bait (at the same time the snar will be raised so that Y becomes caught</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it every day, even at night</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it at several places for a relatively long period of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.8 &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Nuang</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PANCING </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)’</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nuang</span><span class="font4"> is the inflectional form of the stem na. Actually, it is derived from the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nuə</span><span class="font4"> ‘bicara’ (to speak). In this context, the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nuang </span><span class="font4">indicates that while fishing at night conversations often take place between fishermen in order not to be sleepy. The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nuang</span><span class="font4"> should mean fishing at night. This verb indicates that X (the agent) does something and as a result something happens to Y (the patient). The action of nuang is a form of the action of ‘going fishing in order to catch fish’. This is done by two people; they are equipped with ‘snar’ with different sizes starting from 300, 500-1000. Apart from using the bait which is made of slices of fish and snail, a fishhook wrapped with hen fur and weighted with a round stone. This stone is tied to two palm leaves of 30-40 cm long. A fishhook is tied to the end of each palm leaf. The stone accelerate the fishhook to be under the sea water. When Y sees hen fur tied to the fishhook, it will eat it and it will automatically get caught in the mouth. The verb nuang can be explicated as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this by fishing using bait or something which looks like fish which is tied to a stone wrapped with a palm leaf.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this using a particular tool such as a canoe, ‘snar’ (4-8 rolls, size number 300-500, a fishhook and bait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will eat the bait (at the same time the ‘snar’ will be raised; as a result Y is caught in the mouth, whereas the stone will be released from what wraps it. X desires this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this repeatedly until the stone is released and the bait is eaten up (at night)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">UKƏT </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PUKAT </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Actually, this lingual form is derived from the non pukat. This derivational verb indicates that there is something or an activity of catching</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">fish using pukat, meaning that X does something, as a result, something happens to Y. In this activity, the tools such as a canoe and pukat are used. This is usually done in the areas where pari (a type of fish) passes by. So, the objective of this activity is catching Y (pari). This verb can be explicated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this using what is called pukat which is 15-30 m long.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this, using special tools such as a canoe and pukat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will be caught in the pukat as it will wind around Y (obstructed by the fish pin)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this in several areas until the following morning</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>3.10</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tuba</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TIKAM </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The lexical information which can be received from this lexicon is catching fish by stabbing, meaning that X does something, and as a result, something happens to Y (the patient).The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tuba</span><span class="font4"> indicates that there is an activity of catching big fish such as whale, dolphin, shark, pari and so on by stabbing them. X (the agent) does this using what is called ‘tempuling’ (a bar of ‘aur’ which is 4-7 cm long). The tool used to stab the fish which is made of iron is attached to the end of the ‘aur’ connected with string). The other end of the string is tied to the canoe; as a result, Y becomes stabbed. Y will fight by hitting the canoe, making it under the water. It is also possible that the canoe will be run away; as a result, the string will be straight catching Y. This is only done once; if Y is powerless, it will be stabbed for the second or third time. The explication of the verb tuba is as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something will happen to Y”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this by stabbing (using what is called ‘tempuling’; a traditional stabber made of ‘aurr’ with a roll of 4-7 m).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something using a tool called ‘tempuling’, iron as the stabber and a canoe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will become stabbed in the body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will fight such as hitting the canoe about, making it sink; it is also possible that the canoe wil be run away</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this once; if Y is powerless, then X will stab Y once a gain</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.11 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">OPƏ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LONCAT</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This verb of action </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dopə</span><span class="font4"> indicates that X (the agent) does something; as a result, something happens to Y. The activity which is done is stabbing while jumping. X jump as Y is somewhere, where it can be stabbed, about 6-10 m. When Y is already stabbed, Y will fight. X stabs it once; if it is repeated, Y will possible disappear in the sea. The activity </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dopə</span><span class="font4"> is done in order to catch big fishes. This verb can be explicated by:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something; as a result, something will happen to Y</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by jumping using what is called ‘tempuling’ (a traditional thing which is used to stab something made up of ‘aur’ which is 4-7 m log)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using a particular tool such as ‘tempuling’, iron for stabbing and a canoe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will become stabbed in the body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will fight such as hitting the string in order to be get released.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it once</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.12 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LIKƏ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PERANGKAP </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(me-)’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This lexicon indicates another way of catching fish by making what is called ‘blike’ which is sunk 8-10 m into the sea. It is a trap in the form of woven bamboo. It is made in such a way that it has one door for the fish to get in and several rooms or ‘katub’. When the fish is within the ‘katub’ it is difficult for it to go outside. This way of catching fish needs 4-6 days. This verb can be explicated as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something; as a result, something happens to Y” X does it using a trap in the form of woven bamboo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using special tools such as a trap and stone used for maintaining the trap.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will get caught in the trap</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this once and it is 4-6 days to do it</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.13</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sajo</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MENGHENTAK</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">HENTAK</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’ </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">(stamping on with force)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This verb of action </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sajo</span><span class="font4"> indicates that X does something and; as a result, something happens to Y. The target is what is called ‘the flying fish’. However, shark and what is called ‘ikan raja’ can also eat the flying fish, meaning what will be caught not only the flying fish but also shark and what is called ‘ikan raja’ (the ‘snar’ is usually broken as it is too small). X uses what is called ‘snar (about 5-10 rolls; and the size is about 300-500). The end of the ‘snar’ will be tied to a number if fishhooks (more or less three or four fishhooks), the distance between one fishhook and another is 10-15 cm. The fishhook is wrapped with hen fur to attract the flying fish. The ‘snar’ will be released about 10-15 meters behind the canoe. A screen will be installed to accelerate the speed of the canoe. When the canoe passes by, X stamps on the ‘snar’ with force to attract the flying fish. X stamps the ‘snar’ with force repeatedly ultil Y eats the bait. When Y is caught, X will withdraw it and release it again for some time. The explication of this verb of action is as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by stamping the ‘snar’ on with force when the canoe passes by</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using particular tools such as a number of fishhooks and hen fur or something which looks like small fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y will get interested in the thing which looks like fish on the bait</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this (stamping the ‘snar’ repeatedly so that it can attract Y)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something like this.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.14 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ƏPƏK</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb of action </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">həpək</span><span class="font4"> indicates that X does something; as a result, something happens to Y. X will swim or spy on Y as the target. X will use his palm of hand to do this. X will do it repeatedly. X can swim or spy on behind a stone. The explication of this verb is as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something and, as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it by embracing Y</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using his palm of hand (by swimming or not) Y will become embraced or closed by X’s palm of hand X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">IVƏ KEP </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BOM </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">ikan’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This verb of action reflects that X does something; as a result, something happens to Y. What is done by X is ‘bombing a group of fish’. The explosion made by the fish bomb deafens them; as a result, they lose their balance, and some will die or become powerless as they drink the poison the fish bomb. Then X will swim, dive and collect them. The verb can be explicated as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something; as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this by throwing the fish bomb to a group of fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it using the fish bomb</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does it once or twice</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3.16</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Baong</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">APUNG</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ME</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-)’</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baong</span><span class="font4"> indicates that X does something; as a result, something happens to Y. The action of ‘catching’ using this verb is done as follows. X sits on a piece of wood or bamboo which is 3-5 meters long. X does this as far as 30-50 m form the edge of the shore. X uses the ‘snar’ (about 5-10 rolls), depending on the sea depth. Iron is tied to the edge of the ‘snar’ to make the bait sink more quickly. X will stamp on with force when X feels that the bait is eaten by Y. This is done to make Y caught in the mouth when it eats the bait. X will withdraw the ‘snar’ if X feels the fishhook has been caught by Y. If so, X will wrap the fishhook with bait and then throw it again until the bait is finished. The verb can be narrated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“X does something; as a result, something happens to Y”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this by throwing the bait already wrapped with bait</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this using a piece of wood or bamboo which is 3-4 meters long, ‘snar’ (5-10 rolls number 80-100)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does this repeatedly until the bait is finished</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X desires this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X does something as this</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>IV CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Every language has its own characteristics, phonologically, morphologically and semantically. This writing focuses on the semantic characteristics. The data were analyzed using paraphrasing model, in which the verb of action </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meve ike</span><span class="font4"> ‘tangka ikan’ (catching fish) was paraphrased.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The specific characteristics of the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lamaholot Language Lamalera Dialect</span><span class="font4"> would remain unanalyzed and would be buried if it were not intensively analyzed. The model analysis of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) can well analyze the verbs in this language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The paraphrasing analysis using the canonic sentences describe that the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meve ike</span><span class="font4"> actually has varied semantic features. Every semantic feature is described using a lingual form which can explain its meaning easily. The varied semantic features of the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meve ike</span><span class="font4"> ‘caching fish’ include: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">leo, tufa, bitu, veto, tivang, veda, buang, puket, pasa, dope, sajo, hepek, tife kep</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baong</span><span class="font4">. This analysis indicates that one of lingual form can express one meaning and one meaning is expressed by one lingual form.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Goddard, Cliff. 1997. Semantic Analysis; A Practical Introduction. Australia:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The University of New England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mulyadi. 1998. Struktur semantik verba bahasa Indonesia. Tesis S2 Linguistik Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudipa, I Nengah.2010. Struktur Semantik Verba Keadaan Bahasa Bali.Denpasar: Univerrsitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudipa, I Nengah.2014. Makna ‘Bawa’ dalam Bahasa Bali: Tinjauan Metabahasa Semantik Alami (Artikel).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. Semantics: Prime and Universal. Oxford: Oxford University.</span></p>