---
layout: full_article
title: "Guide for Authors"
author: "Guide for Authors"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-29193 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-29193"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-29193"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">GUIDE FOR AUTHORS</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOSCIENCE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>AIMS AND SCOPE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">International Journal of Bioscience and Biotechnology provides a unique venue for publishing original researches in bioscience and biotechnology, and ensures that authors could reach the widest possible audience. It publishes both full-length articles and short communications on all aspects of biotechnology and bioscience.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>SUBMISSION OF MANUSCRIPTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The authors guarantee that the articles have not been published elsewhere and are not under consideration for publication anywhere else; that its publication has been approved by all co-authors, if any, as well as by the responsible authorities – tacitly or explicitly – at the institute where the work has been carried out. The publisher will not be held legally responsible should there be any claims for compensation. Manuscripts to be published in IJBB include research papers, short communications, reviews, and features. The papers should be written in English using appropriate format and corrected by an English language expert. The editor will not accept manuscripts that are deficient in these respects. The editor is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">not obligated to return the rejected articles. Manuscript submission must be accompanied by a covering letter from the corresponding author. The letter should clearly state the name of corresponding author, complete mailing address, phone &amp;&nbsp;fax number, and e-mail address. Corresponding author is responsible for the originality of the research and the content of the manuscript. Other authors (if any) must approve of the submitted manuscripts. To expedite the review process, author must recommend at least two reviewers who are not members of their institution(s) and have never been associated with them or their laboratory (ies); please provide their contact information where indicated on the submission form.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Email Submission</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The soft copy of manuscript also can be sent directly to </span><a href="mailto:ijbb.aobbc@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">ijbb.aobbc@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3"> and </span><a href="mailto:Ijbbudayana@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font3">Ijbbudayana@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font3"> in an attached file. The file is prepared in Microsoft Word. Please indicate the author’s name and file name.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Hard Copies Submission</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Three hard copies of original articles and one soft copy of the file should be submitted. The file is prepared in Microsoft Word. Please indicate the author’s name and file name. It is the author’s responsibility to check the readability of the softcopy. Manuscripts will not be accepted if these requirements are not fulfilled. Please send the manuscripts or its soft copy to: Editors of International Journal of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Central Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Molecular Biology, Postgraduate Building 3th Floor, Udayana University, Jalan PB Sudirman, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia Phone/Fax: +62-3618497043/+62-361-8497044 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;E-mail:</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:ijbb.aobbc@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">ijbb.aobbc@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">FORMAT</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>General</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">All parts of the papers, including abstract, titles of the tables and figures, table’s footnotes, figure legends, and references should be double-spaced on quarto-size (letter) paper with 2 cm margin, using Times New Roman font with 12 font size. Figures and tables must be placed at the end of the manuscripts, each of them on separate sheets. Figures and papers from previous</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">publications can be used as long as there is consent from its authors. All pages, including the pages with figures and tables at the end of the paper, must be numbered consecutively. Research paper may occupy up to 4500 words, some figures and tables; or 15 pages maximum. Reviews, written as continuous articles without the subheadings such as Materials and Methods, Result, and Discussion should not exceed 3500 words or 12 pages maximum including figures and tables. Short articles which contains research material for unique interest but not sufficient to form regular research article will be published as a short communication. The manuscripts should be prepared in a single section without subheadings such as Materials and Methods, Result, and Discussion; not exceed 3500 words. For regular research papers, the presentation of the manuscripts should be as follows.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Title</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The title page should include the title, the author’s name(s), each author’s institution and address, and a footnote containing the address to which all correspondence should be sent, complete with telephone and fax numbers as well as e-mail address.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">It must not exceed 250 words. Abstract contains a brief summary of the text, covering the whole manuscripts without being too elaborate on every section. Avoid any abbreviation, unless it is a common knowledge or has been previously stated. Key words consisting of three to five words are listed in order of importance and placed below the abstract. Please provide 4 to 6 keywords which can be used for indexing purposes.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Introduction</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">This section must give sufficient background in order that readers can understand and evaluate the results without having to read previous publications related to the topic. Use only references that really support the discussion. Introduction includes the background and the objective of the research. Uncommon name of organism (local name) must be followed by its scientific name at the first use.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Materials and Methods</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">This section should contain sufficient technical information to enable the experiment to be reproduced successfully. If a special condition is needed, for example in centrifugation, it should specify the name of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the machine, rotor model, temperature, time, and centrifugal speed (in x g). For widely recognized materials and methods such as media and determination of protein concentration, it is sufficient to mention the reference only. If there are commonly-used modified techniques, the authors must explain the technique briefly. Explain thoroughly if the method is new, likewise for uncommon equipment, materials, and microbial strain. If there are many strains or mutants used, present them in a table that contains the identities (name, code, collection &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;number, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;source, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">characteristics (physiological and genetic) of the strains, mutant, bacteriophages, plasmids, viruses, and living materials such as microbial strains and cell lines described in the article are available for academic purpose. Any members of the scientific community can ask for those materials at reasonable cost for noncommercial purposes. Please also write the measurement unit in International Standard Units and type g L rather than g/L.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Result and Discussion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">This section only contains research results and the interpretation of the results. Please</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ASIA OCEANIA BIOSCIENCE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY CONSORTIUM </span><span class="font1">• </span><span class="font2">74</span></p>