---
layout: full_article
title: "The Forms And Meanings Of American Slangs Used In “Ted” Movie Script"
author: "Putu Okki Pratama, I Made Rajeg, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 17.1 Oktober 2016: </span><span class="font0">234 - 240</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Forms And Meanings Of American Slangs Used In “Ted” Movie Script</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Putu Okki Pratama<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>2</sup>, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:%5butuokkipratamaluphosa@gmail.com"><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>[utuokkipratamaluphosa@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:imaderajeg@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[imaderajeg@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[alit_ida@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>*</sup></span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi yang berjudul The Forms and Meanings of American Slangs Used in “TED” Movie Script mengkaji beberapa tipe dari kalimat dan phrasa bahasa gaul, jenis formasi kata yang digunakan dalam proses pembentukan bahasa gaul, dan arti kalimat dan phrasa bahasa gaul yang ditemukan dalam naskah film “TED”. Data terkumpul dari naskah film “TED” yang mana ditulis oleh Seth Macfarlane. Permasalahan dalam studi ini dibahas menggunakan beberapa teori diantaranya: Teori tentang tipe bahasa gaul yang dicetuskan oleh Chapman dalam bukunya yang berjudul A New Dictionary of American Slang (1987), teori tentang jenis formasi kata oleh Yule dalam bukunya The study of language (1985) dan teori tentang menganalisa arti bahasa gaul oleh Lyons dalam bukunya Languange, Meaning, and Context (1981). Hasil penelitian dari studi ini menemukan 35 jenis bahasa gaul yang tergolong kedalam tipe primary slang, dan 27 jenis bahasa gaul yang tergolong kedalam tipe secondary slang. Diantara kalimat dan phrasa bahasa gaul diciptakan dari proses pembentukan yang berbeda. Proses yang banyak digunakan dalam pembentukan bahasa gaul dalam studi ini adalah proses penggabungan lebih dari satu kata (compounding). Pembahasan mengenai arti kata bahasa gaul Amerika yang digunakan pada pemeran film “TED” dalam naskahnya cendrung mengenai pertemanan, dan kehidupan sehari hari. Pembahasan mengenai arti bahasa gaul yang digunakan oleh pemeran dalam film “TED” dibahas berdasarkan kamus bahasa gaul online dan berdasarkan kamus bahasa gaul oleh Chapman. Dalam studi ini pengertian kata dan phrasa bahasa gaul yang ditemukan dalam naskah film “TED” dijabarkan dalam dua pengertian yaitu arti literal dan arti dalam bahasa gaul itu sendiri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: gaul, Tipe, Formasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Slang is very informal words and expressions that are common in spoken language and is not thought suitable for formal situations. Slang is the main reason for the developing of prescriptive language in an attempt to slow down the rate of change in both spoken and written language. This study is talking about slang in terms of forms, word formations and meanings of American slang related to social function in movie. Why movie, because movie reflects human life and in movie we could see directly how</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the use of slang words and expressions by the actors or actress especially the main characters. Especially in American movie, slang words or expression could express the strong emotion or emotional impacts of the speaker.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems of the study can be formulated into three as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of slang are used by the characters in “TED” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What word formations are used to create slang found in “TED” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of slang words found in “TED” movie script?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems formulated above, the aims are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the types of slang words and phrases used by the characters in “TED” movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the word formation used to create slang words in “TED” movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning of slang words found in “TED” movie script.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method of this study is divided into three following aspects, they are “TED” movie script which is used for the data source, and documentation method was used as the method and technique of collecting data. In analyzing data, the descriptive qualitative technique was used. The descriptive qualitative technique means to analyze the data which has been described; it is the research based on the fact taken from the movie. This research deals with a research procedure that generates descriptive data in word forms. The analysis in the qualitative research is concerned with the understanding of the result of the data found rather than calculating the result of the data found. The data were described in a narrative way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into three parts: analysis of types of slang, formations of slang, and meanings of slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. Types of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two kinds of slang; the primary slang and the secondary slang. The teenage talk, the speech of urban streets gangs would be the example of primary slang. The secondary slang deals with the stylistic choice rather than true identification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">i.Primary Slang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the conversation and language spoken by the characters in the movie script of TED written by Seth Macfarlane, the primary slang words which were found are: (1.) Well, I guess we can’t make small talk all day, huh? If it’s okay with you, I</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">just…I’m gonna misunderstanding and I’m ready to change, but I don’t think you wanna hear any of that crap. I’m not gonna try to get you take me back. I mean, why would you? I’ve been a really </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shitty</span><span class="font2"> boyfriend for the last four years, I don’t deserve you. Look, I know I didn’t take our relationship seriously. But Lori, I do love you more than life itself. All I want is, I just wanna end on good terms, and I owe that to you. And I want you to be happy, you deserve that. And I just hope, you know, that maybe we can still friends (Data number 61)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2.) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mom, dad,</span><span class="font2"> guess what? My Teddy Bear’s alive!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(3.) Oh, fuck that it’s been four years, Johnny. You and me have been together for twenty seven years. Where’s my ring? Huh? Where’s my ring, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asshole</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(4.) He talks! I’m </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> name you Teddy</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(5.) Nope. We’re thunder </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">buddies</span><span class="font2">, and the thunder knows it. We’re totally safe.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">ii. Secondary Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are several examples of secondary slang words found in the movie script ‘TED’ written by Seth Macfarlane. They can be found in the following sentences. (1.) Hey, Johnny, what are doin’? You wanna come over catch a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">buzz</span><span class="font2">?.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2.) Goddamn right, wow. I’m gonna</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dock</span><span class="font2"> you for dingin’ the car and for showin’ up late today, alright? Try and be a little more responsible tomorrow.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">(3.) Listen, speaking of classy, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ciao Bella</span><span class="font2"> is a really expensive restaurant, so we can go anywhere else tomorrow. I really don’t care, as long as we’re together.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. Formations and Meanings of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Yule (1985:52) formation uses different forms of a new word. This ability must derive in part from the fact that there is a lot of regularity in the word formation process in a language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coinage</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There was no example of coinage found in “TED” movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing Word</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ciao bella</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word “ciao bella” in the sentence “Listen, speaking of classy, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ciao Bella</span><span class="font2"> is a really expensive restaurant, so we can go anywhere else tomorrow. I really don’t care, as long as we’re together” is a borrowing word from Italian language, which has meaning good bye. Lori wants to say good bye to the restaurant that they wanted to come because the restaurant is really expensive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">iii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acronyms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were no example acronyms found in “TED” movie script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">iv. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Derivation</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shitty</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word “shitty” as shown in the sentence “Well, I guess we can’t make small talk all day, huh? If it’s okay with you, I just…I’m gonna misunderstanding and I’m ready to change, but I don’t think you wanna hear any of that crap. I’m not gonna try to get you take me back. I mean, why would you? I’ve been a really shitty boyfriend for the last four years, I don’t deserve</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">you. Look, I know I didn’t take our relationship seriously. But Lori, I do love you more than life itself. All I want is, I just wanna end on good terms, and I owe that to you. And I want you to be happy, you deserve that. And I just hope, you know, that maybe we can still friends” comes from the word shit (noun) + suffix </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ty</span><span class="font2">.The literal meaning of shit is feces.This slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> becomes shitty because the creativity of native speaker to make the slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shitty</span><span class="font2">sound different and more unique. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> itself means something or someone with poor quality and the slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shitty</span><span class="font2"> is used to express that John Bennett (Mark Wahlberg) is an unpleasant and nasty boyfriend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">v. Conversion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buzz</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The word “buzz” usually has a meaning as a verb which means making a humming sound as of bees, like an example “the angry </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">buzz</span><span class="font2"> of a bee, makes a noise”. The slang word “buzzes” as shown in the sentence “Hey, Johnny, What are doin’? you wanna come over and catch a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">buzz</span><span class="font2">?” has a function as a verb which means a gossip or rumor. The slang word “buzz” converts the meaning from a verb into a noun as a creativity in creating slang. In this sentence the word “buzz” as a verb is formed by extending the use of the slang word “buzz” as a noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">vi. Clipping</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mom</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word “mom” in the sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mom</span><span class="font2">, dad, guess what? My Teddy Bear’s alive!” is a clipped from the word “mommy”. In this sentence, the word “mom” is informal word used to address mother. The word “mom” is usually used by kids to call their mother. There is no change in meaning in the slang word mom. The slang word “mom” is used to maintain the relationship among mother and children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">vii. Backformation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There was no example of back formation found in “TED” movie script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">viii. Compounding</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Asshole</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang words “asshole” in the sentence “Oh, fuck that it’s been four years, Johnny. You and me have been together for twenty seven years. Where’s my ring? Huh? Where’s my ring, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asshole</span><span class="font2">?” is a compounding word which is combined from the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ass</span><span class="font2"> (noun) + </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hole</span><span class="font2"> (noun)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2">These words are combined without separate. The word “ass” means a person’s buttocks or anus, and “hole” in literal meaning means a hollow in a solid body or surface. In this sentence the slang word “asshole” means one who behaves in an offensive, pompous manner. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asshole</span><span class="font2"> is also used to express an idiot person. This expression is used by Ted, when he feels upset as John lost their friendship ring.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ix. Blending</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gonna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word “gonna” as shown in the sentence “He talks! I’m </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna </span><span class="font2">name you Teddy” comes from the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">going</span><span class="font2"> and becomes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna.</span><span class="font2"> According to the</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thematic Dictionary of slang</span><span class="font2">, the slang word “gonna” is the construction of “going to” as the eye dialect and typical informal spoken English used in writing only for effect. The word “gonna” means being </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">given to</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awarded</span><span class="font2">. The formal expression should be “He talks! I’m going to name you Teddy.” From the script, some slang words besides the slang words and phrases discussed above were also found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buddies</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word “buddies” as shown in the sentence “Nope. We’re thunder </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">buddies</span><span class="font2">, and the thunder knows it. We’re totally safe”, is commonly used to call man’s closets male friend. The word “buddies” is an informal expression, the word “buddies” does not have meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The types of slang used by the characters in “TED” movie script written by Seth MacFarlane are divided in two types; they are primary and secondary slang words. Primary slang is the original speech of subculture member, so very natural to its speakers that they might be mute without it. The teenage talk, the speech of urban street gangs would be the example of primary slang. From the data taken from the script of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(TED), there are thirty five primary slang words uttered by the characters in this movie, and there are twenty seven secondary slang words uttered by the characters in this movie, especially because the characters come from a friendship, so there are a lot of informal expressions that canonly be understood by both of them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Slang is determined as human creativity; slang is usually created by teenagers from unlimited sources. Among slang words and phrases, different processes were taken to create slangs; they are coinage, borrowing word, acronyms, derivation, conversion, clipping, backformation, compounding, blending. The formation process mostly used in creating slang in this movie script is compounding which means the use of two or more roots to form a word. One particular type of compounding is the phrasal verb. It is a type of composition in which several words combine into a phrase. The formation of Compounding Word in this paper is divided intothree: Combination of words, which were supported by 6 data, compounding with separate was supported by 8 data, and combination of more than two words which was supported by 3 data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Some of the slang expressions used by the characters in this movie were used to express about something or somebody when surprised. As we know, slang words are the informal language used by people to express their feeling about somebody or something which are commonly found in spoken language and not suitable for formal situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Chapman, Robert L. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A New Dictionary of American Slang</span><span class="font1">. London: Harper&amp;Row Publisher Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lyons, John. 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Meaning and Context. London</span><span class="font1">: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language</span><span class="font1">. London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">240</span></p>