---
layout: full_article
title: "Grammatical Mistakes in Relation to English Competency Test"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Gde Sosiowati, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati, Ni Wayan Sukarini, Ida Ayu Made Puspani"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25505 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-25505"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25505"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Grammatical Mistakes in Relation to English Competency Test</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I Gusti Ayu Gde Sosiowati, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati, Ni Wayan Sukarini, Ida Ayu Made Puspani</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:sosiowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">sosiowati@yahoo.com</span><span class="font1">,</span></a><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span><span class="font1">,</span></a><a href="mailto:wayansukarini@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">wayansukarini@yahoo.com</span><span class="font1">,</span></a><a href="mailto:dayupuspani@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">dayupuspani@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The research aims at finding out the freshmen’s ability on English grammar. This is very important activity so that the English department knows their level of ability so that the teaching materials can be determined. The test is about structure, taken from TOEFL. The theory used is the theory English Language Teaching, especially Testing by Harmer (2001), in which the test is used as diagnostic test. The result of the test will provide the information about three crucial points on grammar that must be developed. This will help the related teacher to decide what items should be taught so that by the end of the semester, at least most of the students can reach the level of Intermediate, that is the level in which the students are capable of doing conversations on routines, understanding lectures, understanding English TV programs (</span><a href="http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english"><span class="font3">http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english</span></a><span class="font3"> cited on 19 January 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: testing; gramatical; intermediate</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The study program of English is one of the study programs in the faculty of Arts, Udayana University. This study program, according to the regulation of the government, conducts lectures both in English and Indonesian language. The students of the study program have to fulfil 144 credits in which 122 credits are taken from English subjects. This composition shows that the English ability of the students is very important to enable them to follow and understand the lectures properly. This study program is not provided for those who would like to have an English course, instead it is provided for those who would like to improve their skills on language and literature. For this reason, it is a must for new students in our program to have possessed the English language ability at least at the level of intermediate. Intermediate level is the level in which the students have had the abality of conducting conversation of routines, writing and understanding simple texts, taking notes and understanding lectures, and TV programs</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english"><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english</span><span class="font4">.</span></a><span class="font4"> cited on 19 January 2015). The existing fact actually shows that all the new students have passed the selection however their mark is the compilation of the mark of Bahasa Indonesia, social sciences, and mathematics. Their marks are not the real reflection of their English ability. Usually when they start the lectures they found a lot of difficulties in following the lectures due to the fact that they lack of English ability. To find out their real English ability,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">preliminary test must be conducted and the test used is TOEFL test. After finding their ability, a special English program can be conducted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Masduki (2004) has done the research entitled “The Study of English Language Ability of the Students of Non-English Departrment through the Program of Model B Intensive Course). He suspects that the reason why tertiary education students have a low English language abilitry is the lack of time in giving them sufficient opportunity to use the language while they were in Senior High School. In the Model B Intensive Course program the teaching was conducted by using communicative-integrative approach, 22 hours/week/class for 15 weeks. The result of the program showed improvement in the students’ ability in the skills of listening (pre-test 429 -post test 445), structure (pre-test 378 – post-test 442), reading (pre-test 402 – post-test 433), writing (pre-test 3.15 – post-test 4.14), and speaking (pre-test 2.68 – post-test 3.46). The research conducted by Masduki strengthens the opinion that the ability of students accepted in universities is not yet sufficient.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English is very important in supporting working performance and that is the reason why English is learned all over the world. </span><a href="http://news.okezone.com/read/2015/01/30/65/1099246/"><span class="font4">http://news.okezone.com/read/2015/01/30/65/1099246/</span></a><span class="font4"> kemampuan-bahasa-inggris-di-ri-pada-tingkat-menengah) says that among 63 countries, the English ability of the young people in Indonesia is in the middle, with the score of 52.7 while the highest ability is dominated by the countries like Denmark, Netherland and Sweden with the score of 69.30. It said that in Indonesia the ability of English of adults is increasing. In the Asian region, out of 14 countries, the English ability of the Indonesian young people is number six with the high ability is found in the places like Jakarta, Bali, Yogyakarta, West Sumatra , West Jawa and so on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The results of the researches mentioned above show that the English ability of the students or young people is both sufficient and insufficient. This is very much different from the real situation in the English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University. The government has decided the kinds of tests that must be taken by the graduates’ senior high schools to enter universities, then the English Department must accept them and do the hard work to make them capable graduates.The insufficient ability must be improved so that they are able to follow and understand the lectures. However, before improving or preparing the teaching model for the students, their exact level of the English language must be found out. To do that, at the beginning of the semester, the new students are given a test that is TOEFL test. Harmer (2001:321) states that the purposes of the test are (1) Placement test, that is the test that is used to group the students based on the level of their language ability, (2) Diagnostic test, the test that is used to find out the problems faced by the students and after the problems can be identified, the teaching materials and procedures can be decided, (3) Progress or Achievement test that is the test used to find out the improvement of the students in relation to their ability in absorbing the teaching materials, and (4) Proficiency test, that is the test to find out the general ability of the language. Since this research has the purpose</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">to find out the problems faced by the students, the kind of test used is Diagnostic test. To be able to achieve the goal of the test, according to Harmer (2001) the test must be (a) valid, which means that the test should test what to be tested, (b) reliable which means that the result of the test must be consistent. It has been said that the students pass the entry test but their English language ability is not sufficient. The reason for this is that because the purpose of the entrance test is not to find the language ability of the language students, in this case English, instead, the test is conducted to select the students who can pass the passing grade despite of the low mark in English. The passing grade is the mark set based on the compiled marks of other subjects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">After being accepted, the students are already the responsibility of the English Department, the teaching process must be planned and conducted. Since the main purpose of the students is that they know how to communicate in English, the skills taught must focuss to reach the goal. In relation to this, Richards (2006) suggested that teachers must understand that they should provide time for the students to do the activities in which they can use the language to communicate, using various skills, applying various language functions and negotiating meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In relation to the level of English language ability which is not yet sufficient, this research has the purpose of finding out the level of the language ability of the freshmen.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The research was conducted in both qualitative and quantitative methods. The quantitative method was used to count the mistakes the students made and the score they have, while qualitative method was used in describing why they made mistakes in particular areas of English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mahsun (2007) states that data can be obtained from samples that are taken from population when the number is too big and the area is too wide. However, for this research, the data was taken from the whole population, to be more precise. The other reason to use the whole population as sample because they were from various Senior High Schools, both inside and out side Bali, thus, they were considered as heterogenous population. The higher numbers of samples used the more accurate the result of the research will be.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data of this research were the TOEFL test score of the students which showed the students English ability.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In using the TOEFL test, only the parts of structure and written expression were used considering that those parts are the best parts to show their grammar ability which is very important to support their other skills. This is in line with Sutisna’s idea that teaching grammar is important because it supports the other four skills, and the teaching which is mainly focussed on meaning and communication is not sufficient to make the students obtain language proficiency. Sutisna’s idea of the importance of grammar is agreeable since ignoring grammar means that students will be able to speak</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">fluently but often with many grammatical mistakes even the very basic ones which is in fact very disturbing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The number of questions that the students had to do were 40 questions as described below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Structure</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Directions</span><span class="font3">: Questions 1-15 are incomplete sentences. Beneath each sentence you will see four words or phrases, marked (A), (B), (C), and (D). Choose the one word or phrase that best completes the sentence. Then, on your answer sheet, find the number of the question and fill in the space that corresponds to the letter of the answer you have chosen. Fill in the space so that the letter inside the oval cannot be seen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Look at the following examples.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Example I</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The president _____ the election by a landslide.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) won &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(B) he won &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(C) yesterday &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(D) fortunately</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence should read, &quot;The president won the election by a landslide.&quot; Therefore, you should choose (A).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Example II</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">When _____ the conference?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) the doctor attended &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(B) did the doctor attend</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(C) the doctor will attend &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(D) the doctor's attendance</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence should read, &quot;When did the doctor attend the conference?&quot; Therefore, you should choose (B).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Now begin work on the questions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Different hormones ______ at the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">same time on a particular target issue.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) usually act (B) usually acting (C) they usual act (D) the usual action</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The tidal forces on the Earth due to_____ only 0.46 of those due to the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Moon.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) the Sun is (B) the Sun they are (C) the Sun it is (D) the Sun are</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most radioactive elements occur in igneous and metamorphic _____ fossils</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">occur in sedimentary rocks.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, nearly all &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(C) rocks, nearly all are</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, but nearly all &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(D) rocks, which nearly all are</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_______ radioisotope is encountered, the first step in its identification is the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">determination of its half-life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An unknown &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(C) When an unknown</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Afterwards, an unknown &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(D) During an unknown</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Missouri _______ longest river in the United States, flows through</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">seven states from its source in Montana to its confluence with the Mississippi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) River, the (B) River is the (C) River is one of the (D) River, one of the</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coral islands such as the Maldives are the tips of reefs built during periods of warm climate, when _______ higher.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) were sea levels (B) sea had levels (C) having sea level (D) sea levels were</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hail forms within large, dense cumulonimbus _______ develop on hot,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">humid summer days.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) clouds (B) clouds that (C) clouds that are (D) clouds that they</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Measles is a highly contagious viral disease______ by a characteristic skin</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">rash.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) accompany (B) is accompanied (C) accompanied (D) it is accompanied</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Charles Darwin's first scientific book, published in 1842, _____ a since</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">substantiated theory on the origin of coral reefs and atolls.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) to present (B) presented (C) presenting (D) it presents</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phytoplanktons thrive where —— phosphorus into the upper layers of a body of water.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;upwelling currents circulate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(C) are upwelling currents</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the circulation of upwelling currents (D) circulates upwelling currents</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By the end of 1609, Galileo had a 20-power telescope that enabled him to see ______</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">p</span><span class="font3">lanets revolving around Jupiter.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) the call (B) he called (C) to call him (D) what he called</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On every continent except Antarctica——— more than 30,000 species of spiders.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) some are (B) some of the (C) are some of the (D) is some</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many bugs possess defensive scent Glands and emit disagreeable odors when _____.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) disturbed (B) are disturbed (C) they disturbed (D) are they disturbed</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hurricanes move with the large- scale wind currents ——— are imbedded.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) that they (B) which they (C) in that they (D) in which they</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;______ the Earth's ice to melt, the Earth's oceans would rise by about two</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">hundred feet.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) If all (B) Were all (C) If all were (D) All was</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Written Expression</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Directions</span><span class="font3">: In questions 16-40, each sentence has four underlined words or phrases. The four underlined parts of the sentence are marked (A), (B), (C), and (D). Identify the one underlined word or phrase that must be changed in order for the sentence to be correct. Then, on your answer sheet, find the number of the question and fill in the space that corresponds to the letter of the answer you have chosen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Look at the following examples.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Example I</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">The</span><span class="font3"> four </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">string</span><span class="font3"> on a violin </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">are tuned</span><span class="font3"> in fifths.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C D</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence should read, &quot;The four strings on a violin are tuned in fifths.&quot; Therefore, you should choose (B).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Now, begin work on the questions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark8"><span class="font3">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">brilliantly</span><span class="font3"> colored rhinoceros viper </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">has</span><span class="font3"> two or three </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">horns</span><span class="font3"> above each A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">nostrils</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark9"><span class="font3">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most of the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">outer</span><span class="font3"> planets </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">has</span><span class="font3"> large swarms of satellites </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">surrounding them</span><span class="font3">. A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CD</span></a></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Historical records </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">show</span><span class="font3"> that Halley's comet has </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">return about</span><span class="font3"> every</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark10"><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">seventy-six years for the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">past</span><span class="font3"> 2,000 years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark11"><span class="font3">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Robert Heinlein was </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">instrumental</span><span class="font3"> in </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">popularizing</span><span class="font3"> science fiction with </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">series </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">of stories that </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">is</span><span class="font3"> first published in the Saturday Evening Post. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Each </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">number</span><span class="font3"> on the Richter scale </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">represent</span><span class="font3"> a tenfold increase in the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark12"><span class="font3">AB</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">amplitude of waves of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">ground motion recorded</span><span class="font3"> during an earthquake.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark13"><span class="font3">CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark14"><span class="font3">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lake Tahoe, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">located</span><span class="font3"> on the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">eastern edge</span><span class="font3"> of the Sierra Nevada range, is </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">feed </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">by more than thirty mountain </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">streams</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">22.</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Established</span><span class="font3"> in 1789 and operated by the Jesuits, Georgetown University in A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark15"><span class="font3">Washington,D.C. is the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">older</span><span class="font3"> Roman Catholic institution </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">of higher</span><span class="font3"> learning </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">in </span><span class="font3">B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CD</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">The United States.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark16"><span class="font3">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The surface of the planet Venus is </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Almost</span><span class="font3"> completely </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">hid</span><span class="font3"> by the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">thick </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">clouds that </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">shroud</span><span class="font3"> it. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">24.</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Present</span><span class="font3"> in rocks of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">all types</span><span class="font3">, hematite is </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">particular</span><span class="font3"> abundant in the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark17"><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">sedimentar rocks </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">known</span><span class="font3"> as red beds</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark18"><span class="font3">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tropical cyclones, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">alike</span><span class="font3"> extratropical cyclones, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">which</span><span class="font3"> derive much of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">their </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Energy from the jet stream, originate </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">far from</span><span class="font3"> the polar front. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark19"><span class="font3">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elizabeth Cady Stanton organized the first U.S. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">women's rights</span><span class="font3"> convention AB</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark20"><span class="font3">in 1848 and was </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">instrumentally</span><span class="font3"> in the struggle to win </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">voting and property</span><span class="font3"> rights CD</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">for women.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark21"><span class="font3">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jaguarundis are sleek, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">long-tailed</span><span class="font3"> creatures </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">colored</span><span class="font3"> either </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font3"> uniform A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">reddish brown </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">or</span><span class="font3"> dark grey. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark22"><span class="font3">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is possible </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">to get</span><span class="font3"> a sunburn on a </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">cloudy</span><span class="font3"> day because eighty percent of the AB</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark23"><span class="font3">ultraviolet rays from the Sun </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">would</span><span class="font3"> penetrate cloud </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">cover</span><span class="font3">. CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In 1964, GATT established the International Trade Center in order to </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">assist </span><span class="font3">A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">developing</span><span class="font3"> countries in the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">promotion</span><span class="font3"> of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">its</span><span class="font3"> exports.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark24"><span class="font3">B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark25"><span class="font3">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Joseph Heller's novel Catch-22 </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">satirizes</span><span class="font3"> both the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">horrors</span><span class="font3"> of war </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">as well as </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">the power of modern </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">bureaucratic</span><span class="font3"> institutions</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark26"><span class="font3">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In Roots, Alex Haley uses </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">fictional</span><span class="font3"> details to </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">embellish</span><span class="font3"> a factual </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">histories </span><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">of seven generations of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">his</span><span class="font3"> family. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark27"><span class="font3">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">carbon atoms</span><span class="font3"> of the diamond are </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">so strongly</span><span class="font3"> bonded that a diamond AB</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark28"><span class="font3">can only be </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">scratched</span><span class="font3"> with </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">other</span><span class="font3"> diamond. CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark29"><span class="font3">33.</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Viruses</span><span class="font3"> are </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">extremely</span><span class="font3"> tiny parasites that are </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">able</span><span class="font3"> to reproduce only within A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">the cells of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">theirs</span><span class="font3"> hosts. D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">34.</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;During</span><span class="font3"> the last Ice Age, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">which</span><span class="font3"> ended about 10,000 years ago, there was</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark30"><span class="font3">AB</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark31"><span class="font3">about three times </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">more</span><span class="font3"> ice than </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">is</span><span class="font3"> today. CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark32"><span class="font3">35. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Melons </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">most probably</span><span class="font3"> originated </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">in</span><span class="font3"> Persia and were </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">introduced</span><span class="font3"> the North A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BC</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">American continent </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">during</span><span class="font3"> the sixteenth century.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">36. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;More than 600 </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">million</span><span class="font3"> individual </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">bacteria lives</span><span class="font3"> on the skin of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">humans</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark33"><span class="font3">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B &nbsp;&nbsp;CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark34"><span class="font3">37. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The more </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">directly</span><span class="font3"> overhead the Moon is, the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">great is</span><span class="font3"> the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">effect</span><span class="font3"> that it A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B CD</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">exhibits on the Earth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">38.</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As the</span><span class="font3"> International Dateline at 180 degrees longitude is crossed </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">westerly</span><span class="font3">,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark35"><span class="font3">AB</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">it becomes </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">necessary</span><span class="font3"> to change the date </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">by moving</span><span class="font3"> it one day forward.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark36"><span class="font3">CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a href="#bookmark37"><span class="font3">39. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kilauea's </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">numerous</span><span class="font3"> eruptions are generally composed </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">in</span><span class="font3"> molten lava, with AB</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">little</span><span class="font3"> escaping gas and </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">few</span><span class="font3"> explosions.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark38"><span class="font3">CD</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">40. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">incubation</span><span class="font3"> period of tetanus is usually five to ten days, and </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">the most</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="#bookmark39"><span class="font3">AB</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">frequently </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">occurred</span><span class="font3"> symptom is jaw </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">stiffness</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark40"><span class="font3">CD</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">The test above was given to those of 96 new students in seperated rooms to give space for them and watched by lecturers to make sure that they did the test by themselves. Since only some part of the TOEFL test used, the scoring was also modified. The test scored is only the grammar and written expression which consists of 40 questions. The real TOEFL score is ranging 200 – 760. To make the score of the test similar to the TOEFL, the following calculation was conducted. The gap between 200 and 760 is 560 which is then divided into 40 to get the score of each question that is 14. To make the score of the test similar to TOEFL the numbers of corect answers are multiplied by 14, added by 200. By doing this procedures, the range of the score of the test is similar to the TOEFL, ranging 200 – 760. The levels of the language ability of the students are divided terms of pre-intermediate, intermediate and advanced with the following range of score.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Level</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Range of score</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Preintermediate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">200 – 387</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Intermediate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">388 – 574</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Advanced</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">575 - 760</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>III RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The result of the test given to the students shows the following scores. The range of the score is 270 – 648. The result of the research shows that the range of the score of those students are 270 - 648</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The numbers and the percentage of of the students for each level of language ability are as folllows.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Levels</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Numbers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Percentage</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Pre-Intermediate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">29.2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Intermediate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">66</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">68.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Advanced</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The result showed by the level scores indicates that more than half of the students should be able to join the lectures in the English Department. However 29,9% is considered to be a sufficient percentage to disturb the learning process if they are not taken care of.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis conducted on the mistakes produced by the students, the following is the list of the three top areas in which the students make mistakes.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Areas of mistakes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Percentage</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Conditional</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">92.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Linking words</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">75.3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Noun Phrase</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">69.6</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The percentage above was obtained from conducting the following procedures. The numbers of students making mistakes and the percentage in each of the question was calculated by using the formula below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">NSMM X 100% = PoMQ</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">96</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">NSMM = Numbers of Students Making Mistakes in one number of question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">PoQ = Percentage of Mistakes in one Question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">When the test presents more than one number of the similar area, the percentage of those similar numbers are accumulated and then divided into the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">numbers of the questions of the similar area. The result is then used as the percentage representing several questions of the similar areas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">To find out why those students making mistakes in those 13 areas of language, explanation is presented below. It is expected by knowing the reasons why the mistakes occurred, the teaching model can be more easily presented.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conditional. The result of the test shows that 92,8% students made mistake in this area. They do not understand that conditional sentences can have subject-operator inversion without conjunction (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1973:326). Thus, when the students were facing such questions they looked for the options containing ‘if’. The following question of the test illustrates the mistake.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">______ the Earth's ice to melt, the Earth's oceans would rise by about two hundred feet</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If all</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Were all</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(C) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If all were</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(D) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All was</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Most of the students chose (C) because they thought that conditional cannot have the form of inversion. If they had known about it, they would have chosen (B) because that is the correct answer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linking Words. In the area of linking words, 75,3% of the students made mistakes. Based on the examination on the questions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Most radioactive elements occur in igneous and metamorphic _____ fossils</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">occur in sedimentary rocks.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, nearly all</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, but nearly all</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(C) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, nearly all are</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(D) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rocks, which nearly all are</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The mistake done by the students could be because they did not understand most of the words in the question leading to the situation that the clauses have contradictory connection. Most of them took (D), thinking that the second clause is the post modifier, while the correect answer is (B).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun Phrase. The percentage of the students making mistake in the area of nouns is 69,9%. The mistakes they made could be because they do not know that modifier can take the form of verb-ing (gerund) or merely adjective which means that the students have to understand the forms of adjective. By knowing it, eventhough the students do not understand the meaning of the word, they will know that the form is noun phrase. They will also know that when the noun phrase stands as the subject of a clause, it will be immediately followed with a verb functioning as predicate. The problems of not knowing the points mentioned above occur in answering the following question.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Phytoplanktons thrive where ——— phosphorus into the upper layers of a body of water.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(A) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;upwelling currents circulate</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(B) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the circulation of upwelling currents</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(C) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are upwelling currents</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(D) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;circulates upwelling currents</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The correct answer for the question above is (A) since ‘upwelling currents’ is a noun phrase consisting of pre-modifier in the form of gerund ‘upwelling’ and the head ‘current’, followed by verb which functions as a predicate. However, instead of choosing (A) as the correct answer, most of the students chose (B) without being aware that the choice will make the clause have no predicate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another example of mistake that the students made is caused by the fact that they did not know that a pronoun in front of a noun already carries the marker that the noun following it must be in the form of singular.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">brilliantly</span><span class="font3"> colored rhinoceros viper</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">has</span><span class="font3"> two or three </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">horns</span><span class="font3"> above each</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">B</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">nostrils.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">D</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For the kind of test above, what is considered to be the correct answer is the one that does not fit in the sentence. The correct answer for the question above is (D) because the pronoun ‘each’ must be followed by noun in singular form. It must also be followed by countable noun. Most of the students chose (A), thinking that the adverb should be an adjective ‘brilliant’ modifying the word ‘colored’, which in that context. Also from the form, it is not functioning as a noun. A noun cannot take –ed form.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>IV CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The analysis of the test provides the score of Grammar and at the same time present the areas of language in which they made mistakes. They have problems in almost all class words. This means that it will be hard for them to use the languge properly and most likely it is going to disturb the learning process. Considering the time, place and financial constraints that must be faced by the English Study Program in Udayana university, there is only one way that can be done to produce competitive graduates that is doing integrated teaching in which the teacher collaborates to decide, the teaching materials, the teaching procedures and the testing. With solid cooperation, accompined by the willingness of working hard, it is believed that the result will be satisfatory.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harmer, Jeremy. 1983. The Practice of English Language Teaching. London and New York: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harmer, Jeremy. 2005. The Practice of English Language Teaching (Third Edition.completely revised and edited) London and New York: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mahsun. 2007. Metode Penelitian Bahasa (Edisi Revisi). Jakarta: PT. Rajagrafindo Persada</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Masduki. 2004. “Studi Kemampuan Berbahasa Inggris Mahasiswa NonEnglish Department” Melalui Kegiatan Intensive Course Model B’</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Quirk &amp;&nbsp;Greenbaum. 1973. University Grammar of English. Longmn</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Richards, Jack C. 2005. Communicative Language Teaching Today.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">SEAMEO Regional Language Centre</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sutisna. Grammar is considered very boring, however, it has to be taught. (</span><a href="http://digilib.upi.edu/"><span class="font4">http://digilib.upi.edu/</span></a><span class="font4"> administrator /fulltext/d_ pk_ 029780 entis_sutisna_chapter1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">pdf, cited on 5 December 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Your Level of English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><a href="http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english"><span class="font4">http://www.embassyenglish.com/student-life/your-level-of-english</span></a><span class="font4"> cited on 19 January 2015</span></p>