---
layout: full_article
title: "Lexical Cohesion Found In The Editor’s Note Of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine"
author: "Sang Ayu Dwi Janu Pratiwi, I Made Rajeg, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 269 – 275</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Lexical Cohesion Found In The Editor’s Note Of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sang Ayu Dwi Janu Pratiwi<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>2</sup>, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:sangayupatiwi@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[sangayupatiwi@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup> </span><a href="mailto:imaderajeg@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[imaderajeg@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0">3 </span><a href="mailto:ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi yang berjudul &quot;The Analysis of Lexical Cohesion In The Editor’s Note of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine” ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis jenis kohesi leksikal yang sering terjadi dalam teks dan konteks situasi yang terdapat dalam teks tertulis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam studi ini berupa catatan penulis dalam majalah Indonesia Tatler Traveller Issue 1. Analisis data ini didasarkan pada teori kohesi oleh Halliday (1985) dan Hasan (1976) dan Nunan (1993).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temuan dari studi ini menyatakan bahwa jenis kohesi leksikal yang ditemukan pada catatan penulis ini adalah pengulangan, sinonim, dan antonim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kohesi leksikal, pengulangan, kolokasi, dan konteks situasi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A text is related to the cohesiveness of the text itself. Based on Halliday and Hasan (1976:227), cohesion is the relationship between sentences in a text and the sentences of a text can only follow one after the other in particular aspect of them through certain connections. Cohesion itself can be divided into two categories, grammatical and lexical cohesion. And in this study, the discussion is focused on the use of lexical cohesion and the context of situation in editor’s note.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hoey (1991) in Nunan’s book, Introducing Discourse Analysis (1993 ;31) argues that lexical cohesion is the single most important form of cohesion, accounting for something like forty per cent of cohesive ties in texts. There are two major types of lexical cohesion which involves the repetition of lexical item, synonym or near synoym, super ordinate, and general word. Meanwhile, collocation is a form of lexical cohesion that is achieved through the association of lexical items regularly co-occurs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of context of situation becomes the second important things in this study after the analysis of lexical cohesion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Analyze the lexical cohesion and context of situation in editor's note of the English magazine is interesting since the trouble to understand the meaning of the word often happened.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, there are two problems which can be identified, they are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a.) What types of lexical cohesion are found in the editor’s note </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">b.) How the context of situation is reflected in the written text in the editor’s note of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of lexical cohésion in editor' s note of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse how the context of situation reflects in the written texts in the editor's note </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in this study is qualitative method since the data was based predominantly on non-numerical data by calculating the frequency of the occurrence of the types of lexical cohesion in the data. The writer observed data, which come from documented data taken from the editor’s note of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine Issue 1</span><span class="font2">. There are three aspects of the research method. They are data source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into two parts; classification of lexical cohesion such as reiteration and collocation, analyze context of situation. Reiteration which involves the repetition of lexical item, synonym or near-synonym, superordinate, and general word. Collocation which involves antonym, the same ordered series. The context of situation (in Halliday and Hasan 1985) which involves field, tenor, and mode.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Repetition is one kind of reiteration which shows the same lexical items that is repeated in the text and commonly functions as reference. In the text that analyzed in this study, repetition dominates the other parts of the other lexical cohesion. The repitition occured for 14 times in the text. Here is one of the repetition that were found in the editor’s note of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Issue</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another issue of Indonesia Tatler Traveller means another list of must-visit destinations this year. (p.1, s1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In this issue, we cover a number of countries and places that have left an indelible mark in our hearts. (p.1, s.2)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From our cover story featuring Bangkok to our Western destinations, and to famous delicacies originating from the East, this issue sure has it all covered. (p.1, s.3)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Issue (p.1, s.1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">↓</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Issue (p.1, s.2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">↓</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Issue (p.1, s.3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this editor’s letter, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">issue</span><span class="font2"> is reapeated three times. Generally, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">issue</span><span class="font2"> means the act or process of publishing printed matter or something proceeding from a specified source. In this written text, the word issue in p.1, s.1, p.1, s.2, and p.1, s.3, explain the action shown by the editor in writing the editor’s note in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonym</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Synonym occurs when lexical cohesion results from the choice of lexical item that is in some sense synonymous with a preceding one. In other words, synonym is a kind of reiteration which deals with the sameness meaning of words in the text. Here is one of the synonym that were found in the editor’s note of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Beautiful = Stunning</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Similarly, the Wat Arun Temple is an iconic sight in the beautiful capital of Thailand. (p.2, s.3)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Despite the stunning views, sceneries and quality of life offered by the West, nothing quite beats the taste of Oriental. (p.4, s.1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beautiful</span><span class="font2"> is synonym to the word stunning. Both of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beautiful</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stunning </span><span class="font2">involves sense or mind, especially when refer to someone or something appearance. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beautiful</span><span class="font2"> in (p.2, s.3) explain about the scenery in Thailand. In (p.4, s1) the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stunning</span><span class="font2"> is explaining about the scenery that the western has.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Antonym</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Antonym is the oppositeness as a kind of meaning. In other words, antonym can be described as the oppositeness of experiental meaning and it involves grabble opposites between the items. Here is one of the antonym that were found in the editor’s note of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moving on into our Western destinations, we stop by the vibrant London and Vancouver. (p.3, s.1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moving on into our Western destinations, we stop by the vibrant London and Vancouver. (p.3, s.1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">moving on</span><span class="font2"> in the above paragraph are the antonym of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stop</span><span class="font2">, because the both word have opposite meanings. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">moving on</span><span class="font2"> means to order somebody to move away from the sceneof an accident, etc. while the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stop</span><span class="font2"> means not move or no longer move.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Context of Situation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday classifies the context of situation into three, those are field of discourse, (what are the text is all about), tenor of discourse (the role of participans), and mode of discourse (the medium of the text).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Here are the field, tenor, and mode that were found in the editor’s note of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Another issue of Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine means another list of must visit destination .From our cover story featuring Bangkok to our Western destinations, and to famous delicacies orginating from the East.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The participans who involves in the editor’s note are the editor publisher and the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The mode of the editor’s note in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2"> is a written text. The language used by the writer is common language or understandable language so the readers can understand the text easily.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The text showed monologues in which a text itself is the whole part of the relevance activity. The purpose of the text is to give general information of the whole content of the magazine in terms of the latest issue of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis shows both reiteration and collocation were found in the text. The reiterations found in the editor’s note was repetition and synonym or near synonym only. While the collocation found in the editor ‘s note was antonym, and the same ordered series only. The types of lexical cohesion were dominated by reiteration. The type of reiteration was dominated by repetition which appears eight times in the text. The context of situation also found in the text that has been analyzed. Every text has context of situation in order to get social phenonomena that is conveyed by the text itself and so does in the editor’s note of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2">. The text has three features of context of situation namely field, tenor, and mode. The field of text is the latest issue of destinations that was talked in the editor’s note of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine</span><span class="font2"> edition March 2015 Issue 1.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Aksana, A. A. Putu. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Lexical Cohesion of Editor’s Massage in Bog-Bog Magazine</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, James Dean and Theodore S. Rodgers. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Doing Second Language Research</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiasih, Ni Komang. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Context of Situation and Lexical Cohesion in Legend Story</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M. A. K. and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font2">. Victoria: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M. A. K. and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesia Tatler Traveller Magazine, March 2015 Issue 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mahlberg, Michaela. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lexical cohesion: Corpus linguistic theory and its application in English language teaching</span><span class="font2">. Lexical Cohesion and Corpus Linguistics: Special issue of International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 11:3. England: University of Liverpool.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morley, John. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lexical Cohesion and Rhetorical Structure</span><span class="font2">. Lexical Cohesion and Corpus Linguistics: Special issue of International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 11:3. University of Siena.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nunan, David. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font2">. London: Penguin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Widari, Ni Nyoman Manik. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Lexical Cohesion in The Text of Celine Dion’s Cassette Cover</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">275</span></p>