---
layout: full_article
title: "The Main Character Of Maleficent In The Maleficent Movie Based On Psychological Aspect"
author: "I G Sri Agung Intan P D K, Ni Kt Alit Ida Setianingsih, I Gst Ngurah Parthama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 17.3 Desember 2016: 41 - 48</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Main Character Of Maleficent In The Maleficent Movie Based On Psychological Aspect</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I G Sri Agung Intan P D K<sup>1</sup>*, Ni Kt Alit Ida Setianingsih<sup>2</sup>, I Gst Ngurah Parthama<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">123</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:kelakanintan@gmail.com"><span class="font2">kelakanintan@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">alit_ida@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ngurahparthama@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ngurahparthama@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian in berjudul</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> The Main Character of Maleficent in the Maleficent Movie Based on Psychological Aspect. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisa karakter utama berdasarkan konflik dan aspek psikologis yang terdapat di dalam film. Psikologi merupakan studi mengenai unsur unsur dasar dan proses prilaku manusia. Aspek psikologis menekankan pada perilaku manusia sementara kepribadian meliputi perasaan, emosi, pikiran, dan keinginan. Sumber data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari Maleficent Movie (2014). Data dikumpulkan dengan metode dokumentasi dan rangkuman yang datanya diambil dari rangkuman. Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan menonton film dan memperhatikan karakter utama untuk mengetahui karakteristik dalam adegan. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa dari teori-teori yang digunakan, terdapat lima aspek yang ditemukan. Dan setiap aspek terkait untuk kemajuan karakter utama dalam cerita. Sedangkan untuk konflik, ada dua macam konflik ditemukan. konflik eksternal dan konflik internal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karakter utama, film, psikologi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are many branches of studies about language in literature. Literature is a written work and a part of culture because it is written by human. Generally, literature means a written work that could make media such as novel, news, music, and many others. Literature can also be categorized whether it is a fiction or nonfiction. Literary work has been already well published since a long time ago and made the reader know about the knowledge of history. It is usually used for the works that need creative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">imagination. Literary work is made by the writer to be enjoyed, to be understood, and to be used by society (Wellek and Werren, 1956:212). Universal literary work could affect people to enjoy the series such as dramatic comedies in stories, poems or plays.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As the year has passed, the culture has quickly changed from the written text into visual. Nowadays, many movies are adapted from literature especially novel. In this case, literature shares the ability of its structure and plot. A lot of stories from literary works have been filmed as they share the same theme. From this writer’s point of view about movies or motion pictures or films are regenerated from the theatre tradition which has a little bit the same techniques of staging, lightning, movement, and gestures. From novels, movies are drawn from structure, characterization, theme, and point of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this new era, movies have become part of our life, every year they become more popular and loved by the people. There are many things that can be learnt in movies because most of the characters reflect the human characterization. Character is one of the most important aspects of drama that is very interesting to be analyzed because the main character or supporting character of movie could be figured as unique things. Character means all the qualities and features that make a person, groups of people, and places different from others (Oxford, 2000:208). Analyzing characters in the movie is quite different from the characters in the novel because the characters in movie are directly seen without imagining the characters like in the novel. Hopefully, with this study the reader can understand the psychological aspect of Maleficent movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two questions that can be formulated in this present study as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the personality of the main character in Maleficent movie based on the psychological aspect?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of conflict found for the main character in Maleficent movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Subsequently, the aims of the study are to answer the problems stated in the background of the study. There are two specific aims of this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the personality of the main character in the Maleficent movie based on the psychological aspect.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the kinds of conflicts for the main character in the Maleficent movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data are in the form of dialogues and their actions taken from the movie entitled “Maleficent”. The movie was directed by Robert Stromberg and stared by Angelina Jolie as Maleficent. This movie was released on 4<sup>th</sup> June 2014 in Indonesia. Maleficent movie was a remake from Walt Disney’s 1959 fairytale movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sleeping Beauty</span><span class="font2">. The movie was chosen because there are many psychological aspects that could be analyzed with interesting conflicts. Also the story is interesting enough to be followed since the main story is different from the original story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in collecting the data was the documentation method. The analysis of the main character in the maleficent movie was done in following steps: first, watching the movie carefully. Second, taking note of the main character to find out the characteristic in the scenes. Finally, from the note the data could be collected and analyzed relating to the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method of analyzing data in this study was qualitative method. The data were presented and analyzed descriptively based on the theory mentioned in the theoretical framework. The theory used for analyzing the psychological aspect was based on Bernhardt (1945). Analyzing conflict was based on Strathy (2008), Deetz and Stevenson (1986). The data were supported by some data analysis techniques. First, watching the movie carefully and taking notes of the conflict that occured and the events which changed Maleficent’s personality. Second, by analyzing the information using the theory of conflict and psychology based on the note taking. Not to mention that when analyzing the data, it should be analyzed based on printout script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and discussion of the analysis of the main character in which the data were taken from the movie and note taking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conflicts faced by Maleficent can be determined into two major elements: external and internal conflicts. The external conflicts are the conflicts between Maleficent and the society. The internal conflicts are the conflicts between Maleficent within herself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The external conflict happened when she had a grudge with Stefan. She was full of hatred when Stefan betrayed her only for being the King. Afterwards, she wanted to take a sweet revenge towards Stefan. She took revenge by cursing her daughter by granted her daughter eternal sleep where no powers in earth could erase it. Her anger towards Stefan made Maleficent wanting him in misery. Because of his betrayal she believed that true love did not exist on her mind. But in the end, she could finally trust true love kiss again after her motherly’s feeling that could revoke the Aurora’s curse.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The Maleficent’s felt of revenge towards Stefan changed her into an evil Queen. Without a doubt Maleficent made a negative aura towards Moors. When Aurora became mature enough, she knew Maleficent as her protector and called her fairy good mother. At that time after hearing that Maleficent tried to change her behavior by removing the curse. But it was all for nothing because at first she already said that no one in earth could revoke the curse. This made her guilty and fell into misery when Aurora knew everything about her including the curse. She was afraid that she would lose her when Aurora left her and went to the castle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The resolution to her problems was shown in the near of the end of story. Or in the climax scene, where the scene shows Maleficent with help Diaval and the Prince went to the castle to remove Aurora’s curse. But even with the prince’s kiss the curse would not revoke. After she knew that the curse was too absolute she stayed beside her</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and apologized by kissing her on her forehead. The curse was removed and one of the problems was resolved.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are five kinds of psychological aspects that are explained below. These psychological aspects were used by Bernhardt to describe his theories of human motives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appetites</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Appetites are motives or directing influences, because they initiate and sustain activity and direct that activity until it ends in a satisfaction of the felt need. It is the characteristic of all appetites that they produce activity. Unsatisfied appetite is usually an unpleasant condition, and as the satisfaction is delayed it becomes more and more unpleasant and productive or further activity. Appetites are motives or directing influences, because they initiate and sustain activity and direct that activity until it ends in a satisfaction of the fell need. It is the characteristic of all appetites that they produce activity. Unsatisfied appetite is usually an unpleasant condition, and as the satisfaction is delayed it becomes more and more unpleasant and productive or further activity. Maleficent is when she has an obligation to protect Moors from the human. She has the feeling of obligation because she was the strongest fairy in Moors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Want</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Want is a part of human psychology aspect. Humans always try to achieve their want and get their satisfaction from it. The first wants of Maleficent in this movie is that she wanted Stefan to come out from his hiding. She wanted to tell him that stealing was not the right thing to do. But because Stefan was so afraid with Balthazar he refused to come out and this made Maleficent impatient and asked him to come out soon. The second want of Maleficent is when she went to the Grand Celebration for Princess Aurora. She wanted to take revenge to King Stefan by giving a curse as a present to Princess Aurora. The third want of Maleficent is in the middle of cursing Aurora, Stefan begged to Maleficent. Maleficent was excited and wanted him to beg one more time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The fourth want of Maleficent is when she desperately wanted to revoke the curse by repeating what she said. But the curse was too strong to revoke.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Maleficent is a kind and sensitive fairy. She would get hurt easily if someone trying to hurt her close friend or even herself. The reason she changed into evil fairy was not because she wanted to be, however, it was because she was hurt. When Stefan said that Belthazar look hideous. Maleficent yelled at him and said that it was not the truth to Belthazar. Maleficent was the one who took care of Aurora since she was a baby but never showed her face in front of her. She did not want to make Aurora afraid of her. Maleficent hardly expressed herself, she often said that she did not like Aurora and wanted to abandon her. Even though she said that she hated Aurora, she was the one that protected Aurora until she grew up. What she said was different from what she did. Maleficent was a mischievous person, there was time when she pranked the pixies. She looked happy when she successfully pranked them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and Attitudes</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As feeling and attitude are related in the way that an experience is evaluated as pleasant, the individual has an attitude of approach to that experience and tends to repeat the activity and vice-versa. Experience leads someone to repeat or avoid the activity. In the dialogue because of the betrayal, Maleficent was supposed not to believe about true love’s kiss but in the end she tried to bring Prince Philip to wake up princess Aurora.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Motives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Social motives are based on human behavior that the ultimate goal is to be accepted by the surrounding environment. Man and fairies are not in a good relationship and the fairies have to be careful with human. At first the Stefan was a thief at Moors. But, as Stefan was giving the things that he stole back to Maleficent and not wearing a ring that could hurt Maleficent, she began not to suspect him and became interested in him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem described in the first chapter and analysis the conclusion could be made as follows. From the psychological aspect, there were five aspects. Each aspect was found in the main character, Maleficent. Each aspect was related to each other for the progress and the development of the story and Maleficent’s personality. She played both as a protagonist and antagonist. From the beginning of the story she was struggling for being the villain and forever living in hatred or forgot everything and being the good fairy that protected Moors again. But in the end, she changed into protagonist and forgot the revenge that changed her into antagonist character. The conflict could be concluded that the main character faced three kinds of conflict. One conflict found was internal cand two were external. The internal conflict happened in Maleficent and herself that ended with her true feelings. There were two kinds of external conflicts. The first conflict was when she had a grudge with Stefan and did not believe in true love. The second conflict was the conflict that she faced herself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bernhardt, Karl. S. 1945. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font2">. University of Toronto; McGraw Hill Book Company, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Deetz, Stanley A., and Sheryl L. Stevenson. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication</span><span class="font2">. New York: Harpercollins College Div.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Myers, Gail E. and Michele F. Myers. 1992 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Laboratory Approach. </span><span class="font2">Singapore:McGrow Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Roucek, Joseph. S. and Warren, Roland. L. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology an Introduction</span><span class="font2">. 1963. Peterson, New Jersey; Littlefield Adams&amp;Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Springfield. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent 2014 Movie</span><span class="font2"> Script. Available from: URL:</span><a href="http://www.springfieldspringfield.co.uk/movie_script.php?movie=malefice"><span class="font2">http://www.springfieldspringfield.co.uk/movie_script.php?movie=malefice</span></a><span class="font2"> nt.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strathy, Glen C. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">External conflict vs Internal Conflict</span><span class="font2">. Available from: URL:</span><a href="http://www.how-to-write-a-book-now.com/external-conflict.html"><span class="font2">http://www.how-to-write-a-book-now.com/external-conflict.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren 1956. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of literature</span><span class="font2">, New York: Harcout Brace &amp;&nbsp;World.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">48</span></p>