---
layout: full_article
title: "Grammatical Errors In Composition Made By The 11th Grade Students Of Sman 1 Tabanan"
author: "Theresia Yohana Kristiani, I Gede Putu Sudana, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 272 - 279</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Grammatical Errors In Composition Made By The 11<sup>th</sup> Grade Students Of Sman 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Tabanan</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Theresia Yohana Kristiani<sup>1*</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>2</sup>, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">123</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Letters And Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:theresia.yk@gmail.com"><span class="font2">theresia.yk@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:igedeputusudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">igedeputusudana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayufsb@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ayufsb@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tata bahasa dalam Bahasa Inggris merupakan salah satu komponen penting dalam bahasa lisan ataupun tulisan. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis kesalahan tata bahasa yang terdapat dalam tulisan murid kelas XI di SMAN 1 Tabanan dan penyebab terjadinya kesalahan tersebut. Jenis kesalahan dalam tulisan para murid diklasifikasikan ke dalam empat kategori menurut teori yang dikemukakan oleh Dulay (1982) dalam bukunya berjudul “Language Two” dan penyebab terjadinya kesalahan menurut teori yang dicetuskan oleh Richards (1974) dalam bukunya yang berjudul “Error Analysis: Perspective on Second Language Acquisition”. Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa “omission” ialah jenis kesalahan tata bahasa yang paling banyak dilakukan oleh para murid dan “ignorance of rule restriction” ialah faktor terbanyak yang menyebabkan para responden melakukan kesalahan tata bahasa dalam hal penulisan. Kemampuan para responden dalam penulisan dapat dikatakan rendah atau di bawah rata-rata disebabkan persentase kemampuan yang mereka dapatkan kurang dari 50%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata Kunci: Kemampuan menulis, Tata Bahasa, Kesalahan penulisan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language is needed to be able to communicate with society well. Therefore, language is divided into two: first and second language. English is the second language mostly used and learnt in Indonesia besides the fact that it is also claimed as the international language over the world. Furthermore, students need to learn English grammatically in order to be able to communicate and compete globally nowadays. Hence, it is important to study the English grammar in order to be able to form correct utterances in composition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems that the writer would like to discuss in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of grammatical errors according to Dulay’s surface strategy taxonomy are mostly made wrong by the students in their writings?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the causes of learners’ errors according to Richards’s theory of causes of errors in writing composition made by the 11<sup>th</sup> grade students of SMAN 1 Tabanan?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and explain the kinds of grammatical error according to Dulay’s surface strategy taxonomy made wrong by the students in their writings.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and explain the causes of learners’ errors according to Richards’s theory of causes of errors in the students’ composition.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study was obtained directly from recount composition made by the 11<sup>th</sup> grade social students of SMAN 1 Tabanan. The samples for this study were the compositions which met the requirements for being as a recount text (use past tenses and consist of min. 3 paragraphs).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Field research method was the method in collecting data. Therefore, the technique of collecting data was direct personal observation. It was done by asking the learners to compose a recount composition and collect it directly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Qualitative and quantitative method were used in analyzing the data. Qualitative method was done for analyzing the kinds of grammatical errors and causes of learners’ errors while quantitative method was used for presenting the percentage calculation of the data. There were some steps for analyzing the data. First, the kinds of grammatical errors according to Dulay’s surface strategy taxonomy (1982) were identified, therefore, it classified into some categories. Second, the causes of learners’ errors were identified and analyzed by applying the theory of Richards (1974). At the end, the analysis of this study was presented using descriptive method and classified into some categories and percentage calculation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result of the analysis was divided into 2: the kinds of grammatical errors made by the respondents and the causes of their errors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinds of Grammatical Error Made by The Respondents</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Omission is one of categories of types of learners according to surface strategy taxonomy by Dulay (1982). It is considered as common error found in second language learners. Thus, there are eight types of omission were identified in this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of preposition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The second language learners commonly make a mistake in forming an utterance using a preposition. In this study, the respondents omitted the preposition when they should put the preposition in their sentences. It sometimes occurs due to the lack of the respondents’ knowledge in mastering English and/or the different rule applied in their first and second language. Furthermore, the omitted prepositions were identified in this data: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">up, at, to</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a, the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font2"> are indefinite articles that can be used only before singular countable nouns; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2"> can be used before uncountable (mass) nouns and before countable plural nouns (Maclin, 1996: 50). Some of the respondents have failed to construct a correct sentence by omitting the articles. Therefore, the respondents were confused in using the English articles since there are some differences between their first and second language in using articles. Thus, utterances which omitted the articles were </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that was very fun experience, listening music, entered competition room, snatch away fishing rod.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of both plural markers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Plural nouns can be formed by adding </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–s</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–es</span><span class="font2"> at the end of the nouns; however, there are some rules in applying plural markers. In this study, some of the respondents did not put the plural markers to the sentences which required the plural markers and the plural marker was mostly required in the samples were </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–s</span><span class="font2">. The nouns which omitted the plural markers were </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">month, student, question, competition, hour, place, tourist, week, dress.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was, were</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2"> are required in forming past tenses sentences, especially on past continuous tense. In this study, some of the respondents omitted the auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2"> in forming their sentences. Therefore, the utterances that omitted the </span><span class="font1">274</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">my junior high school travelling to Java, my sister fishing fish, I’m waiting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of copula </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was, were</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Unlike the auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were,</span><span class="font2"> copula </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2"> are required if the sentences are followed by adjective or noun. This study identified that the omission of past form copula was more than the past form auxiliary. Thus, one of the sentences that omitted the copula </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">was</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">when I grade 4 in elementary school.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of regular past tense –ed</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Retelling the past events, the learners should be able to learn how to use and apply the regular form in their utterances. Therefore, this study identified that most of the respondents made mistakes in forming regular past tense verb utterances by applying infinitive verbs into their utterances. Based on the data, one of the respondent formed </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We work until 9 pm for three days before the competition,</span><span class="font2"> thus, it leads to a conclusion that the respondent omitted the regular past tense </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–ed</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of irregular past tense</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Unlike the formation of regular past tense which is only by adding </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–ed</span><span class="font2">, the irregular past tense is more varied since it cannot be formed only by adding </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">–ed</span><span class="font2">. The respondents did not use the irregular past tense in which they should apply the irregular past tense forms in their utterances. For instance, one the respondent formed </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">until we get tired</span><span class="font2">. The instance could be probably said true yet it was incorrect due to the fact that the respondent had to write a recount composition. The respondent omitted the irregular past tense verb in his sentence since it should be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">until we </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">got</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> tired.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission of infinitive marker –to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The initiative form of a verb is the form which follows to (Maclin, 1996: 173). In English grammar, the infinitive marker –to cannot be omitted since it plays an important role. However, due to the differences between the respondents’ first language and second language, they often omitted the infinitive marker –to. One of the respondent formed an utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">My friends and I decided travel to Kuta beach</span><span class="font2">, therefore, the sentence implied that the infinitive marker –to was omitted in the sentence although it can be said true literally if it depends on the first language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addition</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Addition is a condition when there are two or more necessary items lie in the sentence. Therefore, there were 2 kinds of addition errors based on the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple addition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is a condition when the errors are neither a regularization nor double markings (Dulay, 1982: 158). For example, the respondent wrote </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">After that, I went to the my house</span><span class="font2">. In the sentence, article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2"> was classified as a simple addition error since it should not be added in the sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Regularization</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Regularization which falls under addition category is a condition when the learners break some linguistic rules, i.e. pluralization. The data identified one of examples, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">For your information to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">got</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> the first rank</span><span class="font2">. Based on the example, it broke the rules of infinitive verb. Thus, the sentence should be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">For your information to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">get</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> the first rank</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Double markings</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Double marking can be defined as a condition when the learners add some necessary items yet it should not be applied in the sentence. For instance, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">they were spoke too fast</span><span class="font2">. The example showed that there was a double marking error lie in it which was showed by the existence of past participle </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Misformation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Misformation is an error characterized by the use of wrong form of morpheme or structure. There were 3 categories fall under misformations: regularization error, archi-forms, and alternating form; however, only 2 out of 3 categories which had been analyzed based on the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Regularization error</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence can be classified as regularization in which the learners apply regular form of past tense in irregular ones. Therefore, the example of this error is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">prepared some materials to competition and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">gived</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> those some color.</span><span class="font2"> The respondent made a regularization error by applying regular form in irregular; therefore, the sentence should be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">prepared some materials to competition and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">gave</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> those some color.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alternating-forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is the use of one member of class of terms to represent others in class. A learner may temporarily select just one of the English adjective demonstratives, e.g. that, to represent others in class. For instance, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">my grandmother already waited </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">we</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> The respondent had misformed the structure of the sentence since the sentence required the accusative pronoun to complete the sentence. Therefore, the sentence should be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">my grandmother already waited </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">us</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Misordering</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Misordering errors occur when the learners misplace the items of the sentence. Therefore, the data identified that some of the respondents had misplaced the items lied in the sentence. One of the respondent formed w</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">e could longer enjoyed the view</span><span class="font2">. It can be identified that the learner misplaced the items which led to an incorrect sentence. The position of adverb should be after the verb, therefore, the sentence should be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we could enjoy the view longer</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Causes of The Respondents’ Errors</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The cause of their errors used the theory which was purposed by Jack C. Richards (1974). According to the theory, there are 4 causes of errors which are over generalization, false concept hypothesized, ignorance of rule restriction, and incomplete application of rules. However, the data identified only 2 causes of errors out of 4.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ignorance of Rule Restriction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Ignorance of rule restriction is a condition when the learners fail to observe the restriction of existing structure by using the restrictions of structure which do not apply to it. Therefore, the respondents of this study often ignored the rule of recount composition which required the past tenses form.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.2.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;False Concept Hypothesized</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is a cause of errors which commonly occurred in second language learners. At the beginning stage, the second language learners often generalize the concept of some rules. Therefore, based on the data, this cause of error had been analyzed due to the fact that some of the respondents failed to form irregular past tense form. One of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">respondent formed </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I suddenly jumped up and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">taked</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> a bath</span><span class="font2">. The sentence showed that the respondent had false concept in forming past tense form.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion and Suggestion</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conclusion for this study is the respondents have low ability in composing a recount text without committing grammatical errors because of their percentage calculation was less than 50%, which was only 31.25%. Although the respondents have been learning English since they were in 4<sup>th</sup> grade of elementary school, they still face the grammatical problems in forming a writing composition. Furthermore, the ability of XI SOC 1 was better than XI SOC 2 due to the fact that the percentage calculation of XI SOC 1 was 47.05% while XI SOC 2 only gained 13.33%.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The suggestion for the respondents is they have to be able to master English, especially English grammar, since it is very important for global communication nowadays. They cannot communicate and compete the world if they cannot master this international language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Baugh, Albert C. &amp;&nbsp;Thomas Cable. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A History of the English Language.</span><span class="font2"> London: Pearson Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Corder, Pit S.. (1981). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Error Analysis and Interlanguage.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cresswell, John W.. (2012). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Educational Research: Planning, Conducting, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluating Quantitative and Qualitative Research.</span><span class="font2"> Fourth Edition. Pearson Education Inc., Boston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Creswell, John W.. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches.</span><span class="font2"> Fourth Edition</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Sage Publications, USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dulay, Heidi C., et al. (1982). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Two</span><span class="font2">. Oxford University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S.. (2009). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary: Eight Edition</span><span class="font2">. Oxford University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Maclin, Alice. (1996). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reference Guide to English: A handbook of English as a Second Language.</span><span class="font2"> Materials Branch, Washington D.C..</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Richards, Jack C.. (1974). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Error Analysis: Perspective on Second Language Acquisition.</span><span class="font2"> Longman, England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thomson, A. J. &amp;&nbsp;A. V. Martinet. (1986). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Practical English Grammar.</span><span class="font2"> Fourth Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk, et al. (1985). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of The English Language.</span><span class="font2"> Longman, NY.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">279</span></p>