---
layout: full_article
title: "HOW TO TRANSLATE SCIENTIFICALLY: A CASE IN THE JOURNAL OF “MEDICINA”"
author: "I Made Juliarta"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-21154 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-21154"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-21154"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">How to Translate Scientifically:</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"> A </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Case in the Journal of</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"> “M</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">EDICINA</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">”</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I Made Juliarta</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:madejuliarta330@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">madejuliarta330@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This reasearch aimed at analyzing and discussing the technique or procedure applied by translator in translating text found in the journal medicina. There are some procedures of translation techniques found and applied by translator. Some of the translation techniques applied by the translator consisting of borrowing, transposition, equivalence, structure shift, unti shift, literal, calque, addition and substraction. It was the borrowing technique used in applying the translation of terms which have been considered a part of respective TL. Unit shift is said as the change from word to group of word or in reverse. A different of modifierhead rule between SL and TL can occur in the structure shift. Equivalence and literal translation or words per word translation were found. It is important to apply the technique of calque which was reagarded as special kind of borrowing. There were the last two techniques which were also found as unavoidably which is applied by translator. Applying appropriate techniques in translating is needed in order the translation product can be reliable and acceptable for the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">: source language, target language, techniques of translation</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Translation is the process in transferring the meaning of a text and the production of an equivalence text. According to (Nida and Taber 1982:12), translation is reproducing receptor language of the closest natural equivalence of a source language message, firstly in terms of meaning and secondly in term of style. The meaning of the source language must be kept while doing the translationg from source language into target language. In doing the translation, the same meaning must be expressed into another language by very different forms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translation is said to be a change of form. The source language is the form from which the translation and the target language is the form from which it is changed. Translation is the transferring without distortion the meaning of the SL into the TL. The intended meaning of the source language must be transferred constant.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">We have said that translation equivalence occurs when SL and TL items are relatable to the same features of substance. In total translation, the question of samness of situation substance is a difficult one and is linked to the question of the sameness or otherwise of the cultures to which SL and TL belong. A legal text is something very different from ordinary speech. The translation which keeping the form in the TL, for instance, the word melodrama in English (Lawrence, 1960:107), it is translated into melodrama in Bahasa Indonesia (BI)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Achyar, 2008:242). The meaning and the equivalence translation are the topic discussed in this paper. Besides, this paper also identifies additional information or meaning or reduction of information which occurs within the translation. It is important to know the translation equivalence of the text which is translated into Indonesian. Therefore, this topic is interested to discuss.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Linguistically, language deals with word, clause, sentence, and how word are combined into a clause or sentence in order to create a complex of meaning. Complex sentence can be used in speaking and writing activities, but the comlexity of its structure often makes the learners confused in differentiating the form and the other types.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">There are some sentences that have the same meaning as the original where the translation should reflect the intend meaning of the oiginal text. The relative clause is one of the examples as a source that have several meanings in Indonesian as target language. A complex sentence consists of two clauses and between two clauses, there is a certain relation that makes the two clauses. These clauses have a complex sense or meaning. They are called as the main clause and subordinate clause. The subordinate clause has a certain function in the structure of complex sentence so that the complex sentence seems like a simple sentence, but one of its element realized by the subordinate clause. The subordinate clause functions in the structure of complex sentence so that the complex sentence seems like a simple sentence, but one of its element realized by the subordinate clause.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">This research used the text taken from Journal entitled medicina. The qualitative method applied in research method aiming at gathering an in-depth understanding. However, the method in this research are involving series of process and analysis data. It is important to read the text in order to collect data. There are some types of translation technique that the translator applied.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">The translation technique applied in translating the text is the analysis of the text. The theory of Vinay and Darbelnet (1958) and catford (1965) are the theory used in analysing the text. The theory of Catford (1965) and Nida (1964) are also the theory used in analyzing the data. There are some data chose as representation of each translation technique. The whole data is not included in the discussion. It is important to analyze representation of each type of translation technique by using some perspective data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure Shift</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">A structure can be defined as the way in which a unit is made of lower-rank units. It is said that a structure shift can occur when there is different classes of elements. Structure shifts can be said as the most frequent among the category shifts. According to Catford (1965), the translation of an English clauses can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">in the predicate, elements subject, and complement. Clause consists of elements predicate, complement, subject, and adjunct. The structural shift can occur in total translation as well. For example, we can see from the translation that determiner-modifier structure can be translated as a modifier-determiner structure.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesia</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Regional analgesic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Analgesia regional</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Epidural analgesia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Analgesia epidural</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Decompressive surgery</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Dekompresi lumbal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-4)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Medical school</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Fakultas kedokteran</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-5)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Pain control</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Kontrol nyeri</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">It can be seen from the data above that the data above were classified as structure shift techniques. This techniques is the dominant techniques which is applied by the translator. There are the differences between the grammatical rules in both English and Indonesian. it can be seen from the examples above that the shift is showed in translation in position of head and modifier of each phrase, while there is reverse rule in Indonesia.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Transposition is said as a change of word class that dooes not affect the whole meaning of the message. It is said that the transposition occured in all kinds of word classes. Among many of the translation studies some whose focuses were on the text alone concentrated on the formal changes rather than meaning e.g. catford’s shifts, transpositions by Vinay and Darbelnet, etc. Translation can be said as an interlingual practice necessitates moving from the form of the SL to the TL. In other words translation is a change of form (Larson 1984: 2) and this formal change takes place at different levels within a text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3.3</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unit Shift</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Unit shift is one of four parts in category shift. It is said that nuit shifts is the translator changes the rank level in part of speech. It can be one ranl in SL the the translator has to change it into another rank in TL. According to Catford (1965), the translator changes into another rank in TL. Rank refers to the linguistic unit of morphemes, words, phrases or clauses. Unit shift can be said as the interesting object to analyze in in the translation phenomena. The nuit shifts essentially occurs in the translation, whether because there is no exact form with the same meaning or because of considering aesthetic value. Catford (1965) introduced the translation shift and gave definition of the concept. According to Catford (1965), there is disticntion between formal correspondence and textual equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Formal equivalence tried to emphasise fidelity to the lexical details and grammatical structure of the original language. Dynamic equivalence, by contrast, tried to tend favouring a more natural rendering, for instance when the readability of the translation is more important than the preservation of the original grammatical structure. In diplomacy or in some business settings people may insist on formal equivalence because they believe that fidelity to the grammatical structure of the language equals greater accuracy whereas in literature a novel might be translated with greater use of dynamic equivalence so that it may read well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Formal equivalence is often more goal than reality, if only because one language may contain a word for a concept which has no direct equivalent in another language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Shift represents some changes occurring in a translation process. Translation shifts occur both at the lower level of language, i.e. the lexicogrammar, and at the higher thematic level of text. Catford (1978: 73) states that by shift we mean the departure from formal correspondence in the process of going from the source language to the target language. Further, he states that basically, in shift of translation, or transposition he says, it is only the form that is changed. In addition, he urges the translation shift is done to get the natural equivalent of the source text message into the target text (1978: 76). Translation shifts also occur when there is no formal correspondence to the syntactic item to be translated (Machali, 1998: 3). According to Bell (1991: 33), to shift from one language to another is, by definition, to alter the forms. However, in such cases, a more dynamic translation may be used or a neologism may be created in the target language to represent the concept (sometimes by borrowing a word from the source language).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">A unit can be defined as a stretch of language activity. A unit shift can occur when textual equivalents are placed on different ranks. It can be seen from the table below:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-6)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">And </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mainly</span><span class="font4"> pneumonia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penyebab infeksi terbanyak adalah </span><span class="font4">pneumonia</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-7)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Factors</span><span class="font4"> associated with acute bronchiolitis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Faktor-faktor</span><span class="font4"> yang terkait dengan bronkiolitis akut</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-8)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Surgery-associated tssues initiates </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">the nociception</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Cedera jaringan terkait pembedahan mencetuskan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">proses nosisepsi</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">It can be seen from the data (3-30) above that mainly was a word in SL and it was translated into penyebab infeksi terbakanyak adalah. The word penyebab infeksi terbanyak adalah was a group of word or phrase. This sentence can be said as unit shift, as there is a change in unit or grammatical scale. It can be seen from word to group of word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">It can be seen from the data (3-30) above that factors was a word in SL and it was translated into faktor-faktor. The word faktor-faktor was a group of word or phrase. This sentence can be said as unit shift, as there is a change in unit or grammatical scale. It can be seen from word to group of word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">We can see from the data (3-48) above that the nociception was a word in SL and it was translated into proses nosisepsi. The word proses nosisespsi was a group of word or phrase. This sentence can be said as unit shift, as there is a change in unit or grammatical scale. It can be seen from word to group of word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3.4</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.4.1</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naturalized Borrowing</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Technique of naturalized borrowing in the translation is based on word categories. The words refer to the borrowing technique in the translation indicated by the suffix marker.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">3.4.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun in Naturalized Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Noun categories are indicated by suffix marker. Noun / nominal suffixes are often employed to derive abstract nouns from verbs, adjectives and nouns. Such abstract nouns can denote an action, the result of actions, or other related theory as well as properties, qualities and the like. To make it clearer, some suffixes of nouns are explained as follows. All nouns were taken from the SL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">3.4.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suffix - ion and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">÷ </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ation si in the TL</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Suffix –ion and –ation in the SL are as well to show that nouns are formed. Those suffixes occur adjustment of spelling in the TL to be –si.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Scintillat</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">ion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sintila</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">si</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Concentrat</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">ion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Konsentra</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">si</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Radia</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">tion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Radia</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">si</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Investiga</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">tion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Investiga</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">si</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">The words have the suffix –ion and –ation in the SL, which is categorized as a noun,. The suffix –ion is accompanied by changing the base–final</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">consonant form (t) to (s). Those words are reconstructions (Oxford, 2013:604). The allomorph –ation in the word information and demonstration (Oxford, 2013:187), in this case, derivatives in –ion suffix, which indicate events or results of the process. The stem of words are; information is inform, the stem of the reconstruction is reconstruct, the stem of the word demonstration is demonstrate. Those translations as well are categorized as a noun. To make it clearer, for instance, the word information in the SL will be categorized as a noun). It means among of words are categorized as a noun in the word type.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">3.4.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suffix -ity ^÷ -as omitted in the SL</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The adjustment of spelling occurs to the suffix –y in the SL becomes –as.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Activi</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ty</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Aktivitas</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.4.2 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;font-variant:small-caps;">Pure Borrowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The technique in the translation to take a word directly from the SL into the TL without any adjustment is called pure borrowing. The words are taken purely. It occurs at noun category in the SL which is translated into the TL. Noun is a word which is used to name something as a thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">3.4.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun in the Pure Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">There are two kinds of noun which are common noun and proper noun. The difference between a common noun and a proper noun is that a common noun does not name any individual person, place, or thing while a proper noun has the name of a person, place, or thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">3.4.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Common Noun in the Pure Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Common noun occurs in the pure borrowing by taking the word directly from the SL into the TL. It is indicated that the word does not begin with a capital letter. It does not name of place, and thing. There are common noun which are found from the data, as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Tritium</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Tritium</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">3-15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Radio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Radio</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">The data above shows that the technique used is borrowing. It is a pure borrowing. Those words were taken directly from the SL into the TL to show that the borrowing techniques in the translation were applied in the pure borrowing. All of word elements in the SL as well are taken directly without any modification in the TL. It is to say that the technique used by taking the spelling in the SL in whole word. It is called as pure borrowing in a common noun.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3.5</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The target text can contaion more linguistic material than its source. Addition process in translation can occur without changing the semantic content of the message, but rather make information implicit that is presented in the source text. The purpose of the message, for imperative purpose that aim at not just understanding the translation but also at ensuring no misunderstanding of the translation.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-16)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“.....from January...”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“.......dari periode Januari...”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">It can be seen from the data (3-48) that there is the insertion of a new word in TL. However, it was absent in SL. It was the word “periode” in TL considered as addition. If it was not added, there will be misunderstanding upon what January referred to might emerge. It is the addition procedure that make implicit information explicit. It is important to justify the addition of periode in translating from SL into TL.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Data</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-17)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“.........between 2005 ..</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">...”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“......antara tahun 2005....”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">We can see from the data (3-49) that there is the insertion of a new word in TL. However, it was absent in SL. It was the word “tahun” in TL considered as addition. If it was not added, there will be misunderstanding upon what 2005 referred to might emerge. It is the addition procedure that make implicit information explicit. It is important to justify the addition of tahun in translating from SL into TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">It is important to know the meaning which is classified into two kinds, referential meaning and connotative meaning. A translator must be aware of which meaning is possibly intended by the author. Besides, it is important to pay attention on the components embedded in a certain unit of meaning. By understanding the components of meaning of the source language expressions, then a translator can make the best decision related to the components.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3-18)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“......without AE.....”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“....tanpa menggunakan AE....”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">It can be seen from the data (3-49) that there is the insertion of a new word in TL. However, it was absent in SL. It was the word “menggunakan” in TL considered as addition. If it was not added, there will be misunderstanding upon what is referred to might emerge. It is the addition procedure that make implicit information explicit. It is important to justify the addition of menggunakan in translating from SL into TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">As we know that translation is an effort of finding equivalent meaning of a text into the second language. The sentence above indicates that there occured</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">meaning equivalence since in translation meaning is the object to be rendered from the source language text into the target language text. It can be seen from the sentence above that the translator is faced with a text as units of meaning in the form of sets of words or sentences.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>IV CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Generally, translation is a process of rendering meaning, ideas, or messages of a text from one language to other language. There are some considerations which follow this process, which mainly related to the accuracy, clarity and naturalness of the meaning, ideas, or messages of the translation. It means that it is an important thing to consider whether the readers of the target text accept equivalent information as the readers of the source text do.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Baker, Mona (1992). In Other Words, A Coursebook on Translation. London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Hatim dan Munday (2004: 6) Translation, An Advanced Resource Book. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1988). A Textbook of Translation. Hertfordshire: Prentice Hall International</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Nida, Eugene A and Charles R. Taber (1982). The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden: E.J. Brill.</span></p>