---
layout: full_article
title: "The Figurative Language In “Twilight” Movie Script"
author: "I Gusti Agung Bagus Santa Putra, I Gede Putu Sudana, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 100 – 108</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">The Figurative Language In “Twilight” Movie Script</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I Gusti Agung Bagus Santa Putra<sup>1*</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>2</sup>, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">123</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:bagussantaputra@gmail.com"><span class="font3">bagussantaputra@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:iputugedesudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">iputugedesudana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:isnu.maharani@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">isnu.maharani@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian yang berjudul The Figurative Language in “Twilight” Movie Script ini fokus pada analisa bahasa kiasan yang terdapat dalam naskah film ini dan makna yang terkandung didalamnya. Topik tentang makna kiasan sangat menarik karena menumbuhkan imajinasi orang-orang saat mereka membaca suatu sumber atau hal lainnya yang mengandung bahasa kiasan. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi dan menganalisa jenis-jenis dari bahasa kiasan yang digunakan di naskah film “Twilight” dan makna yang terkandung didalamnya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini menggunakan dua teori; yaitu teori bahasa kiasan dan teori mengenai makna. The Theory of Figurative Language mengadopsi teori dari K. L. Knickerbocker dan H. Willard Reninger (1963). Teori kedua mengadopsi Theory of Meaning oleh Geoffrey Leech (1974) untuk mendukung analisis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa ada delapan jenis bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan yaitu simile, personifikasi, metonimi, hiperbola, ironi, paradoks, dead metaphor and kiasan. Ada empat macam makna dari bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan yaitu makna konotatif, makna afektif, makna reflektif dan makna collocative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Bahasa Kiasan, Makna, Naskah Film.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Figurative language is part of semantic study which is intended to understand the meaning or sense of words, phrases or sentences. The figurative language uses words that have unusual constructions or sounds, so good comprehension is needed in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">study. There are many types of figurative language; they are simile, metaphor, personification, hyperbole and symbolism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study is very important because it gives clear understanding of the use of figurative language itself especially in the “Twilight” movie script. The figurative expression in this movie script was analyzed by applying the theory of figurative language proposed by K. L. Knickerbocker and H. Willard Reninger (1963). Besides, the theory proposed by Geoffrey Leech (1974) was also used to support the analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This topic is interesting because it gives people a nice sense of imagination when they are reading the source or something which consists of figurative language. This study also analyzes the meaning of the figurative found in the movie script to get the clear meaning of it. Watching the movie seems to be more accurately than in a literal situation which subsequently helps readers find out more about what someone means. The figurative language occurs when people’s words have deeper meaning than the literal language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The problems that are discussed in this writing are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of figurative language are used in the “Twilight” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of the figurative language used in the “Twilight” movie script?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the problems above, the aims of the study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and analyze the types of figurative language used in the “Twilight” movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the meaning of the figurative language is used in the “Twilight” movie script is conveyed.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The primary data in this undergraduate paper is a movie script entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight</span><span class="font3">. The method and technique used in collecting data was the documentary method. The data in this study were analyzed qualitatively based on the Theory of Figurative Language proposed by K. L. Knickerbocker and H. Willard Reninger (1963) and Theory of Meaning proposed by Geoffrey Leech (1974).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. This data analysis is divided into two parts; the analysis of figurative language and the analysis of meaning. The analysis of figurative language analyzes the simile, personification, metonymy, hyperbole, irony, paradox, dead metaphor and allusion expressions in “Twilight” movie script. The analysis of meaning analyzes the conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, affective meaning and reflected meaning of the figurative language found in the movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Figurative Language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This chapter analyzes the figurative language in “Twilight” movie script. They are simile, personification, metonymy, hyperbole, irony, paradox, dead metaphor and allusion, which are further explained in the following sub chapters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Simile involves comparison using the word “like” or “as”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">He grips her more firmly, then leaps to another tree like a flying squirrel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 67, SCENE 88 EXT. TREE)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase contains a simile expression because it involves a comparison between one to another thing using the connecting word “like”. This phrase symbolizes someone’s way of jumping the same as an animal “squirrel”. In this phrase there are two words which are expressed, they are “leaps” and “flying squirrel”. Those two words are certainly not connected since “leaps” is an activity of jumping in a certain height while “flying squirrel” is a nocturnal animal which lives in trees and can jump high using its small wing that exists between its arms and body. In this phrase, the word “he” refers to Edward who is a vampire who has the ability to do something that cannot be done by a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">human being. He can move fast and jump as high as he can so that in this phrase the writer pictures the way in which Edward jumps using a symbol of the animal which can do the same thing; it is leaps quickly from a tree to another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Personification is giving human characteristic to an object, animal or an abstract idea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Branches are dodged with preternatural agility.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 1, SCENE 1 EXT. RAIN FOREST, OLYMPIC NATIONAL PARK, WASHINGTON - DAWN)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase is shown by the use of personification. It is shown in the word dodged with preternatural agility; it is an activity that can only be done by human because they can move or dodge. Branches are only an object which cannot move if there is no wind. So the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">branches dodging with preternatural agility</span><span class="font3"> shows the personification used by giving human characteristic dodging to the object tree.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metonymy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Metonymy describes one thing using the term of another thing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">So the lion fell for the lamb</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 55, SCENE 70 EXT. A MEADOW (CONTINUOUS) - DAY 70 – EDWARD)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase implies a metonymy expression because this phrase uses a symbol to describe something which has the closest meaning to another thing. This metonymy expression pictures two people, a man and a woman who are in love. The “lion” is a wild animal which is the king of the jungle and describes as a strong animal and this animal becomes a symbol of a man who is strong and vigorous. The “lamb” is a farm animal which is very cute and not grumpy; this animal symbolizes the woman whose personality is mostly soft-hearted. In this phrase, the symbol of lion refers to Edward while the symbol of the lamb refers to Bella, these kinds of animals are used for picturing the personality of each of them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Hyperbole involves an exaggeration of ideas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">She freezes when she sees –Edward.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 20, SCENE 35 INT. BIOLOGY CLASS/HALLWAY – DAY 35 – BELLA)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrase above contains a hyperbole expression. The word freezes is commonly used as a change from a liquid into a solid or frozen; this word is related to ice. This expression also consists of connotative meaning because “freeze” in the sentence above is not the actual meaning of “something frozen”, but it shows someone’s stunned feeling when “she” sees her special person.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Irony</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Irony is a statement whose real meaning is completely opposed to its professed or surface meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I should go back and rip their heads off.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 42, SCENE 59 INT. EDWARD'S CAR - DRIVING - NIGHT 59)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrase above contains an irony expression which is shown in the words “rip their heads off”. That group of word pictures an ironic event. The word “rip” is related to death. From this phrase, the writer tells that there is someone who wants to kill a group of people (their).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paradox</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Paradox is a statement whose surface, obvious meaning seems to be illogical.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Breathing in short gasps, trying desperately not to make a sound.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 14, SCENE 21 ECU ON A SECURITY GUARD - IN THE DARKNESS 21)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase is one example of paradox expression because what is apparently stated is different from the actual situation. The statement “breathing in short gasps” contrasts with the other statement “trying desperately not to make a sound”; however, a gasping breath will produce a sound even it is a vague sound.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dead metaphor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Dead metaphor is a metaphor which has lost its figurative meaning through endless use.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I’m Eric. The eyes and ears of this place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 7, SCENE 13. INT HIGH SCHOOL – A SERIES OF SHOTS – DAY 13 – ERIC).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase shows the use of dead metaphor. It is shown by the words eyes and ears, because dead metaphor uses part of the body which no longer suggests anything new. This phrase means that Eric is someone who really knows about this place.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Allusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Allusion is used as a reference to some well-known place, event or person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">They’re all talking about her. This is her hell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 7, SCENE 13. INT. HIGH SCHOOL – A SERIES OF SHOTS – DAY 13).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The allusion expression is shown in the phrase above. The writer uses a name of place that is well-known by people as a symbol. The name of the place is indicated in the word hell. Hell is a place which is believed to be the worst place or the evil place; that place is full of bad things. While in this phrase, the writer uses “hell” as a symbol of a very uncomfortable and undesirable place for “her” because in that place the other people are talking about her and it makes her feel uncomfortable.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This sub chapter analyzes meaning contained in the figurative language in “Twilight” movie script. They are conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, affective meaning and reflected meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Connotative meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Connotative meaning is the meaning of a word which is different from the written.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">They’re all talking about her. This is her hell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 7, SCENE 13. INT. HIGH SCHOOL – A SERIES OF SHOTS – DAY 13).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase contains connotative meaning because one of the words in this phrase has a different meaning from the meaning in dictionary. In the dictionary meaning, the word “hell” refers to one place which is believed as a spiritual realm of evil and </span><span class="font2">105</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">suffering, the place that is not desired by everyone when they later die. While the word “hell” in this phrase means a very undesirable place to be in. So the phrase “They’re all talking about her. This is her hell” means that there is a very undesirable place that she does not want to be in because that place is filled with people that talk about her and she will feel uncomfortable being there.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Affective meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Affective meaning can reflect the personal feeling of the speaker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3">I should go back and rip their heads off.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(PAGE 42, SCENE 59 INT. EDWARD'S CAR - DRIVING - NIGHT 59)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrase above is a statement that is said by Edward as a speaker. This statement contains affective meaning because as its definition, the affective meaning can reflect the speaker’s feeling. In this phrase, the personal feeling of Edward is shown. It pictures Edward’s anger which refers to someone that he does not like. Because of his anger to that person, he expresses his anger by saying “I should go back and rip their heads off”. In the fact, Edward never kills anybody because he already leaves that person and drives away by his car. This phrase is said by Edward when he talks to Bella in his car. At that time, Bella walked alone on the street that was dark and deserted then there was a man who wanted to tease her. At the same time, Edward came with his car and helped Bella immediately.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reflected meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Reflected meaning uses a synonymous or antonymous expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It’s first grade all over again, and you’re the shiny new toy</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 9 SCENE 15 INT. CAFETARIA – DAY 15 – JESSICA SPEAKS TO BELLA)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase implies reflected meaning because there are two words that show synonymous expression. Those two words are “first grade” and “shiny new toy”. The similarity between those words is that they imply “new kid on the block” or a newcomer to a particular place. The word “first grade” means a freshman student and it is compared with the word “new toy”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collocative Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Collocative meaning describes words that regularly appear together in common use.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">∗ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bella, dressed for bed, looks out the window as she talks on the phone with</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rene.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(PAGE 70, SCENE 91 INT. BELLA'S ROOM - NIGHT 91)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This phrase showed a collocative meaning expression in the word “dressed for bed”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">These words often appear together in common use and it already become a permanent term, it was same like the use of the word “handsome” for example. Dressed for bed here was mean that Bella already changing her clothes to pajamas and ready to sleep.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study has analyzed and described the data in the form of figurative expressions and their meanings in the “Twilight” movie script. It can be concluded that there are twenty two phrases found which consist of figurative language and meaning. The figurative language expressions found in this study are four examples of simile, three examples of personification, three examples of metonymy, six examples of hyperbole, one example of irony, one example of paradox, one example of dead metaphor and three examples of allusion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The meanings that those figurative language expressions contain found in the present study are as follows eleven connotative meanings, one affective meaning, nine reflected meaning and one collocative meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Knickerbocker, K. L. &amp;&nbsp;Willard Renigner. 1963. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York. Chicago. San Fransisco. Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G.N. 1947. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font3">. Middlesex: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stefaniamanca. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Learners’ Representation of their Affective Domain through Figurative Language in a Web-Based Learning Environment</span><span class="font3">. Melbourne: Distance Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">108</span></p>