---
layout: full_article
title: "American Slang In “Horrible Bosses 2” Movie By Anders And John Morris"
author: "Luh Putu Amara Sukma Dewi, A.A Shanti Sari Dewi, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 17.3 Desember 2016: 112 -119</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">American Slang In </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Horrible Bosses 2”</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Movie By Anders And John Morris</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Luh Putu Amara Sukma Dewi<sup>1*</sup>, A.A Shanti Sari Dewi<sup>2</sup>, Ni Wayan Sukarini<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:amara.vanessa@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">[amara.vanessa@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font3"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:jungshanti@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">[jungshanti@yahoo.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font3">wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa mempunyai arti penting sebagai sarana untuk berkomunikasi. Bahasa dapat dibagi menjadi dua bentuk yaitu bahasa formal dan non-formal sesuai dengan konteks situasinya. Selain itu, di dalam kehidupan sehari-hari manusia mempunyai pemilihan bahasa dalam berkomunikasi seperti, jargon, ungkapan, methapora, dan bahasa slang. Slang adalah salah satu dari variasi tersebut. Slang adalah bahasa inggris non-formal yang dibuat dan digunakan oleh orang-orang dalam komunitas tertentu. Penelitian ini memiliki tujuan untuk mengidentifikasikan tipe arti yang terdapat pada film berjudul Horrible Bosses 2. Selain itu, penelitian ini juga mencoba untuk menganalisis fungsi dari slang yang terdapat pada film tersebut. Penelitian dokumentasi digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data dari film dan metode kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisa data. Teori- teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa data adalah teori dari Leech (1974) dan teori fungsi bahasa dari Holmes (2010). Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa terdapat enam fungsi yang ditemukan di film Horrible Bosses 2 yaitu, expressive, directive, referential, metalinguistic, poetic, dan fungsi phatic. Sedangkan Teori arti dari Leech (1974) menunjukkan bahwa hanya terdapat enam dari tujuh tipe arti yang terdapat di film Horrible Bosses 2 yaitu; conceptual, connotative, reflected, stylistic, affective, dan arti collocative. Dari ke tujuh tipe arti hanya tipe arti thematic tidak ditemukan di film Horrible Bosses 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bahasa, slang, teori arti , dan teori fungsi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Communication is the foundation of all human relationship. At first, strangers start talking and getting to know each other, and then the relationships are formed when they have more interaction and communication. Communicating helps people</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to express their ideas and feelings, and it, at the same time, help us understand and think of the other. Therefore, communication is an important to do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Language as a means of communication plays an important role in human interaction. In using the language, human beings face many aspects concerned with language in use. Language can be used both in oral and written forms based on their contexts. While from its context, language can be applied in formal and informal situations. In daily conversation, sometimes people are always faced with language choice to speak. There are some kinds of language choice used in informal context such as; idioms, slang, metaphors, jargon, etc. Slang is one of those varieties.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Slang indicates non-standard language, most of people often use on certain occasion. Words or phrases are usually found because of habits or ideas that appear in society. Generally, most of countries have their own slang terms in their language. For instance, in Indonesia, slang can be found in daily conversation and most of teenagers use it. Besides, it is used by teenagers; there are some social groups which usually use it, such as; street gang, drug user, gambler, etc. The use of slang also can be found in several movies especially in American movies. One of American movies is entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Horrible Bosses 2</span><span class="font3">. It is a black comedy drama written by Anders and John Morris. Moreover, this movie interests audience to watch, people usually use the new slangs obtained from the movie in daily life. The use of slang in the film industry is recommended to learn because so many new words and phrases can be found.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the background that has been presented above, there are 2 (two) problems to be discussed in the following chapter:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What s function of slangs are found in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">HORRIBLE BOSSES 2</span><span class="font3"> movie directed by Anders and John Morris?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of meaning of slangs are found in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">HORRIBLE BOSSES 2 </span><span class="font3">movie directed by Anders and John Morris?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Related to the problems in this undergraduate thesis there are two aims that are expected to be achieved; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the function of slang found in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">HORRIBLE BOSSES 2</span><span class="font3"> movie directed by Anders and John Morris.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of meaning of slang found in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">HORRIBLE BOSSES 2 </span><span class="font3">movie directed by Anders and John Morris.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this undergraduate thesis were taken from the movie script Horrible Bosses 2. The data presentation and analysis started with the presentation of the American slangs used in twenty seven conversations, which were communicated by the main character in selected scenes. The movie script was obtained by doing browsing on the internet in movie script website. The data analysis in this study was divided into two parts; firstly, analyzing the function of slang used the theory the language function. Secondly, identifying the type of meaning of slang used by the characters in selected conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, the method of collecting data was documentation method. In documentation method, there are no respondents or informants to be involved in this undergraduate thesis. The process of collecting data was done in several steps; firstly, watching the movie and downloading the movie script from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http//script.com/horrible-bosses-2-script.html.</span><span class="font3"> Secondly, reading and understanding the text carefully and finding the slang terms used by the characters. Finally, after doing those steps, the data were ready to be analyzed based on the theories used in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After the all the data were collected, they were analyzed using method and technique of analyzing data. In this study the collected data was analyzed using qualitative method. Based on the book entitled “The analysis of Qualitative Data” by Miles (1992) qualitative method which is a kind of analysis method use the data in form of words not number, qualitative method provide a wide descriptive of process happening in the area which is analyzed. The data were analyzed as follows: Firstly,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the functions of slang words were analyzed based on Holmes (2010) theory which was divided into six functions: expressive, directive, referential, metalinguistic, phoetic, and phatic. Secondly, identifying the types of meaning of slang based on the Leech (1974) theory and supported by Oxford Dictionary and Urban Dictionary Online as well as context of situation of the conversation occurred.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis the function of slang used the theory of language function</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">proposed by Holmes (2010). In identifying the meaning of slang, the theory proposed by Leech (1972) was applied. Below the discussion is discussed in the selected conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dialogue Data 5</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kurt &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">This is just a problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">That means all we go to do is come up with a solution, right?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Dale &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">You know what we would do? We put some ideas up on the board, right?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Kurt &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">That’s what I’m talking about. Here we go!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Nick &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">No ideas a bad idea!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Dale &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">No bad ideas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Who’s gonna start us off?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kurt &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">I got it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Let’s kill this </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Motherfucker</span><span class="font0">!</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The situation of the conversation is that Bert Hanson cheated them and canceled the order on the assumption they won’t be able to pay back the loan and that after going bankrupt, he will not only be able to buy their completed order for pennies on the dollar. Having learned nothing, Nick, Kurt, and Dale decided to kill Bert</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hanson, some ideas must be written down at white board, but Nick did not agree about Kurt’s idea because he did not want to be called as a murderer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In Kurt’s utterance, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“I got it. Let’s kill this </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Motherfucker</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">!”</span><span class="font3"> contains the slang word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Motherfucker. </span><span class="font3">According to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Wikipedia</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Motherfucker </span><span class="font3">(sometimes abbreviated as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">mofo</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">mf</span><span class="font3">, or </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">mf'er</span><span class="font3">) is an American-language</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulgarism"><span class="font3"> vulgarism.</span></a><span class="font3"> While it is usually considered highly offensive, it is rarely used in the literal sense of one who engages in</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_sexual_activity"><span class="font3"> sexual activity </span></a><span class="font3">with another person's mother, or his or her</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incest"><span class="font3"> own mother.</span></a><span class="font3"> Rather, it refers to a mean, despicable, or vicious person, or any particularly difficult or frustrating situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The slang </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">belongs to the Expressive function. Expressive function is used as expressions of the speaker’s feelings which are expressed by this function; they are anger, disappointed, and so forth (Holmes, 2010). It is categorized into Expressive function because it conveys the feeling and attitudes to the listener. In the dialogue above especially in Kurt’s utterance, the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">is a kind of exclamation so Kurt used those words to express his anger to Bert Hanson and his son. That is the way the slang phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">is categorized into expressive function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Literally, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">mother </span><span class="font3">(Oxford, 2010: 962) means female parent and the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker (</span><span class="font3">Oxford, 2010: 606) means a very offensive word used to insult somebody. The slang phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">belongs to Affective meaning because it has directly a reflection of the speaker’s personal attitude or feelings toward the listener or the target of the utterance. The slang word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">is a common insult and profanity in the English language and widely considered obscene and inappropriate. It is generally regarded as African-American in origin. Literally, it accuses one of violating, perhaps the oldest taboo known to humankind. This expression is used to express anger or aggression. According to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Urban Dictionary Online</span><span class="font3">, the slang phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">is the characteristic of someone who is wickedness, traitorous, and useless. It shows in the dialogue above that Kurt showed his feeling by using the slang phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font3">to Bert Hanson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Those slang words reflect the conceptual meaning in which the meaning depends on the dictionary meaning. Basically, any definition as it appears in its most basic form, without adhering or molding it to fit any particular format of context, is conceptual (theoretical) meaning (Leech, 1974: 15). Moreover, the slang phrase motherfucker also belongs to the Affective meaning. The affective meaning has more directl reflection of the speaker’s personal attitude or feelings toward the listener or the target of the utterance. Basically, they are normally expressed through such forms of language use as insult, flattery, hyperbole or sarcasm (Leech, 1974: 19). It is shown in Kurt’s utterance that he got angry with the rival.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">It can be concluded that there are six function of slangs found in this study, namely: expressive function, directive function, referential function, metalinguistic function, poetic function and phatic function. The expressive function is dominantly found in the utterances. Meanwhile, there are only six types of meaning of slangs found in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Horrible Bosses 2</span><span class="font3"> they are; conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, reflected meaning, stylistic meaning, affective meaning, and collocative meaning. Unfortunately, thematic meaning was not found in the movie since there are no slangs occur in the dialogue.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Alwasilah, A.C. (1985). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Culture and Sociology</span><span class="font3">. Utledge vineart press. Great Britain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bauer, L. (1983). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">English Words Formation</span><span class="font3">. Cambridge University Press, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chapman, RL. (1998). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A New Dictionary of American Slang</span><span class="font3">. Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher Inc, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hartman &amp;&nbsp;Stork. (ed.) (1989). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of Language and Linguistics</span><span class="font3">. Applied Science, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes, J. (2010). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. Longman book, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes, J. (2010)</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics: Theory of 6 speech Function in Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. Longman Book, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keraf. S. (ed.) (2005). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Smarapradipha</span><span class="font3">. Balai pustaka, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G. (1974). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font3">. Hazell Watson &amp;&nbsp;Vine, Ltd. Great Britain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G. (1981). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font3">. 2<sup>nd</sup>Edition. The Chaucer Press Ltd: Great Britain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lestari, D.S. (2006). The Analysis of English Slang in dictionary, internet, and magazine. Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Litton, P. (2009). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Litton’s Universe of English Teaching: Seven Types of Meaning in Semantics A.M.A Project.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford University Press. Great Britain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lyons, J. (1984). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics Semantics: An introduction</span><span class="font3">. Cambridge University Press, England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miles, M.B. &amp;&nbsp;Huberman, A.M. (1992). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Qualitative Data</span><span class="font3">. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, California.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Palmer, F.R. (ed.) (1976). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics (2nd ed).</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge University Press, England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pey, M.A &amp;&nbsp;Gaynor, F. (1954). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Dictionary of Linguistics</span><span class="font3">. Philosophical Library, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Reyes, A. (2005) Appropriation of African American Slang by Asian American Youth. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. 9(4): 509-532.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Spolsky, B. (1998). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. Oxford University Press, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sridana, KP. (2009). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of American Slang Used in 21 Jump Street Movie written by Jonnah Hill and Michael Bacall</span><span class="font3">. Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suastika, S. (2008), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Slang Used Among The American Undergraduate Students at Oregon State University</span><span class="font3">. Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stevenson, A. (ed.) (2010). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Dictionary of English (3 ed).</span><span class="font3"> Oxford University Press, UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">William,A.H. (1993). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Culture</span><span class="font3">. Cengage Learning Publisher. London.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Internet references:</span></h2>
<p><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.urbandictionary.com</span><span class="font3">[</span></a><span class="font3">Accessed on Sunday November 8, 2015]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.horriblebosses2(2014).com</span><span class="font3">[Accessed on Tuesday October 2015]</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.wikipedia.org/"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.wikipedia.org/</span><span class="font3">[</span></a><span class="font3">Accessed on Wednesday January 20, 2016]</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.onlineslangdictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.onlineslangdictionary.com</span><span class="font3">[</span></a><span class="font3">Accessed on Wednesday January 20, 2016]</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.themoviespoiler.com/2014Spoilers/HorribleBosses2.html%5bAcessed"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.themoviespoiler.com/2014Spoilers/HorribleBosses2.html[Acessed</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3">on</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tuesday April 10, 2016]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">119</span></p>