---
layout: full_article
title: "Action Verba of 'Memeleng' in Sasaknese: A Metalanguage Approach"
author: "Bohri Rahman"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25507 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-25507"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-25507"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Action Verba of</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"> “M</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">EMELENG</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">” </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">in Sasaknese a Metalanguage Approach</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Bohri Rahman</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sekolah Tinggi Keguruan dan Ilmu Pendidikan Qamarul Huda Bagu-Lombok Tengah</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:bohri.rahman@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">bohri.rahman@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">In Sasak language , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font3"> 'cut' has several forms such as the following variations: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gecok</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">melekés</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mépés</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ngawas</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beréngge</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">munggel</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nyacak</span><span class="font3"> , </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ngawis</span><span class="font3"> : the meaning of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font3"> in the corpus represents a transitive verb of prototype. This selection is intended to provide a brief overview of the semantic structure. Lexicon </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font3"> ‘cutting' describes the semantic structure of the sub - component&quot; X doing something&quot;, &quot;something bad happened&quot; and &quot;X do something&quot;, &quot;something good happens.&quot; Lexicon with each variation do the concepts of representations. The verb of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font3"> ‘cut ' the mapping component &quot;X did something to Y&quot; because&quot; something happened to Y&quot;. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Memeleng</span><span class="font3"> lexicon based on the tools, motion model, an entity that is subject to section treatment and final results are expected to be achieved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Action Of Verb, Sasaknese, Natural Semantic Metalanguage.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Sasak language is one of the local languages in the archipelago that has similarities with other languages around him, such as Balinese, Javanese and Samawanese in Sumbawa. This similarity can be seen from the pattern of sentence structure and word classes that are central and complex. It is also seen that the central nature of semantic verb always appears in the narrative, as a determinant of argument verbs, and verbs have a semantic role in determining the ability of each arguments that accompany the verb. Although there are similarities with other languages that are in the Sasak language environment, there are many striking differences, namely in terms of the wealth of SV variants. This is caused by Sasak language, sasak language is the language that have been influenced from Balinese and Javanese language and Milky Samawa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Semantically SV can be grouped based on the time stability (Givon 1984: 52), based on the time -scale stability VBS can be divided into; (a) verb statement; (b) verb and (c) action verbs. Verbs are considered the most stable state in the sense of time does not change. Verbs are less stable over time because the process moves from one state to the other state. Action verbs are not stable over time.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The data was taken from the daily conversation with friends in informal situation. The data was collected by note-taking and observation during the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">conversation. There are a number of data-corpus to be selected randomly and furthermore analyzed through the matalanguage (Allan, 2001:3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is the study of the semantic approach that considered gives an adequate analysis meaning. The notion of technique can produce analytical explication of the meaning of language semantics approach postulates. This theory believes that one form has one meaning and one meaning for one form. This comprehension explain the lexicon can hold one meaning or the meaning of expressed in the lexicon, so unimpressed that the granting of the meaning is a rotating against a lexicon (Sudipa , 2012: 1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) is designed to explicate all meaning, either lexical meaning, illocutionary meaning and grammatical meaning. In this theory, the explication of meaning framed in a metalanguage that is sourced from a natural language that is generally understood by all native speakers (Wierzbicka , 1996: 10 and the band. Mulyadi, 1998: 34). The basic assumption of this theory is related to the principle which states that the semiotic analysis of meaning will be discrete and complete, in the sense that any compound can be explained without spin and without residue in combination other discrete meanings (Goddard, 1996: 24; Wierzbicka, 1996 : 10; Sutjiati Beratha, 1997: 10, Mulyadi, 1998: 35).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are a number of important theoretical concepts in the NSM theory, namely: the semantic prime, polysemy, Alolexi, alence choice v, and syntax NSM. The relevant concepts to support the analysis of data was taken from the Sasak language of verbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Semantic prime can not be changed due to human inherited from birth (Goddard, 1996: 2; Mulyadi, 1998: 35). The meaning of this is a reflection of a fundamental human mind. Semantic prime includes a broad realm of language typologically and genetically. Primetive meaning to the earliest meaning is understood by speakers. Semantic prime became the starting point or base to understand the changes of meaning that emerge later. Polysemy is a form of single lexicon that expresses two different original meanings. In this case, there is no relationship between the composition of the exponents and other exponents of exponents because it has a different grammatical structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wierzbicka introduce Syntax NSM which is an extension of the original meaning of the system. Wierzbicka states that the meaning has a very complex structure, meaning not only made up of simple elements, such as: someone, wants, and know, but the complex structure of the components. Syntax NSM consists of a combination of original meaning universal lexicon that form a simple proposition in accordance with the morph syntax. For example: will want to have certain universal rules in context: I want to do this (Wierzbicka, 1996: 19).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">NSM theory regard as the three forms of the verb categories: (a) The state verbs; (b) The process verbs and (c) action verbs. This study will specifically on action verbs Sasak language. Action verbs (actions) can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">identified by two characteristics: (a) may be the answer to the question: What is done by the subject, (b) can be used as a command -forming sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">( 1 ) Andi swim earlier.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">( 2 ) We have not slept since yesterday.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Words in italics in the above sentence is the action verb. Said swimming can be used to answer the question: What does Andi? The word sleep is the answer of the question: What we have not done since yesterday? In addition, the word can be used in a sentence as a command in the following sentence:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sleep!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Swim (was) at will you!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">In every language, including Sasak language, verbs are divided into three types, namely (a) verb of statement; (b) The process verbs and (c) action verbs. The focus of the following study is action verbs, the verb is a verb which is used to perform, with polysemy: doing and happening. The combination of doing and happening influence by undergone to revealed a relatively high because the class includes verbs transitive verb prototype. Transitive verbs have the subject as an agent prototype and direct object as a patient (Wierzbicka, 1996: 421).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In Sasak language, verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font4"> ' cut ' prototype represents a transitive verb in the corpus of this study. This selection is intended to provide a brief overview of the semantic structure and not spinning. Lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng </span><span class="font4">'cutting' describes the semantic structure of the sub - component &quot;X doing something&quot;, &quot;something bad happened to Y&quot; and &quot;X do something&quot;. &quot;something good happened&quot; . Lexicon with each variation as do the concepts of representation and the case. If the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font4"> ' cut ' the mapping component &quot;X did something to Y&quot; and because &quot;something happened to Y&quot;. lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Memeleng</span><span class="font4"> based on the tools, motion model, an entity that is subject to section treatment and final results are expected to be achieved or agent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font4"> shape variations as follows: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gecok</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">melekés</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mépés</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawas</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">beréngge</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">munggel</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nyacak</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawis</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">begunting</span><span class="font4">: cutting</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">gecok : cut thinly</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">melekés : cut with two hands</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mépés : cutting branches of trees that have fallen or dry</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ngawas : cut shrubs</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">gillnets : cutting branches or sticks that are still standing munggel : cut shoot of beans example bean plants nyacak : cut something into small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ngawis : cut grass for fodder</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">begunting : a haircut or a shave</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">begorok : slaughtering or butchering animals</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">dampol : cutting trees that are still alive</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mépés, ngawas, gillnets, dampol, munggel</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawis</span><span class="font4">: This lexicons have reference to an entity form part of the plant. the difference of Meaning caused by the lexicons are distinguished by the state or what happened to Y. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mépés</span><span class="font4"> used to describe the act of X to Y, the state Y is not alive anymore. For example, the following sentence:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Andi mépés kayuk lek kebon (Andi cut wood in the garden)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">When a person hears the speech the audience will immediately understand that the subject (X) cut wood that has fallen branches or twigs of wood that has been dried with using machetes. It is certain that X uses a machete and do not use saws, sickles, axes or knives to perform actions against Y. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ngawas</span><span class="font4"> used to declare cut shrubs that grow in the fields. When Inspectors can be ascertained that the X cut the bushes with machetes. X action aimed at cleaning up the farm of the sagebrush. X is not going to cut down trees or cut branches when X do </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawas</span><span class="font4">. Likewise X is not going to cut a small plant shoots with his hand. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ngawas</span><span class="font4"> used in the following sentence</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Amaq Andi ngawas lek kebon (of Andi’s father cutting bushes in the garden) Aku jak lalo nagawas lemak aru (I'll go cutting bushes tomorrow morning)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The second sentence describes the use of a lexicon ngawas. In the lexicon of usage, although equally meaningful cut however ngawas can not be replaced with another lexicon. As </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berengge</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bedampol</span><span class="font4">, or others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gillnet</span><span class="font4"> and second </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4"> lexicon has the same reference is cutting the tree that is still alive and standing. The difference is if </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gillnet</span><span class="font4"> then X will cut wood branches that grow laterally left or right of the main tree, while </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4">, X will cut the main tree that grows upward. If gillnet intended to make the tree grow up to the top of the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4"> intended that the trees do not grow up, but be shady as it grows laterally. Both the lexicon is demanding X to use the same tools to perform actions, although Y will get perbeda treatment of X.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Almost the same as the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4"> meaningful </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">munggel</span><span class="font4"> cutings plant shoots as a meaning verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4">. The difference is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampol</span><span class="font4"> used for large trees then </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">munggel</span><span class="font4"> used for small plants like beans and the like. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Munggel</span><span class="font4"> also do not want X to use tools to cut, because cutting </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">munggel</span><span class="font4"> using fingers (thumb and index finger). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Munggel</span><span class="font4"> also do not want X to climb to do so. In meaning, though dampol and munggel had the same original meaning cut, but both are very different from the reference and the way to do it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawis</span><span class="font4"> still has a plant cutting entities. Lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngawis</span><span class="font4"> formed from the noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Awis</span><span class="font4"> (sickle), the addition of the prefix &quot;ng&quot; the noun &quot;Awis&quot; change the class that word into a verb. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ngawis</span><span class="font4"> be semantically meaningful cut. This variation is typically used with less meaning cutting grass for cattle, buffalo, horses, or other grazing livestock. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ngawis</span><span class="font4"> use tool Awis (sickle) to cut. The Ways in which X is also different from other lexicons default meaningful cut, like </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dampo</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pepes</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gillnets</span><span class="font4"> and others in this discussion. Examples of its use in a sentence like the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Andi lalo awisan sampi (Andi went mowing grass for cows).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gecok</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cacak</span><span class="font4">, the lexicon is meaningful default cut. Examples of the use of this lexicon as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cacak kedebong tie Andi (Andi cut the banana tree)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gecok bawang tie sari (sari cut the onion)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From these examples it looks lexicon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gecok</span><span class="font4"> use of vertical and different. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cacak</span><span class="font4"> used to Y is greater. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cacak</span><span class="font4"> will not be used for small Y as onions, vegetables, and fruits. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cacak</span><span class="font4"> requires X do tools such as machetes to perform different actions on the vertical Y. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gecok</span><span class="font4"> used for Y are small, gecok also do not want X to use energy and machetes to perform actions. Gecok desired tool is a knife or a tool like that do not use much power to do so.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Melekés</span><span class="font4"> has cut the original meaning. But in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">melekés</span><span class="font4"> X does not use a tool to take action to Y. Tools needed only two hands. Melekés a Y cut in the form of bars for example pens, sticks, pencils, plastic ruler and anything that can be held, lightweight, and easily broken. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Melekés</span><span class="font4"> not require a lot of energy to do it, X will easily do it to Y, since Y is an object that is easily broken. Example for speech that uses the lexicon melekés:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Girangn melekés dengan tie (the men cut)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>IV CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the results of the analysis using analytical techniques paraphrase/explication, mapping with natural language sentences in a canonical form, with supporting data on Sasak language, verbs </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memeleng</span><span class="font4"> 'cut' can be analyzed thorough the theory of metalanguage. This study has given a clear enough picture of the technical explication stating one form or lexicon to one meaning and one meaning for one form or lexicon.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Allan, Keith. 2001. Natural Linguistic Semantics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Goddard, Cliff. 1996. Semantic Theory and Semantic Universal (Cliff Goddard Convensor) Cross Linguistic Syntax from Semantic Point of View (NSM Approach) 1-5 Australia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudipa, I Nengah. 2004. “Verba Bahasa Bali, sebuah Kajian Metabahasa Semantik Alami” Disertasi Doktor Linguistik-Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. Semantics: Prime and Universal. Oxford: Oxford University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mulyadi, 1998. “Struktur Semantis Verba Bahasa Indonesia” Tesis S2, Linguistik Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sutjiati, Beratha, NI, 1997. “Basic Concepts of a Universal Semantic Metalanguage” Linguistika 110-115. Denpasar: Program Magister Linguistik UNUD.</span></p>