---
layout: full_article
title: "POLITENESS STRATEGIES USED BY THE MAIN CHARACTERS IN THE MOVIE “THE GREAT GATSBY”"
author: "Nyoman Agus Trimandala, I Nyoman Udayana, Yana Qomariana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 16.2 Agustus 2016: 216-222</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">POLITENESS STRATEGIES USED BY THE MAIN CHARACTERS IN THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MOVIE “THE GREAT GATSBY”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Nyoman Agus Trimandala<sup>1*</sup>, I Nyoman Udayana<sup>2</sup>, Yana Qomariana<sup>3 [123]</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:trimandalaagus@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[trimandalaagus@yahoo.co.id]</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:nyomanudayana@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">nyomanudayana@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:yqomariana@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">yqomariana@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Politeness Strategies Used by The Main Characters in The Movie The Great Gatsby” yang difokuskan pada analisis stereotip gender dan kesopanan dalam bahasa , terutama pada jenis-jenis nya dan faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi hal-hal tersebut. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui berbagai macam jenis kesopanan dalam berbahasa dan stereotip gender yang menjelaskan sifat karakter utama dalam film ini kemudian yang dilanjutkan dengan mengetahui faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi karakter tersebut dalam film berjudul &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis jenis kesopanan berbahasa dalam penelitian ini didasarkan pada teori Brown dan Levinson (1978) dalam bukunya yang berjudul kesopanan dalam penggunaan bahasa dan teori Rosenkrantz di Brannon (1996, 1974 ) yang terkait dengan stereotip gender (Brannon, Linda 1996. Jenis Kelamin: Perspektif Psikologis Boston: Allyn dan Bacon.).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis dalam penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa terdapat tiga jenis strategi kesopanan dalam bahasa yang ditemukan dalam data yaitu kesopanan dalam positif, kesopanan dalam negatif, dan catatan strategi waktu. Dan antara tokoh satu dengan yang lainnya memiliki watak yang berbeda-beda. Kemudian beberapa faktor pun berpengaruh terhadap hal tersebut yaitu hasil yang dalam, keadaan, integrasi penilaian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hasil dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bobot risiko &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dalam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pilihan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;strategi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword: Kesopanan dalam berbahasa, Ekspresi wajah yang menggambarkan tindak ancaman , Stereotip Gender,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language is something that is important in society, because it is a tool that serves to convey the things that we want to say. Language can be used to get someone to do what the speaker wants in various ways, either politely or impolitely, depending on the context. Besides, politeness is one of the most important aspects in communication, that is, to decide whether or not the communication keep going.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Politeness can be determined by various factors and one of which is gender. This stereotyped connection between gender and politeness leads to certain expectations by members of communities of practice about what linguistic behavior they expect of women and men to perform.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The film entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2"> is a good example in which the politeness strategy based on the concept of gender stereotypes are applied within the conversations among the main characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2">. There are four main characters in film </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2">; they are Nick Carraway, Jay Gatsby, Daisy Buchanan, Tom Buchanan. Since a film also reflects a reality, the conversations between characters also represent the phenomena in a real society of the time when the film was released.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is very important because by analyzing the politeness that is closely related to gender stereotypes, how polite language behaviour should be performed is clearly described. By being able to produce a polite language, the speaker will also get the respect from the hearer so both sides will as much as possible avoid any action of face threatening act.(FTA)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of politeness strategies are employed by the characters in the film entitled “The Great Gatsby”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors cause the characters to employ such strategies?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the kinds of politeness strategies and gender stereotypes employed by the characters in the film entitled “The Great Gatsby”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the factors that cause the characters to employ such strategies</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study are mainly spoken data. In writing this study the writer collected the data from the conversations the movie The Great Gatsby movie. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">movie was chosen because it contains many conversations between females and males either in formal and informal situations, applying politeness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in collecting data was documentation method through which the data taken from the film were documented. First, the characters in the movie were watched and listened to; second, the relevant parts of the movie which contain the conversations showing politeness strategies were noted down.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were qualitatively and descriptively analyzed based on the theory of politeness strategy proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978) and gender stereotypes proposed by Rosenkrantz in Brannon (1996, 1974). The analysis started with the first problem, that is, the types of politeness strategies, then the gender stereotypes and finally the factors contributing to such politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Descision</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are four politeness strategies, namely bald on record, positive politeness, negative politeness, and off record. In this film, such three strategies are applied by portrayed characters although not all the strategies were covered. In this analysis the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978) combined with the theory proposed by Rosenkrantz in Brannon (1996: 1974) about Gender stereotypes were used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DATA 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TOM: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shakespeare! How’s the great American novel</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">coming?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh, I’m selling bonds now Tom... with Walter Chase’s outfit-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TOM: Never heard of em.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(05 :16)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Relevance to Context of Situation</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation took place at Sanitarium- Doctor’s office. The participants in this conversation were Nick and Doctor, and then the conversation between Nick and Tom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data Interpretation and Evidence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, the utterance “Shakespeare! How’s the great American novel coming...?” was a kind of bald of record strategy. It is a metaphor.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Factors Causing the Characters to Employ Those Strategies</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In data 3, the first factors which contribute to the strategy used are intrinsic pay off by applying off record and social distance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DATA 10</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TOM: You’ve got no right to speak her name!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MYRTLE: &nbsp;&nbsp;Daisy! Daisy! Daisy! I'll speak it whenever I want! Daisy! Dai—</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(22:37)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Relevance to context of situation</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above took place in Myrtle’s Apartment at night. The participants in this conversation are Tom and Myrtle</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Data Interpretation and Evidence</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">This context “You’ve got no right to speak her name!” is a kind of negative politeness strategy used to indicate reluctance.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Factors Causing the Characters to Employ Those Strategies</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Tom employs this strategy because he is influenced by some factors. The intrinsic pay off as the first factor is applied by performing negative politeness and the second factor is social distance</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Gender Stereotypes</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">According to data, the character Tom was firm in masculinity positive and rude in masculinity negative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DATA 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Daisy Buchanan, we can’t live without you!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DAISY: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I'm p-paralyzed with happiness...!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(07:15)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Relevance to context of situation</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above took place in Buchanan Mansion, late afternoon. The participants in this conversation are Nick, Daisy, and Jordan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data Interpretation and Evidence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is a kind of positive politeness strategy, that is, strategy 2 which is exaggerating</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Factors Causing the Characters to Employ Those Strategies</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Intrinsic pay off which is followed by positive politeness is one factor that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">causes Nick to apply such a strategy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Gender Stereotypes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on data, the character Daisy is sensitive to femininity positive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DATA 13</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GATSBY : &nbsp;&nbsp;Oh but it is though...! You see, I thought you ought to know</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">something about my life. I... I don’t want you to think I’m just some... some nobody. You see, old sport, I’m going to make a very big request of you today.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A big request?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(38:26)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Relevance to context of situation</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The conversations above took place in Gatsby’s car. The participants in this conversation are Nick and Gatsby.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data interpretation and Evidence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This utterance “A big request?” is a kind of positive politeness strategy used to intensify interest to hearer,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Factors Causing the Characters to Employ Those Strategies</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gatsby employs this strategy because he is influenced by intrinsic pay off, followed by performing positive politeness.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Gender Stereotypes</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In accordance with data, Gatsby’s characters are confident in masculinity positive and aggressive in masculinity negative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DATA 18</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Happy to do it. Jay-- I'm going to call Daisy and invite her to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">tea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GATSBY: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh, that’s alright. I don’t want to put you to any trouble...</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(49:28)</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Relevance to context of situation</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above took place in Nick’s bungalow .The participants in this conversation are Nick and Gatsby.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data interpretation and Evidence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This utterance “: Happy to do it. Jay-- I'm going to call Daisy and invite her to tea.” Is a kind of positive politeness strategy used to offer and promise.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Factors Causing the Characters to Employ Those Strategies</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nick used the intrinsic pay off factor, followed by performing positive politeness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Gender Stereotypes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data, the character Nick is Carefree in masculinity positive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Positive politeness strategies are used in a condition in which S tries to minimize the distance between expressing friendliness and solid interest in the hearer’s need to be respected, that is, getting closer to H. Negative politeness is used in the situation in which S has the main focus on the assumption that he may impose and intrude on H’s space. Bald off record is used to take some pressure off of the hearer. In this case, S performs an act in a vague manner that could be interpreted by the hearer as some other acts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The character Nick is Carefree in masculinity positive, Jay Gayby is confident in masculinity positive and aggressive in masculinity negative, Daisy Buchanan is Sensitive in femininity positive, and Tom is Firm in masculinity positive and rude in masculinity negative. There are also several factors which contribute to those strategies: 1. The Intrinsic Payoffs : By performing on record, off record, positive politeness, and negative politeness</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The circumstances : The “social distance” and The “absolute ranking”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The integration of assessment of payoffs and weighting of risk in choice of strategies.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Brannon, Linda. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gender: Psychological Perspectives</span><span class="font2">. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown and Levinson, Goody. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness:</span><span class="font2"> . Boston: Allyn and Bacon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, P and S.C. Levinson. 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Universal in Language Phenomena.</span><span class="font2"> In Esther</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">N. goody (ed), Question and Politeness: Strategies in Social </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interaction,</span><span class="font2"> pp.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">56-289</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rosenkrantz et al. (1968) as provided in Brannon (1996, 1974). a list of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stereotypical traits of men and women</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">222</span></p>