---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Figurative Language in Linkin Park’s Song Lyrics"
author: "Nyoman Triguna Aditya, Ida Ayu Made Puspani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 21.1 Nopember 2017: 19-23</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Figurative Language in Linkin Park’s Song Lyrics</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Nyoman Triguna Aditya<sup>1*</sup>, Ida Ayu Made Puspani<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:triguna.aditya@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">triguna.aditya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">], <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:dayupuspani@gmail.com"><span class="font1">dayupuspani@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul Analisis Bahasa Figuratif Dalam Lirik Lagu Linkin Park. Penelitian ini di lakukan untuk mengetahui jenis-jenis bahasa figurative dan juga untuk mengetahui jenis-jenis makna yang terdapat di dalam lirik lagu Linkin Park. Ada lima lagu Linkin Park yang dipilih sebagai sumber data, yaitu; Crawling, From The Inside, Burning In The Skies, Waiting For The End, and Burn It Down. Data-data tersebut dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif dan kuantitatif. Setelah data dianalisis dan didiskusikan, ditemukan ada lima jenis bahasa figuratif yang terdapat di kelima lagu Linkin Park, yaitu; Paradok, Personifikasi, Metafora, Hiperbola, dan Simile. Dari kelima bahasa figuratif yang ditemukan, Metafora adalah yang paling sering digunakan. Dalam penelitian ini juga ditemukan empat jenis makna, yaitu; Makna Konseptual, Makna Konotatif, Makna Affektif, dan Makna Kolokatif. Dari semua jenis makna yang ditemukan, Makna Konseptual adalah yang paling sering digunakan. Kelima lagu yang dianalisis memiliki makna yang sama yaitu tentang kesedihan yang disebabkan karena konflik emosional yang terjadi di dalam diri seseorang maupun dengan hubungannya dengan orang lain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Figuratif, Lirik, Makna</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature is the art of language; it means that a literary work is created to entertain people. Literature is personal expression based on the experience, thought, feeling, faith, and imagination of a person. Literary work can be in the form of prose, drama, and poetry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poetry is a kind of literature which is a piece of writing that expresses emotions, experiences, and ideas, especially in short lines using figurative language and sometimes with rhyme. It triggers the imaginative sense that gives a deeper understanding to make the reader feel the same emotion as the writer. Poetry can also be turned into a song</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">which is called a Music Poetry that is usually performed in theaters. It can be said that song is a poetry that is sung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Most people nowadays are likely to define song as the part of music art, but in fact song is also the part of literary work and closely related to poetry. In music industry many songwriters use figurative languages in making their song lyrics just the same way like making poetry. By using figurative language, the songwriter conveys the meaning with feeling that makes it sound special and beautiful, so the people who listen to the song and read the lyric will have a deeper understanding of the song because not only do they understand the song but also feel what the song is about.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two problems formulated in this study based on the background:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of figurative language are employed in Linkin Park’s song lyrics?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What &nbsp;kinds of meaning are</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">expressed in Linkin Park’s song lyrics?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After formulating the problems of the study, the aims of the research are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what kinds of figurative language are employed in Linkin Park’s song lyrics.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what kinds of meaning are expressed in Linkin Park’s song lyrics.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method is very important in doing research because it will help the readers understand the aim of the research. The research method itself is the way of explaining how the work was conducted. The data were collected by using Documentation Method. After the data were collected they were analyzed using the qualitative and quantitative method. This study uses the theory of figurative language proposed by Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963:367) and the theory of meaning proposed by Leech (1974:10).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Figurative Language in Linkin Park’s Song Lyrics</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This analysis presents the types of figurative language found in Linkin Park’s song lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 1</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lyric below was taken from the song entitled “Waiting for the End”:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>(Fifth Stanza)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">What was left when that fire was gone</span><span class="font1">(1) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I thought it felt right but that right was wrong</span><span class="font1">(2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">All caught up in the eye of the storm</span><span class="font1">(3) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">And trying to figure out what it’s like moving on</span><span class="font1">(4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">And I don’t even know what kind of things I said</span><span class="font1">(5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My mouth kept moving and my mind went dead</span><span class="font1"> (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Picking up the pieces now where to begin</span><span class="font1">(7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The hardest part of ending is starting again</span><span class="font1">(8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The fifth stanza is the summary of the entire song. The first sentence is a metaphorical expression, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“what was left when that fire was gone”</span><span class="font1"> means that he realizes that only the regret that he got after the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“fire was gone”</span><span class="font1"> which means after the problems or the conflict was ended. The words </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“that right was wrong” </span><span class="font1">is a paradox expression which means that he never expects that what he had done in the past that he thought that was right, in fact, it brought his life to a sorrowful situation. Now he lives his life hopeless just like everything that has gone in a blast of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“the eye of the storm”</span><span class="font1">. His mind is so confused that it feels like his </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“mind went dead”</span><span class="font1"> that even he does not know what he was talking about. But even though he stuck in the bad feelings in his current life, he is still looking for hope whether he can change his life to be better. He really wants to start a new life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">even though it means that he needs a great effort to make it happened. This stanza consists of eight sentences. The first sentence expresses the use of metaphor because this sentence replaces the real situation with another similar situation. The third and the sixth sentences express the use of hyperbole because they exaggerated the real situation. The second and the eighth sentence express the use of paradox because they create a contrary expectation between the real situation and what is stated. All of these sentences are considered having connotative meaning because they are showing figures of speech. The rest of the sentences are considered conceptual meaning because it is a primary meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 2</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lyric below was taken from the song entitled “Crawling”:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>(Fourth Stanza)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discomfort, endlessly has pulled Itself upon me distracting, reacting</span><span class="font1"> (1) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Against my will I stand beside my own reflection</span><span class="font1"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">It’s haunting how I can’t seem</span><span class="font1"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">All the bad feelings have become the discomfort inside him. In the first sentence it is shown through the personification expression how the discomfort has “distract” him from the inside and how it becomes a thing that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“haunting”</span><span class="font1"> his life. This stanza consists of three sentences in which the first sentence is a connotative meaning because it shows the use of personification in which it applies human attribute to a thing. The second and third</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">sentences contain conceptual meaning because it is a primary meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 3</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lyric below was taken from the song entitled “Burn it Down”:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>(First Stanza)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The cycle repeated as explosions broke in the sky</span><span class="font1">(1) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">All that I needed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">was the one thing I couldn’t find</span><span class="font1">(2) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">And you were there at the turn waiting to let me know</span><span class="font1">(3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The song tells about a broken relationship between people. This stanza tells that in a relationship sometimes the conflict can happen repeatedly like a </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“cycle”,</span><span class="font1"> and when it happens it is just like an </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“explosion broke in the sky”</span><span class="font1">. But in reality the person in the song does not want the conflict to happen again and again</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> He needs a good relationship, but in contrary, their relationship always finds many problems. This stanza consists of three sentences. The first sentence is considered having connotative meaning because it is showing the use of simile that compares things with the help of the word “as”. The second and the third sentences are considered having conceptual meaning because it is a primary meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 4</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lyric below was taken from the song entitled “From the Inside”:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>(First Stanza)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I Don’t know who to trust No surprise</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Everyone feels so far away from me</span><span class="font1"> (2) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Heavy thoughts sift through dust</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">And the lies</span><span class="font1"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This stanza tells about a person who feels so lonely because of the loss of trust to everyone around him. In the second sentence it is shown through a hyperbole expression that even though many people stay close around him, but none of them that he feels appears close by heart that makes he thinks that everyone stay so far away from him. In the third sentence, the words </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“heavy thoughts”</span><span class="font1"> is a personification expression that expresses how the lonely feeling has become something that makes him suffer. This stanza consists of three sentences, the first sentence is considered having conceptual meaning, the second sentence has connotative meaning, and the third sentence is considered containing connotative meaning and collocative meaning because “heavy thought” is a collocation of words that creates a new meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 5</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lyric below was taken from the song entitled “From the Inside”:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>(Fifth Stanza)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I won’t trust myself with you</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I won’t waste myself on you</span><span class="font1"> (2) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Waste myself on you</span><span class="font1"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last stanza expresses the anger of the person in the song of being betrayed. He realizes that all the time that he uses to trust them is such a waste of time. This stanza consists of three sentences in which all of them are considered having affective meaning because all of these sentences are conveying personal emotion toward another person.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are five kinds of figures of speech found in all the five songs of Linkin Park that were analyzed; they were &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paradox, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor, Hyperbole, and Simile</span><span class="font1">. All the five songs which are analyzed here have the same main theme in which they are about sadness caused by emotional conflicts whether within the person itself or within the relation to other people. From all figures of speech found here, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor</span><span class="font1"> is the figure of speech that is commonly used to express the theme of the songs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There were four types of Meaning found in this study; they are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Conceptual Meaning, Connotative Meaning, Affective Meaning, and Collocative Meaning.</span><span class="font1"> From all the types of meaning found, conceptual meaning is the type of meaning that is commonly used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L &amp;Reninger H.W. 1963.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literature</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">New York. Chicago. San Francisco. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Toronto: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Holt</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rinehart and Winston</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, G.N.1947. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font1">.Auxland: Penguin Book</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Arikunto, S. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodelogipenelitian</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: BinaAksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Novianti, Ni GustiAyu. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Figurative Language Used In The Song’s “Just The Way You Are” and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Remember When”.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kusuma, R.P. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Feature Of Figurative Language In The Song Lyrics Of Blink 182 Band Album.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">23</span></p>