---
layout: full_article
title: "Ecopreneurship Business Model of Nusa Dua Hotels Resort Area"
author: "Putu Ratih Pertiwi, Irma Rahyuda"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33375 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33375"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33375"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">97</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ECOPRENEURSHIP BUSINESS MODEL OF NUSA DUA HOTELS RESORT AREA</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Putu Ratih Pertiwi <sup>1)</sup>, Irma Rahyuda <sup>2)</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Diploma IV Tourism Studies, Faculty of Tourism, Udayana University<sup>1 </sup>Jl. DR. R Goris No. 7, Denpasar, 80234</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Telp / Fa x (03 6 1) 2 2 3798, email: </span><a href="mailto:ratihpertiwi@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">ratihpertiwi@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2"> Diploma IV Tourism Studies, Faculty of Tourism, Udayana University<sup>2 </sup>Jl. DR. R Goris No. 7, Denpasar, 80234</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font2">The purpose of this research is to examine the ecopreneurship business model applied by star hotels in Nusa Dua Resort integrating environmental elements into tourism business. Related to the concept of sustainable tourism development that emphasizes the development of eco-tourism and efforts to achieve the prospective ideal conditions. To discover it, the necessary data from several five star hotels that linked to international chains in Nusa Dua Resort area used as samples. Analyzed using descriptive qualitative analysis technique where the elements of ISO 14001 are used as the indicators, and guidelines for the interview and questionnaires. The data that has been obtained, processed and extracted, into some graphs and tables, and described as a basis for conclusions of ecopreneurship business model applied by star hotels in Nusa Dua Resort. As the result, this research shows that the ecopreneurship business model applied by star hotels in Nusa Dua Resort in integrating the environmental elements into tourism business has 4 phases. Such as P-D-C-A where Plan adapted into environmental management system planning, Do adapted into implementation of environmental labeling and recycling, Check adapted into an environmental audit examination and evaluation of environmental performance, and Action adapted into action on regular management review.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key Words: Ecopreneurship, sustainable development, sustainable tourism development, ISO 14001, P-D-C-A</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>17</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The increasing of growth number of five-star accommodation services in Bali would have brought a positive benefit to the stakeholders of tourism including tourists, taxes paid to the government, formal and informal employment and other multiplier effects arising from such activities. On the other hand, the phenomenon accommodation facilities establishment in Bali has been under the spotlight regarding the exploitation of natural resources and management of material waste that pollute the environment surrounding the accommodation establishments are located.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the problems described earlier, this study intends to examine ecopreneurship or concept that integrates between the entrepreneur and the sustainable development that is implemented by the management of five-star hotel in the area of Nusa Dua Resort by integrated it into environmental elements of tourism business.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">II.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This research method is descriptive qualitative where the technique of collecting data is through the literature review by examining the theories that are related to entrepreneurship, sustainable development, as well as ecopreneurship. The indicators are used as a reference in the development of business models ecopreneurship is the International Organization for Standardization or ISO 14001. In addition, to obtain the information and data from the research sites, unstructure interview techniques are used also through the questionnaire. Presentation of the results of the data analysis is done formally (in the form of graphs and tables) and informally (in narrative form).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To get an information about the development of ecopreneurship business models conducted by the hotels in Nusa Dua Resort, the authors conducted a survey of three hotels (Grand Hyatt Bali by Hyatt, The Laguna by Starwood, and Club Med) of the entire hotel totaling 17 hotels located in Nusa Dua Resort. In determining the sample in this study, the authors adopted a purposive sampling approach, where the sampling is based on several criteria and aim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">III.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The ecopreneurship business model applied by the five-star hotel in Nusa Dua Resort integrating to the environmental elements of tourism business has four phases which is called P - D - C - A or Plan (Planning), Do (Implementation), Check ( audit and Evaluation), and Action (Periodic Management Review). Where the details of the four phases are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phase Plan (Planning Environmental Management System). The five-star hotel in Nusa Dua Resort has:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The commitment in the form of written policy about Environmental Management System, one example of the policy or the policy is Earth Check Policy.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appointing one department to handle environmental issues. Department appointed by the company include the Human Resource Department and Engineering Department.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Having short-term, medium and long-term programs to achieve the purpose of Environmental Management System, such as mangrove planting, earth hour, Tri Hita Karana, PROPER, Earth Check and Green Globe.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The companies have priority consideration in the purchase, sale, or promotion of products and services in terms of:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Assessing and testing the environmental performance of supplier companies.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Require suppliers to perform the environmental analysis.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Informing consumers about the steps to reduce its environmental impact.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have priority in applying environmental management, such as:</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The written environmental policy</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Training programs on the environment in the workplace for employees in the form of training to manage hazardous products, managing waste, responsible, and prevent occupational hazards and environment-friendly attitude</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public environmental report</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The activities related to sustainable tourism practices such as managing hazardous products and manage waste</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The five-star hotels in Nusa Dua Resort adopting some standard system of environmental management in their company. The standard system of environmental management were adopted, namely the Tri Hita Karana, PROPER, Earth Check, and Green Globe.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do (Implementation of Labelling Environmental and Recycling Products).</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adopting some of the environmental management system at the company's standards. The standard systems of environmental management were adopted, namely the Tri Hita Karana, PROPER, Earth Check, and Green Globe.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Providing information about the steps on environmentally friendly products and services. Such as the use of Eco-Label products and leave messages on each of its products to invite guests to participate and maintain environmental friendliness in every use of the products and services of the hotel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Involving in environmental activities on a regional scale, national, and international levels. As Mangrove Planting, Earth Hour, Tri Hita Karana, Proper, Earth Check, and Green Globe Certification.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Getting awards like PROPER environment, Blue Certificate for B3, and Green Globe certificate.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Joining an organization that has a focus on environmental issues, such as Tri Hita Karana, Earth Check and Green Globe.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Having a policy of keeping the goods period used in either company's good be used for operations or products selling to the hotel guests.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Doing Recycling Waste by separating garbage by each type</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Having a planned schedule in conducting environmental audits in each department. By applying an external audit, internal audit implementation, and development of indicators. The type of audit is an audit of clean water production and waste minimization, water conservation audit, energy conservation audit, audit the impurity/contamination location, and occupational health and safety audits.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perform socialization to all employees regarding the policy of environmental management system</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">j. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Disseminating the company's commitment to the environment to the community around the location of the company.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Check (Inspection Environmental Audit and Environmental Performance Evaluation).</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Having a planned schedule in conducting environmental audits in each department. By applying an external audit, internal audit implementation, and development of indicators. The type of audit is an audit of clean water production and waste minimization, water</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">conservation audit, energy conservation audit, audit the impurity/contamination location, and occupational health and safety audits.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Performing the socialization to all employees regarding the policy of &nbsp;&nbsp;environmental</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">management system</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Disseminating the company's commitment to the environment to the community around the location of the company.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Act (Actions Management Review Periodic).</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Periodically reviewing the overall environmental management system to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy, the effectiveness of environmental management systems toward the changes.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Following the workshop and seminar environments.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reporting the results of the audit and evaluation of the environmental management system to management.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3.2 Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data obtained, The five-star hotel in Nusa Dua Resort area has not been completely adopted the ecopreneurship business models in running the business. But the hotels already has an awareness of running the business is needed the ecopreneurship concept to solve the environmental problems. It has been known in general that the limited resources that are owned, for example, water supplies, mineral or gas, which once consumed, these resources can not be recreated and will decrease over time, until no remaining natural resources even slightly if there is no consciousness to maintain it. Also, due to the economic activity and high consumption, most of the resources that have been consumed will be a waste. The result was a serious pollution problem affecting human life and also the ecosystem, causing the accumulation of greenhouse gasses and climate change potential, Volery (2002: 542). That's the important role of the concept ecopreneurship in finding alternatives in running a business without neglecting the values of the environment, for example by recycling or managing new energy sources, such as wind and solar (Arber &amp;&nbsp;Speich, 1992; Barnes, 1994;). It has been applied by the five-star hotel in Nusa Dua Resort viewed through a phase P-C-D-A that have been adapted to the environmental management system.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">IV. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To integrate the environmental elements into the tourism business the Hotel star in Nusa Dua Resort implemented the ecopreneurship business model where there are four phases which P - D - C - A or Plan adapted into environmental management system planning, Do adapted into the implementation of environmental labeling and recycling, Check adapted into an environmental audit examination and evaluation of environmental performance, and Action adapted into action on a regular management review.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Acknowledgment</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We thanks to the Rector of Udayana University, The Chairman of LPPM Udayana University, and The Dean of the Faculty of Tourism Udayana University who has provided the opportunity for the team to participate in disseminating the results of research as a form of Tri Dharma Perguruan Tinggi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A. R. Anderson, A. R. Cultivating the Garden of Eden: Environmental Etrepreneuring. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 11(2), 1998,pp. 135-144</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;W. Arber, &amp;&nbsp;C. Speich. Why The Earth’s Genetic BiodiversityCannot Be A Matter of Indifference. In Koechlin, D., Muller, K. (Eds.). Green Business Opportunities: The Profit Potential. London: Pittman, 1992.pp. 1-21.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S. Arikunto. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prosedur Penelitian Suatu Pendekatan Praktik</span><span class="font1"> .Jakarta: Rineka Cipta. 2006.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bagyono. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hotel Front Office, Teori dan Praktik.</span><span class="font1"> Cetakan Kedua.Bandung: Alfabeta.2008.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S. Basuki, Sulistyo. Metode Penelitian.Jakarta:Penaku. 2010.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biro Pusat Statistik (BPS).</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Dalam Angka 2014</span><span class="font1">.Biro Pusat Statistik Propinsi Bali. 2014.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;G.H. Brundtland. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Report of The World Commission on Environment and Development</span><span class="font1">.The United Nation. 1987.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S.T. Djajadiningrat. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainable Future, Menggagas Warisan Peradaban Bagi Anak Cucu</span><span class="font1">.ICSD. Jakarta. 2005.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;J. Elkington. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Triple Bottom Line of 21<sup>st</sup> Century Business</span><span class="font1">.UK: Capstone Publishing Limited.1999.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D. Hayati et al. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Measuring Agricultural Sustainability</span><span class="font1">. E, Lichtfouse (ed), Biodiversity, Biofuels, Agroforestry and Conservation Agriculture, Springer Science Business Media, ISBN; 978-90-4819512-1, 2010. pp 73-100.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hisrich, et al. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kewirausahaan</span><span class="font1">. New York: McGraw-Hill.Penerbit Salemba Empat.2008.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;R. Isaak.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Green Logic: Ecopreneurship, Theory and Ethics</span><span class="font1">. Sheffield.UK: Greenleaf Publishing.1998</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;R. Isaak. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Making of The Ecopreneur</span><span class="font1">. Greener Management International, 38 (Summer),2002. pp 81-91.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISO 14001: Environmental Management System Self-Assessment Checklist</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keogh, P. D., &amp;&nbsp;Polonsky. M. J. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Environmental Commitment: A Basis For Environmental Entrepreneurhip</span><span class="font1">. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 11 (1), 1998.38-49.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;L. Linnanen. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Insider’s Experiences With Environmental Entrpreneurship</span><span class="font1">. Greener Management International, 38 (Summer), 2002.71-80.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T. McEwen.. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ecopreneurship as a Solution to Environmental Problems: Implications for College Level Entrepreneurship Education</span><span class="font1">. International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences, HRMars Journals, ISSN: 2222-6990, Vol. 3, No. 5. 2013. pp 264-288.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;J. L Moleong.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: PT Remaja Rosdakarya Offset. 2007.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rachman, et al. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Panduan lengkap Perencanaan CSR</span><span class="font1">.Jakarta: Penebar Swadaya.2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rumekso. Housekeeping Hotel. Yogyakarta : Andi Offset.2004</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S.Schaltegger. T</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">he Framework and Typology of Ecopreneurship: Leading Bioneers and Environmental Managers to Ecopreneurship</span><span class="font1">. Hampshire, 2005. GU11 3HR: Ashgate Publishing Limited.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;M. Schaper. The Essence of Ecopreneurship. Greener Management International, 38 (Summer), 2000.pp26-30.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[23] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;M. Schaper. Understanding The Green Entrepreneur. In M. Schapper (Eds.), Making Ecopreneurs: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developing Sustainable</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Entrepreneurship. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 2005 pp. 3-12.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[24] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H. Schinck, S.Marxen, &amp;J. Freima. Sustainability Issues For Startup Entrepreneurs. Greener Management International, 38 (Summer), 2002. 59-70.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[25] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setiadi, et al.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Indikator Pembangunan Berkelanjutan Kota Semarang</span><span class="font1">. Jurnal Ristek. Vol. 2. No. 2. 2008.pp. 1-6.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[26] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sihite, Richard. Hotel Management (Pengelola Hotel).Surabaya : SIC.2000.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[27] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suryana. Kewirausahaan.Salemba Empat. Jakarta.2003.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[28] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tamoerzi. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Profesional Hotel Front Liner.</span><span class="font1"> 2000. Jakarta : Visipro.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[29] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D. Taylor, E.E.Walley. The Green Entrepreneur: Visionary, Maverick or Opportunist? 2003. Manchester Metropolitan University Business School Working Paper Series.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[30] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Untari. Ecopreneurship Dalam Konsep Pembangunan yang Berkelanjutan.Universitas Indraprasta PGRI Jakarta.2013.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[31] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;UNWTO World Tourism Barometers 2016</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[32] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T. Volery. Ecopreneurship: Rationale, Current Issues and Future Challanges. In U. Figlisteraller, H. J. Pietner, T. Volery, W. Weber. (Eds). Radical Change in The World: Will SMEs Soar or Crash? St. Gallen: KMU Verlag, 2002.pp. 541-553.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[34] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;E.E. Walley &amp;&nbsp;D.W Taylor Opportunities, Champions, Mavericks? A Typology of Green Entrpreneurs. Green Management International, 38 (Summer), 2002. pp 31-43.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[35] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S. Wijatno. Pengantar Entrepreneurship.PT. Gramedia. Jakarta.2009.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[36] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;World Travel and Tourism Council.2015</span></p></li></ul>