---
layout: full_article
title: "THE BACKGROUND OF MARKET IDEOLOGY  IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF BELADIRI AIKIDO IN BALI"
author: "Wayan Nurita, I Nyoman Suarka, AA Bagus Wirawan, I Nyoman Dhana"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-32132 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-32132"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-32132"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">May 2017 Vol. 10, Number 2, Page 13-18</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">THE BACKGROUND OF MARKET IDEOLOGY IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF BELADIRI AIKIDO IN BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wayan Nurita</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Suarka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">AA Bagus Wirawan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Dhana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sekolah Tinggi Ilmu Bahasa Asing Saraswati, Denpasar email: </span><a href="mailto:nuritabali@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nuritabali@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quite a lot of Balinese people nowadays are pursuing different martial arts coming from other nations, among others is Aikido. Aikido as one of the martial arts of Japan can be accepted and is growing well in Bali which has the background of market ideology as one of the impacts of globalization. The development process of Aikidoin Bali both in addition to the number of training venues (Dojo) and improving the quality of the participants’ techniques (Aikidoka) under the supervisionof Bali Aikido Master Organization (Bari Aikikai) which has been established since 1997. By questioning what kind of ideology is working in the development of Aikido Martial Arts in Bali, this research is a qualitative research which applies the Hypereality theory of Jean Baudrillard.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Result of the research shows that the development of aikido martial arts in Bali both in the development of the dojo and the aikidokaare in the process to reach certain levels. In order to reach both, the allocation of time and funds are required. Bari aikikai is a Japan subordinate of aikidomartial arts organization (Nihon Aikikai). Everything related to the development of aikido martial art in Bali is done through Bari Aikikai. The Japanese as the cultural owner and discourse producer play an important role in relation to the market ideology in it. This condition and realitycan be seen in the development process of aikido martial art in Bali. Both the dojo and aikidoka managers spend a lot of money in terms of training in the form of compulsory dues and other dues payment. This research also found a new paradigm that behind the acceptance and development of aikidomartial artsas the globalization of culture, there is market ideology behind the discourse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: ideology, market, development, martial arts, aikido.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The existence of globalization on the one hand and the development of global tourism business on the other hand, one of Japan aikidomartial arts was born, accepted, grow and develop in Bali. The intensity of entry and development of aikido in Bali cannot be separated</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">from the issue of globalization, the power and domination of Japan in the world constellation, both politically, economically, and culturally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In order to maintain and clarify its identity, Indonesian people with the Balinese among others should still preserve their traditional martial arts because it can also be used as instruments or tools to develop identity for both local and national societies (Koentjaraningrat, 1985: 115). Meanwhile, many Balinese now receive and develop severalof martial arts that come from other nations including one of the martial arts of Japan named Aikido. Aikido martial arts established in Bali since 1995 and up to this time (2017) has spread in Badung andGianyarregencies also in the city of Denpasar and has had the number of members as many as 348 people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the reality, all activities in developingaikido martial arts in Bali including the involvement of the mass media, under the supervision of Japanaikido martial arts organization (Nihon Aikikai), will eventually contribute benefit in the form of material to the main dojo in Tokyo-Japan either for the coaches assigned to Bali as well as the main organization of Aikido martial arts in Japan (Nihon Aikaki) in the form of member dues around the world including Bali. Actually the fact is interesting to be studied more deeply because the discourse ofaikido martial development in Bali as one of Japanese cultures, brings market ideology in it. Based on the explanation and information mentioned before, the problem formulated in this research is why there is a market ideology in the development of aikido martial arts in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study applied qualitative method which give emphasize to cultural meaning with ethnographic approach, including among others (1) entering the life of Balinese aikidoka both individually and in group; (2) seeing the process of aikido martial arts development in Bali both from organizational establishment, dojomanagement, process of level experienced by aikidoka, the competing of meaning to clarify the identity and play with ideology, image, power which ultimately compete for the fiscal capital. This research uses four locationsof dojoaikidomartial arts in Bali such as: (1) Dojo Samurai at TukadGanggaRenon, (2) Dojo in the village of Sumerta Denpasar, (3) Dojo Aura at Sunset Road-Kuta, and (4) ) Dojo Kami at South Jimbaran-Kuta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of data used in this research is qualitative and quantitative data. The data sources used include primary and secondary data sources. The research instrument is the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">researcher himself. The technique of determining the informant is using purposive sampling. Data collection techniques consist of observation, in-depth interviews, documentation, and literarystudy. Data analysis techniques are using descriptive-qualitative and interpretative analysis techniques. The theory used is the Hypereality Theory of Jean Baudrillad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Aikido martial arts as one of the Japanese cultures that has spread and cultivated by aikidokain some dojos in Bali. In the process of development it requires dojo for the training place in order to improve the quality of technique of aikidoka. The establishment of dojos by the managers (aikidoka) that has met the standard according to bariaikikaki shows the successful of development of aikido martial arts in Bali. With this success is actually the successful of the Japanese. The Japanese, in this case dojo aikido martial arts center (Honbu dojo) has succeeded in developing aikido martial arts through hand stands (Bali Aikikai) in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The development of dojo in order to develop aikido martial arts in Bali, means that it requires a lot of cost for Baliaikidoka. A number of dojo managers in Bali do not have their own land which means that they rent the land. It means that the dojo managers also have to spend money for buildings, additional funds for other means such as: matrass, exercise equipment such as stick (jo), sword (bokutou), and wooden knife (tantou). There is also fee for promotional purposes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The emergence of several dojos as a proof of the successful development of aikido martial arts in Bali. It shows that Bali aikidoka also gets benefit especially for managers and coach assistant because with the establishment of new dojos means that the managers and coach assistant will get income in the form of material. The material income earned by dojomanagers are the rest of expenditure on building leases, training facilities, and expenses for other instructors. This reality shows that in the management of the dojo raises the market ideology because the development of aikido martial arts in the establishment of dojo its ultimate goal is material income.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Aikido martial arts as a product of Japanese culture and Baliaikidoka as a consumer. In this case Baliaikidokadoes not only consume the products (aikidomartial arts) but also consumes symbols that determine the image to form their identity. This reality shows that consumerism is not merely related to the role model of symbolic value, but relates also to the question of identity. Consumption is not merely the matters of expenditure or acquisition of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">objects to be self-owned on the basis of use value, but also the purchase of identity. Through aikidomartial training, Baliaikidoka as Japanese cultural consumers form their own identity and have authority to compete for the capital in the form of material obtained from other aikidokawho are practicing in the dojo he leads.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To improve the quality of technique and the increase of level, Baliaikidokaneeds a long and sustainable time and also a lot of budget. The costs ranging from routine training costs in the form of time tuition, seminar fees, training costs outside the camp dojo (training camp) members of bariAikikai, and fees for the exam. Other costs such as participating in outdoor activities or seminars and examinations in Japan, all individuals are responsible for this in accordance with their needs of the costs concerned. To follow the training activities in Japan, in addition to transportation, accommodation, and consumption costs are also required to attend the seminar. And if there is Bali aikidoka who take the test for the higher level will be charged according to the level. Realizing this fact can be said that it is impossible without sum of material and much time to be able to achieve a higher level in aikido martial arts because there are several conditions specified by the dojo center of aikido martial arts in Tokyo-Japan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The main requirement of aikidoka to have a black belt (and) is to take the test for the Dan higher level that is tested by the Japanese. In the test the Bali aikidokacan invite teachers from Japan to come to Bali by facilitating transportation, accommodation, fee to test, donation to the central dojo in Tokyo, and transportation or the Bali aikidokaare required to come to Tokyo for the test and certainly requires sum of money. From this fact it can be said that for Bali aikidoka who wants to improve the quality have to prepare time and sum of Japan currency. All expenses of Baliaikidoka paid to Honbudojo in Tokyo in the form of Japanese currency. Thus it can be said that the development of aikido martial arts in Bali, both the development of the dojo and the improvement of the quality of his aikidoka ultimately provide material benefits to the Japanese as the owner of the culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the description on the discussion there are several things can be concluded as follows. Firstly, the market ideology for the development of aikido martial arts in Bali can be seen in terms of the establishment and management of dojo. Secondly, for the Baliaikidoka in order to improve the quality and the level requires a long and continuous time along with the budget to practice, attend seminars, and other expenses. With the level and the identity</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">belong to Bali aikidokaultimately they also can get the material income by the profession as a trainer in the dojo. The amount of budget spent by Bali aikidoka in relation to training and rating of higher level, became the income for the Japanese as a real form of market ideology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">By looking at the reality with regard to market ideology in the development of aikido martial arts in Bali, can be put forward to the government in this case the Education Department of Youth and Sport of Bali Province to see or adopt the superiority of the management system in aikido martial arts so that it can be applied to native Indonesia martial arts management in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">First of all I would like to praise the Almighty God, Ida Sang HyangWidhiWasa, because of His blessing a research entitled The Background of Market Ideology in the Development of Beladiri Aikido in Balican be completedas it is expected.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On this occasion I would like to express my gratitude tothe team of the research respectively: Prof. Dr. I NyomanSuarka, M.Hum., Prof. Dr. AnakAgungBagusWirawan, S.U., and Dr. I NyomanDhana, M.Si.,and also to the management of E Journal of Cultural Studies of UdayanaUniversity.Last but not least hopefullythis research will be useful especially in the field of cultural studies which will be able to manifests human emancipation in the sphere of martial arts in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Adlin, Alfatri. 2006. Menggeledah Hasrat: Sebuah Pendekatan Multi Perspektif. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra. Atmadja, Nengah Bawa. 2010. AJEG BALI: Gerakan, Identitas Kultural, dan Globalisasi. Yogyakarta: LKiS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2005. Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktik (terj. Nurhadi). Yogyakarta: Kreasi wacana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bungin, M. Burhan. 2008. Penelitian Kualitatif: Komunikasi, Ekonomi, Kebijakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Publik, dan Ilmu Sosial Lainnya. Jakarta: Kencana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Featherstone, Mike. 2005. Posmodernisme dan Budaya Konsumen. (terj. Misbah / ulfa Elizabeth). Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Koentjaraningrat. 2015. Kebudayaan Mentalitas dan Pembangunan. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama. Cetakan kedua puluh satu 2015.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nippon Budokan Foundation. 2009. Budo: The Martial Ways of Japan. Edited and Translated by Alexander Bennett. Tokyo: Shuusansha.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2009. Posrealitas. Realitas Kebudayaan dalam Era Posmetafisika. Yogyakarata: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Saito, Morihiro. 1995. Traditional Aikido: Sword. Stick Body Arts. Tokyo:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sugarawa Martial Art Institute, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">18</span></p>