---
layout: full_article
title: "DECONSTRUCTING EMPOWERMENT OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  AT GIANYAR SENANG HATI FOUNDATION, BALI"
author: "Anak Agung Nyoman Sri Wahyuni, AA Bagus Wirawan, Anak Agung Ngurah Anom Kumbara"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-32133 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-32133"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-32133"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">May 2017 Vol. 10, Number 2, Page 19-23</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">DECONSTRUCTING EMPOWERMENT OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES AT GIANYAR SENANG HATI FOUNDATION, BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Anak Agung Nyoman Sri Wahyuni</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">AA Bagus Wirawan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Anak Agung Ngurah Anom Kumbara</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">email: </span><a href="mailto:yuniagung@hotmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">yuniagung@hotmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Globalization extraordinarily affects the Senang Hati Foundation. The roles played by the agents of empowerment such as the Non-government OrganizationS and government are enormous. The government should pay attention to every citizen, including those with disabilities as they also need justness, as stated in the Five Principles ‘Pancasila’ and the 1945 Constitution and the Act Number 4 of 1997 concerning people with disabilities, which was then changed into the Act of the Republic of Indonesia Number 8 of 2016 concerning people with disabilities. This present study is intended to identify the empowerment of the people with disabilities at the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali. The qualitative method is used. The data were taken from the primary data source and secondary data source. The data were obtained through observation, in-depth interview, and library research. The theory of hegemony, the theory of deconstruction, and the theory of social practice are used in the present study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of the study shows as follows. First, the Foundation has four programs which are implemented to empower people with disabilities. They are social program, educational program, health program, and economic program. Second, the obstacles the Foundation faces can be divided into two. They are the internal obstacle and external obstacle. Third, the obstacle affects the existence of the Foundation, its management, its members, the government, donators and society. The finding of the study is that the Foundation has not been able to empower all of its members yet. In addition, the agents of the empowerment of people with disabilities have different interests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: globalization, deconstruction, empowerment, foundation, and people with disabilities</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Globalization extraordinarily affects the empowerment of the people with disabilities at the Senang Hati Foundation. The implant of cultural values such as discipline, hardworking, being efficient, and being responsible are the fundamental parts of the process of the empowerment of people in the current era of globalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The roles played by the agents of empowerment such as the non-government organizations and government greatly contribute to the success achieved by the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali in empowering people with disabilities. They are empowered to be effective, efficient, and independent. Every citizen including those with disabilities taken care of by the Senang Hati Foundation are entitled to justness, as stated in the Five Principles ‘Pancasila’ as the source of every law in Indonesia, and the 1945 Constitution, the Act Number 4 of 1997 concerning people with disabilities, which was then changed into the Act of the Republic of Indonesia Number 8 of 2016 concerning people with disabilities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The qualitative method is used in the present study. The data were collected through in-depth interview, observation and library research. The data were analyzed, verified and concluded in the forms of narration, tables, pictures and charts from the perspective of cultural studies. In this context, deconstruction refers to the concept of deconstruction proposed by Derrida. The data were analyzed using the theory of hegemony proposed by Gramsci and the theory of social practice proposed by Bourdieu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Senang Hati Foundation, as one of the social non-profit organizations, was established on 5 May 2003. The Foundation has its own Statues and Bylaws which it refers to when undertaking its social activities. It also refers to the Act of the Republic of Indonesia Number 32 of 2004 concerning the regional government, the Act of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6 of 1974 concerning the basic provisions of social welfare, the Decree of the Minister for Social Affairs Number 40/HUK/KEP/X80 concerning social organization, the Decree of the Minister for Home Affairs and the Minister for Social Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia Number 78 of 1993 concerning supervision of social organizations ‘Orsos/LSM/HUK/1993.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On 14 February 2005 the Foundation established an orphanage named Panti Guna Senang Hati. At that time there were thirty children staying in the dormitory. In 2008 the Foundation supported 240 children, forty five of whom stayed at the dormitory. The others stayed at their respective houses. In 2014 the Foundation, through Panti Guna Senang Hati, could take care of 276 children with disabilities, thirty of whom stated at the dormitory and the rest stated at their respective houses. The Foundation has shown good performance in sports, arts and so forth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the end of 2013 the success made by the Foundation decreased; several members did not trust the management; the financial management was less transparent. This could be seen on the debate shown on the face book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This present study focuses on three problems formulated in the form of questions. First, what is the empowerment of children with disabilities at the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali like? Second, what problems the Foundation faces in empowering children with disabilities at the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali? Third, what is the implication of the problems the Foundation faces on the children with disabilities at the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This present study is intended to deconstruct the empowerment made by the NonGovernmental Organizations by tracing the form, problems and implication of the empowerment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Empowerment refers to a process through which people with disabilities are motivated to improve their abilities to develop their life independently. It is also a sustainable process through which people work together to share knowledge and experience under an either formal or informal group in order to achieve a goal. In short, empowerment is closer to a process (Madekhan Ali, 2007: 86). According to Sumaryadi (2005: 11), people’s empowerment means “an attempt made to prepare people to strengthen the institution to which they belong to be independent and prosperous, and to make progress within the atmosphere of sustainable social justice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Empowerment refers to an attempt made to create opportunities to someone to improve his/her potentials and capabilities and to determine the future he/she intends to have (Prijono, 1996:117). It can also be defined as a process which can strengthen those who are weak (Sulistiyani, 2004: 77). It is an attempt to make someone aware of and able to develop the potential he/she has in order to be independent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sunyoto Usman (2003: 40-47), there are several strategies which can be chosen to be applied to the people’s empowerment; they are creating the climate needed, strengthening competiveness and protecting. Sumodininggrat (2000) explains that empowerment is not permanent; when people are able to be independent, they are free to be so. However, they are still monitored so that they will not collapse anymore. Based on what is stated by Sumodiningrat, people can be empowered through a learning process which comes to an end when they are independent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The form of empowerment for the children with disabilities at the Senang Hati Foundation includes four programs; they are the social program, the educational program, the health program, and the economic program. The social program is implemented by establishing a dormitory for the members and providing them with the supporting equipment and the daily primary needs. The educational program is implemented through writing and reading learning in the form of educational package A, educational package B, and educational package C. Vocational trainings are also provided to them, depending on the potentials they have.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The health program is implemented through sitting, standing and walking physiotherapies, depending on the disabilities they suffer from. In addition to the aforementioned physiotherapies, aqua therapy involving dolphins and sports are also held. The economic program is implemented through vocational trainings and by helping sell the products they produce. It is not possible for them to work in the formal sector. It is not possible for them to undertake any activity under the Educative Economic Enterprise system either. The form of empowerment for the children with disabilities taken care of by the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali is adjusted to the Foundation’s program, basic responsibility and function, and is supported by the partnership network made.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factors which can hamper the success made by the Foundation in empowering those with disabilities it takes care of can be categorized into the internal obstacles and external obstacles. The internal obstacles come from the organization itself, and the external ones come from outside. The internal obstacles include the problems arising from individuals/members/management of the Foundation. The external obstacles include those coming from the government, society, and donators.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The obstacles mentioned above affect the Foundation, its management and members, the government, donators, and society. One of the implications was that the Foundation was liquidated; meaning that it became empty and its programs became hampered. The name of the Foundation was changed into the Bhakti Senang Hati Foundation. In addition, it was relocated from Jalan Sasibrata, Banjar Tengah, Tampaksiring Village, Tampaksiring District, Gianyar Regency, Bali Province to Jalan Mundeh, Banjar Teruna, Siangan Village, Gianyar Regency, Bali Province. The founders and management were changed as well, resulting from the decision made by twenty one members to leave the Senang Hati Foundation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are four programs implemented by the Senang Hati Foundation; they are the social program, the educational program, the health program, and the economic program. The obstacles that hampered the attempts made by the Foundation to empower people with disabilities came from within the Foundation and outside. The obstacles extraordinarily affected the foundation, its management and government, the government, the donators and society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The finding of the study was that the Gianyar Senang Hati Foundation, Bali could not empower all of its members. Only 175 people with disabilities had received the supporting equipment. The other programs could not empower half the Foundation’s members. In addition, several agents being involved in the empowerment of people with disabilities taken care of by the Foundation had different interests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Foundation should keep renewing the data on its members and their addresses in order to be able to maximize the empowerment. It should also always refer to its Statutes and Bylaws, maintain communication and coordination, be transparent and accountable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this opportunity the writer would like to thank Prof. A.A. Bagus Wirawan, S.U, as Supervisor, Prof. Dr. A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara, M.A., and Dr. Putu Sukardja, M.Si. as Cosupervisor I and Co-supervisor II.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ali, Madekhan. 2007. Orang Desa Anak Tiri Perubahan. Malang : Averroes Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prijono, Onny S. 1996. Pemberdayaan: Konsep, Kebijakan, dan Implementasi. Jakarta: CSIS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sumodiningrat, G. 2000. Membangun Perekonomian Rakyat. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sumaryadi, I Nyoman. 2005. Efektivitas Implementasi Kebijkan Otonomi Daerah. Jakarta: Citra Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sulistiyani. 2004. Kemitraan dan Model-model Pemberdayaan. Yogyakarta: Gava Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Usman, Sunyoto. 2003. Pembangunan dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">23</span></p>