---
layout: full_article
title: "Figurative Language Used in Taylor Swift’s Songs in the Album 1989"
author: "Putu Nana Lusiana, Yana Qomariana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 21.1 Nopember 2017: 166-171</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Figurative Language Used in Taylor Swift’s Songs in the Album </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1989</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Putu Nana Lusiana<sup>1*</sup>, Yana Qomariana<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">12</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>12</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nanalusiana18@gmail.com"><span class="font2">nanalusiana18@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:inyoman.aryawibawa@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[inyoman.aryawibawa@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul Bahasa Kiasan yang Digunakan dalam Lagu Taylor Swift di Album 1989. Fokus dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi bahasa kiasan yang digunakan dalam lirik lagu dan juga untuk menganalisis makna bahasa kiasan dan makna leksikalnya. Data diambil dari lima lagu di Album Taylor Swift berjudul 1989. Metode dokumentasi digunakan sebagai metode pengumpulan data. Metode kualitatif diterapkan untuk menganalisis data. Teori utama digunakan untuk menganalisis data berdasarkan teori bahasa figuratif yang diajukan oleh Knickerbocker dan Reninger (1963) dan teori makna leksikal oleh Chaer (2013). Hasil penelitian ini membuktikan bahwa ada delapan jenis bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan pada kelima lagu tersebut. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa arti bahasa kiasan dan makna leksikalnya saling berlawanan. Di mana makna bahasa kiasan jauh lebih dalam dan lebih mengesankan daripada makna leksikal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Kiasan, Leksikal, Lirik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature is the creative process of human language in order to fulfill the desire of human being to use their language creatively. Song as piece of music with words that are sung has a function to express the thoughts and feeling. Song has two elements, they are music and lyrics. Music is a complex social behavior and universal containing an expression of human thoughts, ideas, opinion, and others. Lyrics can &nbsp;&nbsp;be</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">categorized as part of discourse, because it consists of words or sentences which have different grammatical functions. By writing a song lyric, people are easy to show their feeling and emotion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Generally, the hearers of the songs have different interpretations to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">understand the meaning of the songs. To understand the meaning in text, people must have semantic skills. According to Chaer (2013:2), semantics is the technical term used to refer to the study of meaning. semantic analysis is internally focused on meaning in words and sentences. Lexical meaning is the meaning of word in isolation, and is usually considered to be the meaning of words. This is the one usually given by the dictionary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Song usually consists of figurative language since the figurative language is used in the lyric that is writen well. The lyrics of Taylor's songs in her album in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1989</span><span class="font2"> is interesting to study because many lyrics used figurative language and the meanings are portrait of Taylor's own life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;What types of figurative language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">are used in five Taylor Swift’s songs in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1989?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are the meanings of the figurative language contrasted with its lexical meaning?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;What types of figurative language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">are used in five Taylor Swift’s songs in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1989</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;How are the meaning &nbsp;of &nbsp;the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">figurative language contrasted with</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">its lexical meaning?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;Research Methods</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected directly from five Taylor Swift’s songs in the Album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1989</span><span class="font2">. The songs are Blank Space, Style, Bad Blood, Clean, and New Romantics. The song lyrics were taken from </span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com"><span class="font2">www.azlyrics.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used to collect the data was the documentation method. This method is a way of collecting data taken by taking notes, through internet and books as theory. Technique of collecting data consists of steps as in the following: firstly, the song lyrics of the five songs were downloaded and printed out from </span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com"><span class="font2">www.azlyrics.com</span></a><span class="font2">, then the songs were listened to carefully and repeatedly until the lyrics were understood and the lyrics were read several times until the songs were understood what they were all about. Finally, the types of figurative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language in the songs were classified based on discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were some steps which were used in analyzing the data in this study. First, in order to understand the object of the study, it is very important to read the song lyrics carefully, especially to find the meaning of the figurative language, then classifying the sentence in each song to get the types of figurative language using theory proposed by K.L Knicker bocker &amp;&nbsp;H. Williard Reniger (1963). Second, finding the meaning of figurative language and finding its lexical meaning using oxford dictionary and some online dictionaries, and then analyzing how the meaning of figurative language is contrasted with its lexical meaning. Finally, the analysis was done with the conclusion and became the answers of the problems that mentioned before.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Figurative Language and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Blank Space</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You look like my next mistake (line 6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the sentence above, it is quite clear for us to see the use of simile. It i s called simile because the sentence compares “you” with “my next mistake” using the word “like”. In lexical meaning the word “you” means person or people being spoken to or written to (Oxford, 2015) and “mistake” means wrong action, idea or opinion (Oxford, 2015). Meanwhile, the meaning of its figurative language, the word “you” refers to a man that the writer met. She wants to convey that the man is trouble and will break her heart and it</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">will be a big mistake to pursue something with him. In fact, she has had at least six mistakes. She also knows that because of the attraction and chemistry she feels, she knows she will pursue him regardless. She is ready to commit.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bad Blood</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Salt in the wound like you're laughing right at me (line 15)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence shows the use of simile because it is a comparison using the word “like”. In lexical meaning, “salt” means substance obtained from mine and seawater, used to flavor food (Oxford, 2015), “wound” means injury to the body, especially one made with a weapon: a bullet (Oxford, 2015), and “laughing” means making the sounds and movements of your face that show you are happy or think something is funny (Oxford, 2015). This is contrasted with its meaning of the figurative language, the writer wants to convey that the situation is exacerbated when her friend doesn’t seem to act like the bigger person by laughing at her when times are down.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">And everyday is like a battle (line 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above shows the use of simile because it compares “everyday”and “battle” using the word “like”. In lexical meaning, “everyday” means daily (Oxford, 2015) and “battle” means fight between armed forces (Oxford, 2015). This is contrasted with its meaning of figurative language, the writer wants to convey that the types of lives of singers and songwriters have to deal with being famous. Their everyday lives are just as hard to deal with as anybody else’s along with the hate they get from many people all over.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphor a) Blank Space</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Love's a game, wanna play? (line 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence shows the use of metaphor as an implied comparison on the basis of similarity between literal meaning and the thing or situation. In lexical meaning, “love” means strong feeling of deep affection for somebody or something (Oxford, 2015), “game” means form of play or sport with rules (Oxford, 2015) and “play” means doing things for pleasure, as children do, enjoy yourself, rather than work (Oxford, 2015). Its figurative meaning could be the writer compares love to a game ], there could be cheaters, losers, and winner, but none of it is very serious or important. When she asks him “wanna play” she is offering him a chance to be on her long list of exlovers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We're all here, the lights and noise are blinding (line 23)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above shows the use of personification, because it’s giving human characteristic to an object, animal, or an abstract idea. In lexical meaning, “lights” means energy from the sun, a lamp, etc that makes it possible to see things (Oxford, 2015), “noise” means sound, especially when loud or unpleasant (Oxford, 2015) and “blinding” means unable to see (Oxford, 2015). In fact, lights and noise are abstract things they can’t be blind but people &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;can. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The &nbsp;&nbsp;writer &nbsp;&nbsp;uses</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">exaggeration expression to express her feelings. This sentence means at house parties and club which are popular among young adults, there tend to be a good amount of drinking, dancing, and music, all of which can be incredibly overwhelming if you’re forced to deal with for a long period of time. Noise</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">technically can’t be blinding, since it comes in the form of sound wave. However, once it gets to a certain point, it can seem like sensory overload</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.3 Synecdoche a) Blank Space</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I could show you incredible things (line 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the sentence above we can see the use of synecdoche because the sentence using the whole thing stands for the part of the thing. In this case, incredible things stand for “magic, madness, heaven, sin” this line exists in line 3. In &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lexical &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;meaning,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“incredible” means wonderful, amazing (Oxford, 2015). This sentence means the writer wants to give the boy wonderful experience and memories if they get into a relationship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We're all bored, we're all so tired of everything (line 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the sentence above we can see the use of synecdoche because the sentence using the whole thing stands for the part of the thing. In lexical meaning, “everything” means all things (Oxford, 2015). This lyric means as the youth, the writer is looking for something new and exciting, and is bored with the day-to-day monotony of everyday life. Specifically, in the terms of love, as a young adult, people generally lose the initial fairytale romanticism with which they approached it in their teenage years.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole a) Blank Space</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I'm dying to see how this one ends (line 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the sentence above we can see the use of hyperbole because it seems to be exaggerated. In lexical</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">meaning, “dying” means stop living (Oxford, 2015). The writer doesn’t really stop living just to see how her relationship will end, she used exaggeration expression to express her feelings. In this sentence the writer tries to explain that she doesn’t expect this relationship to go anywhere good, but she’s interested in pursuing it anyway just to find out. She suggests that she views her own relationships the way other people consume &nbsp;&nbsp;celebrity</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">relationships, hoping each week to read about a terrible breakup or downfall. She is’t going to be at all surprised when the relationship ends up being a total disaster , she might even be disappointed if it weren’t.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Style</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Long drive, Could end in burning flames or paradise (line 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This line shows the use of hyperbole as an exaggeration used to emphasize a point. In lexical meaning, “long drive” means operate and control a vehicle (Oxford, 2015), “burning” means being on fire, producing flames and heat (Oxford, 2015), “flame” means hot bright stream of burning gas coming from something on fire (Oxford, 2015), and “paradise” means heaven. The word “long drive” represents “relationship” it’s impossible a relationship ends in a burning gas or in heaven. “Burning flames” is a build off the phrase “to go down in flames” meaning the relationship will fail slowly but surely until it disappears. “Paradise” asserts that they could get back together and live happily ever after.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bad Blood</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You made a really deep cut (line 8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This line shows the use of hyperbole as an exaggeration used to emphasize a point. In lexical meaning, “deep” means</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">going a long way down from the top or surface (Oxford, 2015) and “cut” means making an opening or wound in something with something &nbsp;&nbsp;sharp</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Oxford, 2015). In this case, this person didn’t really make a deep cut, the writer wants to convey that deep cuts leave scars and bring long lasting pain. Her friend’s acting will leave a permanent mark on her and will not be quickly forgotten. The “deep cut” also conjures up the imagery of being stabbed in the back by the one you trusted the most.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clean</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rain came pouring down when I was drowning (line 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This line shows the use of hyperbole as an exaggeration used to emphasize a point. In lexical meaning, “drowning” means dying in water because o f i n ab i l i t y t o breathe (Oxford, 2015). In this case, the writer wasn’t really drowning, &nbsp;&nbsp;she just uses</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">exaggeration expression to show her feelings and she wants to convey that she felt like she was drowning in water after having been thirsty (the drought she refers to earlier in the song) for a long time. It was difficult but she finally be able to find some peace. This also could mean that when she was going through her toughest times, she learnt the most about herself and became stronger as a person. The rain may symbolize tears and strong emotion that she had been keeping in, as she kept struggling accept the end of relationship</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We cry tears of mascara in the bathroom (line 9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This line shows the use of hyperbole as an exaggeration used to emphasize a point. In lexical meaning, “tears” means drop of liquid that comes from your eye</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">when you cry (Oxford, 2015) and “mascara” means colour for darkening the eyelashes (Oxford, 2015). In this case it is impossible that someone cries tears of mascara. This sentence means that the writer spent the night crying in the bathroom and her mascara smears down her face in tear.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Irony a) New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Please &nbsp;leave me stranded, It's so</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">romantic (line 47)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We can see the use of irony in the sentence above, because the sentence of which the real meaning is completely opposed to its professed or surface meaning, according to Knickerbocker and Reninger. In lexical meaning, “stranded” means helpless position, being unable to move, etc (Oxford, 2015) and “romantic” means having feelings of love (Oxford, 2015). In this case, the writer is being sarcastic or ironic. Nowadays, many women think that men will leave them stranded after a romance. The witer doesn’t actually want her significant other to abandon her, and leaving someone not to be romantic. This sentence could mean that the writer is waiting for the time he is going to disappear leaving her stranded or alone and metaphorically emphasizes on how romantic is of him to leave her like that.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>5.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dead Metaphor</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Style</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">And I got that red lip classic thing that you like (line 8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We can see clearly the use of dead metaphor in the sentence above. The sentence actually has lost its figurative sense because of the endless use. But if we look carefully, of course this phrase is a figurative language. In lexical meaning, “classic” means very</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">high quality (Oxford, 2015). The writer wants to convey that a popular style for women in the 50’s and 60’s was classic red lipstick.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bad Blood</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You know it used to be mad love (line 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We can see clearly the use of dead metaphor in sentence above. The sentence actually has lost its figurative sense because of the endless use. But if we look carefully, of course, this phrase is a figurative language. In lexical meaning, “mad” means very stupid, crazy (Oxford, 2015) and “love” means strong feeling of deep affection for somebody or something (Oxford, 2015). The writer wants to convey that she used to be good friends with this person before. The actual phrase “mad love” is reminiscent of young, chill, real friendship. It speaks to the nature of what the writer and her friend had together.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>5. 1.7 Paradox a) New Romantics</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We play dumb (line 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence shows the use of paradox, a statement of which surface on obvious meaning seems to be illogical even absurd, but making a good sense upon closer &nbsp;&nbsp;examination</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Knickerbocker and Reninger, 367). In lexical meaning, “dumb” means unable to speak (Oxford, 2015). The writer wants to convey that girls often think they need to “play dumb” in order to get a partner, but underneath that they are playing a complex game, in which they manipulate their behaviors in a way others will find pleasing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark52"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark53"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, there are several conclusions that can be drawn. There are eight kinds of figurative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language found in the five songs, they are; simile, metaphor, personification, synecdoche, hyperbole, irony, dead metaphor, and paradox. It can be concluded that the meaning of the figurative language and its lexical meaning are contrasted, in which the meanings of the figurative language are much deeper and more impressing than the lexical meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Chaer, Abdul. 2013. Pengantar Semantik Bahasa Indonesia. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, &nbsp;Geoffrey. 1981. &nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lyons, John. 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">. Vol 1. New York: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbocker, &nbsp;&nbsp;K.L &amp;&nbsp;Williard</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Renigner. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1963. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interpreting</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Literature. &nbsp;New York. Chicago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">San Fransisco. Toronto : Holt, Rinehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">171</span></p>