---
layout: full_article
title: "Typology of Tri Ning Danu Tourist in Bedugul Tourism Area, Bali"
author: "I Nyoman Sunarta, Ni Nyoman Sukma Arida, I Made Adikampana, Ni Luh Karmini, Saptono Nugroho"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33371 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33371"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33371"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">88</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Typology of Tri Ning Danu Tourist in Bedugul</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark2"></a>Tourism Area, Bali</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Sunarta<sup>1</sup>, I Nyoman Sukma Arida<sup>2</sup>, I Made Adikampana<sup>3</sup>, Ni Luh Karmini<sup>4</sup>, and Saptono Nugroho<sup>5</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1,2,3,5</sup> Tourism Destination Program Study, Tourism Faculty, Udayana University, Jl. Dr. Goris 7, Kota Denpasar, Bali 80232</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Telp/Fax : (0361) 223789, E-mail : </span><a href="mailto:cairns54@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">cairns54@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>4</sup>Economic Development Program Study, Bussiness and Economy Faculty, Udayana University, Bukit Jimbaran,Badung, Bali 80361</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font1">The study aims to find the profile in the form of tourist's typology of the three lakes (Beratan, Buyan and Tamblingan) in Bedugul. Tourist's typology related to the characteristics of the tourism market in Bedugul.This study utilize the survey method to deploy a number of questionnaires. The questionnaires in the form of a structured list of questions to respondents in one time (cross-sectional). The questions posed related to the characteristics of the respondent. Respondents in this study are tourits who travel activities in the three lakes. Respondents were determined using non-probability sampling (purposive sampling). Intake of sample based on certain criteria. The criteria based on the judgment or a certain quota specific. Selection of respondents in this study is based on a particular consideration to the purpose of research that tourists visiting the three lakes. The number of samples taken as many as 200 tourists. The number of respondents that are larger than 100 makes it possible to do statistical analysis. The results showed tourist's typology based on the characteristics of tourism market varied in the three lakes. There is also a similarity pattern in each lake typology related tourists visiting that want to enjoy nature and culture based tourist attractions, first timer tourist, and day visitors, tourist spending levels are relatively low, under IDR 500.000.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key Words: typology, tourist, market characteristic, three lakes, Bedugul</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">sampling. The sample is chosen by taking a sample of a population based on certain criteria. The criteria used can be based on the certain judgment or limited quota (Jogiyanto, 2005). The selection of respondents in this study is based on a particular consideration as the purpose of research are tourists that visiting the three lakes. The number of samples took as many as 200 tourists. The number of respondents that are larger than 100 makes it possible to do statistical analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">III.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The tourist market characteristic known from foreign tourists who have been visiting these lakes. The survey was conducted by distributing questionnaires to get a description of the characteristics of the market by exploring the empirical aspects such as: market source, motivation, length of stay and accommodation options, tourist behavior, and socio-demographic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lake Beratan</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Markets Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Market who buys the tourism products in Beratan Lake is majority sourced from Europe. European market comes from countries including</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Western Europe sub-regions such as French, German, and Italian. It can be stated that these countries are the main market, with a contribution of more than 70% visits.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Motivation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tourism motivation is influenced by the level of interest a tourism destination that will affect the decision-making of tourists. The survey results showed that tourists visiting Lake Beratan driven by the desire to be in the atmosphere of Lake Beratan and Ulun Danu and the willingness to learn the culture of local communities, including enjoying food and drink. The push factors are consistent with other survey results that indicate the tourists in planning their activities is to fill their leisure time are always pay attention to the tourism destination that offers culture and nature-based experiences (68%). Besides, the tourists will be more consider to visit tourism destinations which are actively engaged in the protection of natural and cultural assets as tourism resources (71%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The length of stay and accommodation options</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tourists in Lake Beratan mostly in the group of visitors on a daily or day visitors (85%), while the rest are visitors who stayed over night. Actualy, the tourists have a total average time for 19 nights. From the whole time, which was spent to live or stay in Lake Beratan only in 2 nights. Type of accommodation that has been chosen is a hotel, villas, and homestay.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist behavior</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the frequency of visits, almost all the tourists are first-timers (99%). But then when asked if you want to come back? more than 65% answered &quot;Yes&quot;. Of course, the potential for a return visit will be actualized if some of the pull factors of Lake Beratan more qualified, such as absence of sufficient information, the cleanliness of the lake, and the restrictions on the number of visitors to the lake.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The travel patterns,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tourist who is traveling to Lake Beratan tend to group with friends or couples. In addition, traveling with families and their children are also quite a lot to do, especially for tourists who are motivated to learn about the unique culture and nature. While the trips arranged by intermediaris (agents and travel agency) amount is not so meaningful. Besides visiting the tourist attraction on Beratan Lake, tourists also visit other attractions such as Ubud, Taman Ayun, Gitgit Waterfall, and Jatiluwih. Another attraction options is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">strongly associated with motivation to also gain experience about the various remains of the local culture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resources of Information</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To date, mostly of travelers figure out of Lake Beratan based on information from travel guide books, internet, and friends or family (word of mouth). The advances in information technology and communication (ICT), particularly in used of smart phones will be easier to access and obtain tourism information.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Spending patterns in Lake Beratan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The average amount of spending per tourist per day is Rp. 450.000, -. The expenditure of tourists are shopping transportation, attractions, food and beverage and souvenirs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lake Buyan</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source markets</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Lake Buyan primary source markets come from countries located in Europe, Asia Pacific and the Americas. Based on nationality, many tourists come from France, Australia, and the United States. The main market is estimated to contribute about 70% of all visits to this lake.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Motivation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The push factors for tourists visiting Lake Buyan are their desire to learn about the local culture and gain new experience about the local culture and nature. The push factors are parallel with the results of other surveys showing that most tourists in planning activities are to fill their leisure time always pay attention to the tourism destination that offers culture and nature-based experiences (70%). In addition, tourists will be more intense to visit tourism destinations which are actively engaged in the protection of natural and cultural assets as tourism resources (83%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The length of stay and accommodation options</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Similar with Lake Beratan, tourists are classified into daily visitors. The daily visitor number are larger than the visitors who stayed in Lake Baratan. In general, the length of stay of tourists in a destination is determined by several factors as follows: tourism product preferences, budget, and tourist satisfaction. The survey showed that the average length of stay of tourists in the Lake Buyan ranges from 1 night. The length of stay is only 6% of their total time for holiday. During their stay in these destinations, tourist</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">prefer the type of accomodation such as homestay and hotels.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist Behaviour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The majority of Lake Buyan tourist is a first timer (97%). Allegedly, the small number of tourist who revisits because the lower quality of products and accessibility. Tourists who are come to this lake tend to be clustered in the form of travel with a spouse or friend. Besides traveling in groups with a spouse or friend, there are also tourists who travel with families and their children.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Travel Pattern</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Influenced by information on tourism destinations. Information about Lake Buyan is obtained from travel guide books and agents and travel agency. In addition there are also tourists who get the information from the driver of tourist transportation, internet, and on the way to Lovina or other tourist attractions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The expenditure patterns</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is known that the average amount of spending per tourist per day is Rp. 350.000, -. The spending tourists are shopping, food, and beverages, as well as the purchase of tourist attractions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lake Tamblingan</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Market Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The main markets of Lake Tamblingan sourced from countries located in Europe and Asia Pacific. Based on nationality, tourists were from the Netherlands, France, and the United Kingdom (Europe) and China (Asia Pacific). The main market is estimated to contribute 75% of all visits to this lake.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Motivation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Motivation is a psychological factor that provides an explanation of the reasons for visiting a tourism destination.The tourists reason to visiting Lake Tamblingan are the desire to gain new experience about the local culture and nature as well as a willingness to learn the local culture. Various reasons are related to the results of another survey showing that the majority of travelers in planning tourism activities always pay attention to the tourism destination that offers culture and nature-based experiences (92%). In addition, tourists will be consider to visit tourism destinations which are actively engaged in the protection of natural and cultural assets as tourism resources (84%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The length of stay and accommodation options</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Length stay of tourist can affect a significant impact on the tourism destination. The tourists in Lake Tamblingan states that on the average time to stay is 23 nights. But they spent time in stayed at the lake only one night, or about 4%. During their stay in the destination, tourists prefer homestay and hotel as their temporary residence. The tourists who choose to stay are very limited in number, around 17% of visits to Lake Tamblingan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourists Behaviour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Tamblingan tourists based on the frequency of visits shows the composition of 97% of first timers and 3% repeater. Tourists who come to this lake has a tendency to travel with family, friends and families together and their children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e.The sources of information about destinations visited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To date the tourists who visit Lake Tamblingan are get the information from various sources such as agencies and travel agencies, travel guide books, and the internet. The advances in information technology and communications in particular the use of smart phones make it even easier to access information, especially on the internet. The smart phone is used to search the location, and browse testimonials on various websites and travel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The expenditure patterns</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Discovered that the average amount of spending per tourist per day is Rp. 300.000, -. The spending tourists are shopping transportation and food and beverage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">IV.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the description above, it can be conlude into several statement as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The results show travelers typology based on the characteristics of each market in the lake are varies.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a similarity pattern in each lake typology related tourists visiting that want to enjoy naturebased tourist attractions and culture, first timers, and day visitors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Level of tourists spending is relatively low, at under $ 500,000</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">it can be proposed the following suggestions:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The absence of an integrated management of the corresponding three lakes in Bedugul Region make every lake has its own style of activity there for tourist visits it only for transit.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it required additional attractions based on culture there for the tourists have a variety to choice in enjoying the attractions not only see the natural beauty only.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it required further studies related to the formulation of integrated development of sustainable tourism in the Tri ning Danu based on existing and potential markets</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Acknowledgment</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This article is an outcome of of Research Invention Grant Udayana 2016. The author would like to thank the University of Udayana who have facilitated and provided funding for the implementation of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jogiyanto. Analisis dan Desain Sistem Informasi. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Andi.2005.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S. Pike. Destination Marketing Organisations. Elsevier. UK.2004.</span></p></li></ul>