---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Conflict in the Movie “LUCY”"
author: "Ni Luh Made Eva Lusiana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 225-231</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Conflict in the Movie “LUCY”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Luh Made Eva Lusiana</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:evalusiana86@gmail.com"><span class="font1">evalusiana86@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul The Analysis of Conflict in the Movie “Lucy” oleh Luc Besson. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah menemukan jenis konflik yang dihadapi oleh pemeran utama dan sumber dari conflict tersebut dan menganlisis bagaimana cara pemeran utama menyelesaikan konflik tersebut. Data penelitian ini di ambil dari film Lucy. Penelitian ini focus menjelaskan konflik eksternal dan konflik internal. Analisis konflik berdasarkan teori Kenny (1996) yang membagi konflik menjadi dua jenis, diantaranya: eksternal konflik dan internal konflik. Deskripsi dan penyajian karakter dianalisis berdasarkan teori Deetz and Stevenson (1986) yang terdiri dari: sumber konflik dan solusi dari konflik tersebut. Kesimpulan dari penelitian ini adalah menunjukan pemeran utama menghadapi dua konflik, diantaranya: eskternal konflik dan internal konflik. sumber konflik dari pemeran utama adalah; perbedaan pendapat, tujuan yang tidak sesuai dan peran yang tidak sesuai. Untuk solusi yang digunakan pemeran utama untuk menyelesaikan konflik tersebut adalah; strategi penghindaraan, strategi kompetisi, dan strategi kreatif integrasi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: konflik, strategi, resolusi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conflict is a struggle between two or more forces that creates a tension that must be resolved (although in some stories, as in real life, it isn't). Conflict is important to literature because it provides the basic materials for the construction of the plot. Without conflict, nothing would happen. In addition, the conflict within a piece may be central to the author's view of life or the point he or she is trying to make.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict with which fiction concerns itself is of many kinds. A story may deal with a conflict within a single man, a conflict between a man, a conflict between a man and society, between man and nature, and so on. Conflict refers to person which deals with life situation. It is only situation that offers a conflict (Kenney 1966:19).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the discussion of conflict will be more deeply about the conflict in the movie with the reference</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy</span><span class="font1"> written by Luc Besson (2014). The story of this movie is very interesting which could build up the emotion of the spectator. This movie is a science fiction and action. Based on science fiction we can see in the screen when the professor explains about science to students and in the screen Lucy tells about new drugs names CPH4 and Lucy has force to control media electronic, communication with the professor using television. In action, Lucy is arrested with the gangster that sells drugs to another world.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, there are three problems in this study; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of conflict are faced by the main character?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the source of those conflicts?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does Lucy solve the conflicts?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identity the kind of conflict faced by the main character of the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the source of conflict of the main character.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the way Lucy solved the conflicts.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study were taken from the movie entitled Lucy written by Luc Besson (2014). This movie is about the young woman named Lucy; she is an American woman living and studying in</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taipei"><span class="font1"> Taipei,</span></a><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taiwan"><span class="font1"> Taiwan,</span></a><span class="font1"> the conflict started when her employer, Mr. Jang, a Korean</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mob_boss"><span class="font1"> mob boss </span></a><span class="font1">and drug lord was offering job to Lucy to deliver a briefcase to Mr. Jang containing a highly valuable synthetic drug called CPH4. After seeing her boyfriend shot and killed, she captured. The data sources were chosen because they could provide much information related to the conflicts, which is very interesting to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected and selected using the documentation method. The process was by watching</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and understanding the content of the movie and related them to the topic. It was followed by listening to dialogue and reading the movie script. Afterwards, finding out the statement that belong to the intrinsic study, in this case, the elements of fiction especially about the conflicts which were selected through note taking technique.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed qualitatively based on the theoretical basis for conflicts. All the data collected were classified into certain categories. To determine the data belonging to certain point of analysis, first the data were copied from the movie and then, categorized into internal and external conflicts. The data were analysed based on the conflict theory of literature by William Kenney (1966:5), source of conflict and conflict solution was analyzed using the theory managing interpersonal communication by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Conflict found in the movie “Lucy”</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Conflict between Lucy and Richard</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conflict is between Lucy and Richard, while in the movie the analysis of external conflict of the main character is only covering the conflict between man and man, in this case the main character and her boyfriend Richard. The conflict between Lucy and her boyfriend Richard included interpersonal conflict, because both conflicts caused differing opinion. When Richard asked Lucy to take a briefcase to room Mr. Jang, Lucy refused to do anything for Richard without knowing what he wanted her to deliver. Richard annoyed with Lucy, because she always refused what Richard wanted, very flash Richard slips the handcuff from the briefcase handle around Lucy’s wrists, Richard and left Lucy without any choice. That made Lucy angry with Richard.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;What the…</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Richard! What the hell are you doing?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Richard &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Sorry. I really</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">need your help.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Richard!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Richard! Hold on a second! What is this shit?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Take this off of me right now!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Richard &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I don’t have the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">key. Mr. Jang has it all you have to do is go</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">into the hotel and ask for him at the reception desk. He’ll come down with the key and you’ll be free to go.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflict</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Internal conflict is also sometimes called psychological conflict. Internal conflicts could happen between one idea and another idea or the conflicts of in one’s own mind. Internal conflict exists within him or herself. Personal conflict is the struggle that takes place in the character’s mind. For example, a character may have to decide between right and wrong or between two solutions to a problem. For example, in Lucy, the story (as the main character) about her life became changed because the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">drug (CPH4) was broken in her body. Lucy thought that she would be died, but she had a super power, it was super brainpower. Lucy felt everything like the space, the air, the vibrations, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I feel the space... the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">air... the vibrations...the people... I feel the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rotation of the earth... the heat leaving my body... the blood running in my veins... I feel my brain... and I can travel to deepest part of my memory...</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Source of Conflict found in the movie “Lucy”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Source of External Conflict Source of Conflict between Lucy and Richard is Different Opinions</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict here is the conflict man and man; in this case Lucy and &nbsp;&nbsp;Richard. This conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">damaged the relationship between them; Richard asked Lucy to deliver the briefcase to Mr. Jang; Lucy refused to do anything for Richard without knowing what they wanted her to deliver. The source of their conflict was differing opinion. The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Richard : Lucy, it’s easy as pie. In, out, all done and dusted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy : So, why don’t you do it yourself?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Richard : For fun, that’s all! The last thing the guy is expecting is a total 10</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">turning up to deliver his case. It will blow his mind. C’mon!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B. Source of Internal Conflict</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Sources of Internal Conflict is Incompatible Roles</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The source of this conflict is incompatible roles; this conflict arises whenever individual roles in the interaction cannot be played because each requires a complementary role that the other is not playing. Richard asked Lucy to deliver the briefcase to Mr. Jang but Lucy refused to do anything for Richard without knowing what Richard wanted Lucy to deliver. Actually, Lucy did not care about what Richard said and she took another sip coffee, and turned her face to the sun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy : What’s in it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Richard : Sweetheart! Don’t get paranoid on me! It’s fifty feet! I’m right here!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You trust me, don’t you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I gotta go</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Richard : Hey, Lucy, Lucy! What are you doing?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of Conflict found in the movie “Lucy”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Resolution of External</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Resolution of Conflict between Lucy and Richard is Avoidance </span><span class="font1">The resolution of external conflict between Lucy and Richard is avoidance, when Lucy was angry with Richard, because Richard slipped the handcuff from the briefcase handles around her wrists and Richard counted out five hundred dollars and wedged the bills in her cleavage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Richard : It’s worth five hundred bucks, at least! And the money upfront! Buy yourself a real Stetson with it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B. Resolution of Internal Conflict Resolution of Internal Conflict is Creative Integration</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The resolution of in this conflict is creative integration attempts to break the conflict context by demonstrating that the way a conflict is being</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">perceived is not the only possible way to see it. One has a choice to see the conflict in another context rather than to examine it within the present one, actually subverts the conflict discussion. It debilitates individual and relationship problem solving by incapacity decision making and it can expand the complexity of the issues, leaving them more difficulties to address in the future, because she really does not have a choice, she thinks this is her responsibility. Although she knows that it is dangerous for her life after she discusses it with Professor Norman and his college.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study Lucy faced two types of conflict; there are external and internal conflicts. In external conflict, Lucy faced three external conflicts; they are the conflict between herself and her boyfriend, Richard, the conflict between herself and the gangster, Mr. Jang, and the conflict between herself and Professor Norman. The source of external conflict of Lucy and her boyfriend, Richard was the different opinion. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">was an approach avoidance conflict because in managing her conflict with Richard she used avoidance strategy. She deals with the conflict; before she finished the conflict Richard passed away as he was shot by the gangster.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict between Lucy and Mr. Jang was incompatible goals. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this was an approach competition conflict, because in managing her conflict with Mr. Jang she used a competition strategy. She did not deal with this conflict, she wanted to stay alive, but she was already dependent with the drugs, if she did not consume the drugs, her body would not have lost, but this conflict finished, because Mr. Jang passed away by the police and Lucy was lost.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict between Lucy and Professor Norman was differing opinions. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this was an approach avoidance conflict, because in managing her conflict between Professor Norman she used the avoidance strategy. In this conflict Professor Norman could not believe Lucy, but after Lucy explained what happened her life was changing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and she needed an answer to this case. Professor Norman just wanted Lucy to bequeath this science to the development of science, Lucy dealt with it, after she analyzed the research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The source of Lucy internal conflict was incompatible roles between two roles. The internal conflict of Lucy is categorized as a personal conflict and this personal conflict is also included in the approach-approach conflict. The creative integration was used to manage the conflict.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Toronto:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McGraw – Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Deetz, Stanley A and Sheryl. L. Stevenson. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Chapter &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Diyanni, Robert, 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading, Fiction</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Poetry, and Drama.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;McGraw-Hill</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">International Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Horby, A.S .2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.</span><span class="font1"> New York: &nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenny, William. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">K. L. Knickbocker and H.W. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature. </span><span class="font1">New York: Holt Renehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Myers, Gail E. and Michele F. Myers. 1992. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Laboratory</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approach</span><span class="font1">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Singapore:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McGrow Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reaske, Christoper. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Drama</span><span class="font1">. Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Robbins, S.P. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Organizational Behavior: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Concepts,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Controversies, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Applications</span><span class="font1">. New Jersey: Prentice Hall International, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith A. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature Stories, Poems, Play and Essays Fourth Edition.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Mc Graw- Hill</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek Rene and Austin Warren. 1962. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> Great Britain: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harcout, Brace and World, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1967. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harvest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">231</span></p>