---
layout: full_article
title: "Three Dimensions of Jean Louise As The Main Character in Lee’s Novel Go Set A Watchman"
author: "Efraim Aero, I Gusti Ayu Gde Sosiowati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 117-123</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Three Dimensions of Jean Louise As The Main Character in Lee’s Novel Go Set A Watchman</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Efraim Aero<sup>1*</sup>, I Gusti Ayu Gde Sosiowati<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:aeroefraim@gmail.com"><span class="font3">aeroefraim@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:sisiowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">sisiowati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Tiga Dimensi Jean Louise Sebagai Tokoh Utama Dalam Novel Go Set a Watchman Karya Lee”. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk memahami karakterisasi Jean Louise dari dimensi fisik, sosial, dan psikologi serta memahami alasan mengapa Jean Louise gagal sebagai tokoh reformasi. Sumber penelitian ini di ambil dari novel karya Lee yang berjudul Go Set a Watchman. Penelitian ini merupakan penelitian kepustakaan, yang menggunakan metode dokumentasi dengan menggunakan teknik mencatat. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa adalah Teori Dimensi Karakter oleh Egri (1966) dan teori Karakterisasi oleh Kenney (1960).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: tiga dimensi karakter, metode penokohan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">phenomenal character from a novel</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Literature refers to entirety of written expression, with the restriction that not every written document can be categorized as a literature (Klarer 2004:1). Novel has the ability to develop critical thinking skill, and helps people empathize with others through the characters and characterization in the story. Character is the most important element in a novel. The character could teach people some moral lessons and the value of life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study focuses on the main character named Jean Louise, a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">entitled Go Set a Watchman, written by Lee. She is a reformist who stands up for races equality in Maycomb County. Viewing Jean Louise character and characterization are important, because its makes the character fully represented. The analysis of Jean Louise could be used as a study to show that a character is really a reflection of human figure. It is also important to know the method of characterization used by the author to describe Jean Louise.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the figure of the main character shaped in terms of the physiological, sociological</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">and psychological aspects in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lee’s novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Go Set a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Watchman</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the method of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">characterization used by the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">author to describe the main</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">character in the novel Go Set a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Watchman?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the reason of the main</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">character named Jean Louise described as a failed reformist in Lee’s novel Go Set a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Watchman?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the physiologal,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">sociologal and psychological</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">aspects of Jean &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Louise in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lee’s novel Go Set a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Watchman.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the methods of characterization used by the author to describe Jean Louise in Lee’s novel Go Set a Watchman.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the reasons why Jean Louise is described as a failed reformist.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this study were taken from the international bestselling novel Go Set a Watchman, written by Lee and published by Arrows Book. The method used for this study was documentary method. The data for this study were collected through several steps. Firstly, the data were read repeatedly and carefully in order to understand the content of the novel. Secondly, the data were identified and selected in order to find Jean Louise traits, characterization and the reasons why she failed as a reformist. The process was followed by note taking the data related to the study. The data of this study were analysed through the qualitative method. The data were analysed based on two major theories, namely the three-dimensional theory proposed by Egri as stated in The Art of Dramatic Writing (1960), and characterization theory proposed by Kenney taken from his book entitled How to Analyze Fiction (1966).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussions</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Three Dimensions of Jean Louise</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of the character in Go Set a Watchman is focused on the main character, Jean Louise. There is no</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doubt that Jean Louise is the center of the story, because she takes the most part of the story, and like a gravity everything in the story always comes back to her, always related to her existence. Viewing Jean Louise from three-dimensions is important because it makes the character fully represented. Jean Louise has three dimensions as a character, namely her physiology, sociology and psychology.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological Dimension of Jean Louise</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Physical flaw is considered an element in physical dimension. Jean Louise has an eye defect which makes her vision imperfect. It is proven by the following quote :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 7</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">She may have discovered that all her life she had been with a visual defect which had gone unnoticed and neglected by her-self and by those closest to her: she was born color blind. (Lee, 2015: 122)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Color-blind is a disease which makes someone unable to see the difference among some colors,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">especially red and green. Jean Louise has an eye defect which makes her vision imperfect. The eyes defect also has affected her sociological and psychological dimensions. It also affects her attitude as a reformist, she learns that colours are meaningless.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological Dimension of</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Jean Louise</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sociological dimension is reflected through the character’s education. Jean Louise is the lucky one, she comes from a family that can afford education tuitions for her. Jean Louise’s level of education can be seen as the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 10</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">She was now twelve and in the seventh grade. Her capacity to savor the change from grammar school was limited; she did not revel in going to different classrooms during the day and being taught by different teachers, nor in knowing that she had a hero for a brother somewhere in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">remote senior school. (Lee, 2015: 134)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 11</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Atticus sent her to a womenʼs college in Georgia; when she finished, he said it was high time she started shifting for herself and why didnʼt she go to New York or somewhere. (Lee, 2015: 117)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise is described as an educated woman. She attended grammar school, a school for kid around age eleven to eighteen and then continued to higher level of education. Her father, then sent Jean Louise to the women’s university in Georgia. Jean Louise’s education background helped her get a job in New York.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Dimension of</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Jean Louise</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;analysis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">psychological dimension of Jean Louie is focused on several aspects of the character’s attitude. Jean Louise is a reformist who wants race equality happening in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Maycomb. Her ambitions to make Maycomb a better place for the Negroes make her deserved to be titled as a heroine.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Data 41</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Have you ever considered that you can’t have a set of backward people living among people advanced in one kind of civilization and have a social arcadia?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Of course, I know that, but I heard something once. I heard a slogan and it stuck in my head. I heard </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ʻEqual rights for all; special privileges for none,</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">’ and to me it didn’t mean anything but what it said</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. It didnʼt mean one card off the top of the stack for the white man and one off the bottom for the Negro</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, it— </span><span class="font3">(Lee, 2015: 242)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise is completely understood that people cannot have social arcadia, but it does not mean that the Negroes and the white races cannot live in equality. Jean Louise states that equality is for everybody, not only for the white. She does believe that people can live in peace</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">no matter what their skin colors are. Jean Louise does not want the whites to get special treatments even though Jean Louise is physically described as a white woman, she still believes in equality and defends the black races.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Method of Characterization</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Kenney in his book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyse Fiction</span><span class="font3"> (1966) divided the characterization methods into five, namely discursive, dramatic, character on character, contextual and mixed method. The author of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Go Set a Watchman</span><span class="font3"> uses the mixed method to present Jean Louise’s characterization. The analysis of the mixed methods can be described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discursive Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Discursive method is a method used by a writer to tell the reader about a character, the writer sometimes mentions the writer’s opinion, disapproval or approval of the character. The following examples are related to discursive method:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 54</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Jean Louise had never known her mother, and she never knew what a mother was, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">but she rarely felt the need of one. (Lee, 2015: 103)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The writer tells the reader that</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise does not know her mother and rarely needs her. The data are presented through the discursive method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dramatic Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Dramatic method is a method which the writer uses to shape the characters by showing themselves through their own words and action.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Data 57</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Iʼm thoughtless, all right. Selfish, self-willed, I eat too much, and I feel like the Book of Common Prayer. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lord forgive me for not doing what I should have done and for doing what I shouldn’t have done—oh hell.</span><span class="font3"> (Lee, 2015:77)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The pronoun “I” refers to Jean</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Louise. She reveals herself by her own words that she is thoughtless, selfish and eats too much that</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">makes her fat. This kind of method is named the dramatic method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Character on Character method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The character on character method simply means a character in a story talking about another. The example of character on character method in the novel can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Data 59</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Jean Louise, your brother worried about </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">your thoughtlessness until the day he died!” </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Lee, 2015: 31)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise is described as a thoughtless person based on the previous conversation between her aunt, Alexandra and his brother, Jem. Her characterization is shaped through the character on character method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reason Why Jean Louise Failed as a Reformist</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise’s journey as a reformist does not end well, she has to face the failure and accept her</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">discomfiture. The reason why she fails can be explained as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 64</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“What on earth could I do? I canʼt fight them. Thereʼs no fight in me anymore.” </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Lee, 2015: 189)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jean Louise can be concluded as a failed reformist, because she gives up the fight. She realizes that she is too weak to fight Maycomb people. She realizes that people’s prejudice will not change within a short time. She truly believes in equality, but her fighting spirit is already gone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The result of this study shows the relation between the three dimensions of character and the method of the characterization. This relation shapes Jean Louise character and her reformist attitude; the both elements make her character fully represented. Jean Louise is described as a colorblind and well-educated woman who believes in race equality. The method applied by the author to describe Jean Louise is the mixed method. Jean Louise is a failed reformist at the end of the story she cannot change people’s prejudice about</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">racism issue because she has lost her fighting spirit.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Egri, Lajos.1960. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Art of Dramatic Writing</span><span class="font3">. New York: Simon &amp;&nbsp;Schuster,Inc. Available in: </span><a href="http://www/itworkss.com/download/Books/Lajos/Egri/The%20/Art/Of/Dramatic/Writing.pdf"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www/itworkss.com/downlo</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www/itworkss.com/download/Books/Lajos/Egri/The%20/Art/Of/Dramatic/Writing.pdf"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">ad/Books/Lajos/Egri/The</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www/itworkss.com/download/Books/Lajos/Egri/The%20/Art/Of/Dramatic/Writing.pdf"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">/Art/Of/Dramatic/Writing.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Klarer, Mario. 2004. An Introduction to Literature Studies Second Edition. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lee, Harper. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2015. Go Set a Watchman</span><span class="font3">. Great &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Britain: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;William</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Heinemann Penguin Random Groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1962. Theory of Literature. Harcourt: Brace &amp;&nbsp;World</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">123</span></p>