---
layout: full_article
title: "HEXOKINASES IN BREAST CANCER"
author: "S. Kharitonov, A. Zikiriahodzhaev, M. Ermoshchenkova, A. Sukhot’ko, M. Fedorova, E. Pudova, B. Alekseev, A. Kaprin, A. Kudryavtseva"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-32476 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-32476"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-32476"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOSCIENCES AND BIOTECHNOLOGY •Vol. 4 No. 2 • April 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2303-3371</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2017.v04.i02.p05"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2017.v04.i02.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">A REVIEW</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>HEXOKINASES IN BREAST CANCER</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Kharitonov S.<sup>1</sup>, Zikiriahodzhaev A.<sup>2</sup>, Ermoshchenkova M.<sup>2</sup>, Sukhot’ko A.<sup>2</sup>, Fedorova M.<sup>1</sup>, Pudova E.<sup>1</sup>, Alekseev B.<sup>2</sup>, Kaprin A.<sup>2</sup>, Kudryavtseva A.<sup>1,2*</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>1</sup>Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences <sup>2</sup>National Medical Research Radiological Center, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">* </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Corresponding author: </span><a href="mailto:rhizamoeba@mail.ru"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">rhizamoeba@mail.ru</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Received : 7<sup>th</sup> December 2016 | Accepted : 9<sup>th</sup> March 2017</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Hexokinases are one of the key enzymes involved in the process of glycolysis. The level of expression of hexokinases is widely studied in breast cancer as a possible marker of unfavorable prognosis and aggressiveness of tumors. The level of expression of hexokinase may reflect the level of glycolysis activation and, thus, indicate samples with the most altered cellular metabolism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keywords: breast cancer, glycolysis, hexokinases, expression</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Breast cancer is one of the most frequent malignant neoplasms in women and remains the most important problem of modern oncology. World statistics show that each year more than 1.2 million women develop breast cancer. The emergence of distant metastases is the main cause of death of breast cancer patients under the age of 55 (Scully </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tumors of the breast are characterized by considerable variability in the clinical course. There are many factors affecting the prognosis and longterm results. Among them, first of all</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">experts distinguish age, reproductive and hormonal status, histological form and some others. The search for triggers and mechanisms of the breast cancer development, including relapse and metastasis, is conducted by many researchers, but there is still no consensus on the causes of their occurrence (Bhatelia </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2014; Redig and McAllister, 2013).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Metabolism of cancer cells</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Carcinogenesis is a complex and multifactorial process in which metabolic and signaling pathways undergo significant disturbances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">However, there are general characteristics common for most malignant tumors, one of which is the disturbance of energy metabolism (Fedorova </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2015; Haraldson </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2012; Krasnov </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013a; Kudryavtseva </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2016; Oparina </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013; Sawayama </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2014; Snezhkina </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2016). In most cases, it switches from mitochondrial respiration to glycolysis and activation of the latter (Krasnov </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013b; Kudryavtseva </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2014). Glycolysis is accompanied by the synthesis of ATP and is the main way of glucose catabolism used by organisms, usually with a lack of oxygen. However, malignant cells continue to use glycolysis to produce energy even when oxygen is present in the tissues in sufficient quantities (Warburg </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 1927). Biochemist Otto Warburg in 1926 discovered this phenomenon, and it was named in his honor by the “effect of Warburg”. As a result of the activation of glycolysis, accumulation of lactate takes place, which destroys the intercellular collagen matrix, which is one of the metastatic factors (Gatenby and Gillies, 2007; Lee </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2011; Moreno-Sánchez </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2009). Moreover, it seems that the activation of glycolysis and its utilization as the main source of ATP occurs not</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">only as a forced measure due to the conditions of hypoxia and the disturbance of the functions of mitochondria, but also because of the necessity to use intermediate products of glycolysis for active growth and division of malignant cells (Pavlova and Thompson, 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In tumors of various cancer types, switching to glycolysis as the main source of energy and the Warburg effect is observed in different degrees. In addition, the activation of glycolysis occurs through various mechanisms and the expression of a different set of enzymes participating in this process is disturbed. Furthermore, there are various regulatory mechanisms facilitating energy exchange. In cells, glycolysis occurs in the cytosol. Individual reactions and intermediates of glycolysis are well studied, and the enzymes of glycolysis are conserved for all organisms. Most glycolysis reactions are reversible, but the equilibrium is moved towards lactic acid formation (Mansouri </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2017). Glycolysis involves two stages and ten basic enzymatic reactions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hexokinases take part in the first stage of glycolysis. The first enzymatic reaction of glycolysis is phosphorylation - the transfer of the orthophosphate residue to the glucose molecule due to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the energy of ATP. The reaction is catalyzed by hexokinase enzymes. The formation of glucose-6-phosphate by hexokinase is an irreversible process and is accompanied by the release of a significant amount of free energy. The most important property of hexokinases is their inhibition by glucose-6-phosphate, i.e. the latter serves simultaneously as a reaction product, and an allosteric inhibitor. Hexokinases are able to catalyze the phosphorylation of not only glucose, but also other hexoses, in particular fructose, mannose, etc. In the liver, in addition to hexokinases, there is an enzyme glucokinase, which catalyzes the phosphorylation of only glucose. Glucokinase is absent in the muscle tissue.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Correlations between hexokinase expression level and pathophysiological features</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Brown </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3"> (2002) showed the lack of correlation between the expression of hexokinase II and the clinical stage of the disease (Brown </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2002). The association of increased expression of HK2 with the size of the tumor and the presence of metastases in this study was not revealed. Expression of hexokinases (in particular HK2) was analyzed in 24 lobular and ductal carcinomas of the breast. Hexokinase 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">was visualized by immunohistochemistry. Physiological amounts of hexokinase 2 were practically not detected, and excessively accumulated hexokinase 2 was detected in cancer cells. The analysis showed that 19 samples contained excess HK2, in the remaining 5 samples, hexokinase was expressed at the level of control. Correlations between the clinical stage of the disease and elevated levels of hexokinase were not detected. The number of tumor cells containing an increased amount of hexokinase was evaluated. It was shown that an increase in the expression of hexokinase 2 is observed in 5-100% of cells. Correlation between the relative number of cells with an increased content of hexokinase 2 and the stage of the disease was not detected also.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">However, some studies indicate that increased expression of hexokinase correlates with the aggressiveness of breast cancer (Coelho </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2015). Coelho and colleagues examined 54 malignant tumors at various clinical stages, the samples grouped on the basis of expression of standard molecular markers: progesterone and estrogen receptors (PR and ES, respectively), epidermal growth factor receptor (HER-2), Ki- 67, as well as the p53 protein. The sample was analyzed for the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">absence / presence of a correlation between increased expression of hexokinase 2 and the size of the primary tumor. The samples were grouped in three different ways.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The grouping by clinical stages of analysis of both mitochondrial and free hexokinase (Total HK, total hexokinase) allowed confirming a positive correlation between increased activity of this cause and stage of diseases. The highest activity was detected in tumors of stage IV. Separately from the assessment of the total activity of hexokinases, a study was also conducted for the fraction of HK associated with mitochondria. A similar nature of dependence is revealed, and more clearly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">When the samples were grouped according to the size of the primary tumor (less than 2 cm, 2 to 5 cm, more than 5 cm), both in the total and in the mitochondrial-related fractions, a positive correlation was also observed between tumor size and enzyme activity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Assessing the dependence of hexokinase activity on the histological subtype of tumors, a traditional division into 6 subgroups was carried out based on the most commonly used markers. It is known that a subgroup with a triple negative phenotype (PR-, ER-, HER-2-)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">is characterized by a more aggressive course of the disease. It was shown that the level of activity of hexokinase associated with mitochondria in this type of breast cancer is the highest. Correlation of expression of Ki-67 protein with activation of hexokinases in this study was not revealed. However, this relationship was found in another paper (Sato-Tadano </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013) - a positive correlation of the level of expression of hexokinase 2 with HIF-1a and Ki-67 was revealed. HIF-1a is a transcription factor that activates under hypoxic conditions. More than 60 genes, controlled by this factor, in particular, activation of the HK2 gene (Harris, 2002; Semenza, 2003) are described. During the rapid growth of the tumor, the cells inside it are under hypoxic conditions. According to some data, in the process of tumor growth, the increase in HK2 expression appears due to the action of factor HIF-1a (Denko, 2008). It is also shown that increased expression of HK2 in the primary tumor is associated with a decrease in the overall and disease-free survival of patients.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Currently rapidly accumulates the data about the expression of a number of genes associated with energy metabolism in breast metastases (Palmieri </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2009). The miR155 /</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">miR143-cascade &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;controlling &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expression of HK2 in breast cancer cells (Jiang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2012) is described, and the participation of HK1 in the &quot;Warburg effect&quot; is confirmed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thus, the level of expression of hexokinases is widely studied in breast cancer as a possible marker of unfavorable &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;prognosis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">aggressiveness of tumors. However, large-scale retrospective studies are required on large sample, independently for each histological subtype of breast cancer. The level of expression of hexokinase may reflect the level of glycolysis activation and, thus, indicate samples with the most altered cellular metabolism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The reported study was funded by RFBR and Moscow city Government according to the research project № 1534-70035.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Bhatelia, K., Singh, K., and Singh, R.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2014). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TLRs: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;linking</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">inflammation and breast cancer. Cell. Signal. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">26</span><span class="font3">, 2350–2357.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Brown, R.S., Goodman, T.M., Zasadny, K.R., Greenson, J.K., and Wahl, R.L. (2002). Expression of hexokinase II and Glut-1 in untreated human breast cancer. Nucl. Med. Biol. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">29</span><span class="font3">, 443–453.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Coelho, R.G., Calaça, I.C., Celestrini, D.M., Correia-Carneiro, A.H.P., Costa, M.M., Zancan, P., and Sola-Penna, M. (2015). Hexokinase and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">phosphofructokinase activity and intracellular distribution correlate with &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aggressiveness &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">invasiveness of human breast carcinoma. Oncotarget </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font3">, 29375– 29387.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denko, N.C. (2008). Hypoxia, HIF1 and glucose metabolism in the solid tumour. Nat. Rev. Cancer </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">, 705– 713.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fedorova, M.S., Kudryavtseva, A.V., Lakunina, V.A., Snezhkina, A.V., Volchenko, N.N., Slavnova, E.N., Danilova, T.V., Sadritdinova, A.F., Melnikova, N.V., Belova, A.A., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;(2015). [Downregulation of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">OGDHL expression is associated with promoter hypermethylation in colorectal cancer]. Mol. Biol. (Mosk.) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">49</span><span class="font3">, 678–688.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gatenby, R.A., and Gillies, R.J. (2007). Glycolysis in cancer: a potential target for therapy. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">39</span><span class="font3">, 1358–1366.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Haraldson, K., Kashuba, V.I., Dmitriev, A.A., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Senchenko, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;V.N.,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kudryavtseva, A.V., &nbsp;&nbsp;Pavlova,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">T.V., Braga, E.A., Pronina, I.V., Kondratov, A.G., Rynditch, A.V., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2012). LRRC3B gene is frequently &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;epigenetically</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">inactivated in several epithelial malignancies and inhibits cell growth and replication. Biochimie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">94</span><span class="font3">, 1151–1157.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Harris, A.L. (2002). Hypoxia--a key regulatory factor in tumour growth. Nat. Rev. Cancer </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2</span><span class="font3">, 38– 47.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jiang, S., Zhang, L.-F., Zhang, H.-W., Hu, S., Lu, M.-H., Liang, S., Li, B., Li, Y., Li, D., Wang, E.-D., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2012). A novel miR-155/miR-143 cascade controls glycolysis by regulating hexokinase 2 in breast cancer cells. EMBO J. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">31</span><span class="font3">, 1985– 1998.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Krasnov, G.S., Dmitriev, A.A., Lakunina, V.A., Kirpiy, A.A., and Kudryavtseva, A.V. (2013a).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Targeting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;VDAC-bound</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">hexokinase II: &nbsp;&nbsp;a promising</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">approach for concomitant anticancer therapy. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">17</span><span class="font3">, 1221–1233.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Krasnov, G.S., Dmitriev, A.A., Snezhkina, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A.V., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kudryavtseva, &nbsp;&nbsp;A.V. &nbsp;&nbsp;(2013b).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Deregulation of glycolysis in cancer: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;glyceraldehyde-3-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">phosphate dehydrogenase as a therapeutic target. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">17</span><span class="font3">, 681–693.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kudryavtseva, A.V., Krasnov, G.S., Dmitriev, A.A., Alekseev, B.Y., Kardymon, O.L., Sadritdinova, A.F., Fedorova, M.S., Pokrovsky, A.V., Melnikova, N.V., Kaprin, A.D., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2014). Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in aging and cancer. Oncotarget.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kudryavtseva, A.V., Fedorova, M.S., Zhavoronkov, A., Moskalev, A.A., Zasedatelev, A.S., Dmitriev, A.A., Sadritdinova, A.F., Karpova, I.Y., Nyushko, K.M., Kalinin, D.V., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;(2016). Effect of lentivirus-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mediated shRNA inactivation of HK1, HK2, and HK3 genes in colorectal cancer and melanoma cells. BMC Genet. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">17</span><span class="font3">, 156.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lee, G.-H., Kim, D.-S., Chung, M.J., Chae, S.-W., Kim, H.-R., and Chae, H.-J. (2011). Lysyl oxidase-like-1 enhances lung metastasis when lactate accumulation and monocarboxylate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;transporter</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expression are involved. Oncol. Lett. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2</span><span class="font3">, 831–838.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mansouri, S., Shahriari, A., Kalantar, H., Moini Zanjani, T., and Haghi Karamallah, M. (2017). Role of malate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dehydrogenase &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">facilitating lactate dehydrogenase to support the glycolysis pathway in tumors. Biomed. Rep. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font3">, 463– 467.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreno-Sánchez, R., Rodríguez-Enríquez, S., Saavedra, E., Marín-Hernández, A., and Gallardo-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pérez, J.C. (2009). The bioenergetics of cancer: &nbsp;&nbsp;is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">glycolysis the main ATP supplier in all tumor cells? BioFactors Oxf. Engl. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">35</span><span class="font3">, 209–225.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oparina, N.Y., Snezhkina, A.V., Sadritdinova, A.F., Veselovskii, V.A., Dmitriev, A.A., Senchenko, V.N., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mel’nikova, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N.V.,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Speranskaya, A.S., Darii, M.V., Stepanov, O.A., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;(2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Differential expression of genes that encode glycolysis enzymes in kidney and lung cancer in humans]. Genetika </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">49</span><span class="font3">, 814–823.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Palmieri, D., Fitzgerald, D., Shreeve, S.M., Hua, E., Bronder, J.L., Weil, R.J., Davis, S., Stark, A.M., Merino, M.J., Kurek, R., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2009). Analyses of resected human brain metastases of breast cancer reveal the association between &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;up-regulation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">hexokinase 2 and poor prognosis. Mol. Cancer Res. MCR </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">7</span><span class="font3">, 1438– 1445.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pavlova, N.N., and Thompson, C.B. (2016). The Emerging Hallmarks of Cancer Metabolism. Cell Metab. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">23</span><span class="font3">, 27–47.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Redig, A.J., and McAllister, S.S. (2013). Breast cancer as a systemic disease: a view of metastasis. J. Intern. Med. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">274</span><span class="font3">, 113–126.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sato-Tadano, A., Suzuki, T., Amari, M., Takagi, K., Miki, Y., Tamaki, K., Watanabe, M., Ishida, T., Sasano, H., and Ohuchi, N. (2013). Hexokinase II in breast carcinoma: a potent prognostic factor associated with hypoxia-inducible factor-1α and Ki-67. Cancer Sci. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">104</span><span class="font3">, 1380–1388.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sawayama, H., Ishimoto, T., Sugihara, H., Miyanari, N., Miyamoto, Y., Baba, Y., Yoshida, N., and Baba, H. (2014). Clinical impact of the Warburg effect in gastrointestinal cancer (review). Int. J. Oncol. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">45</span><span class="font3">, 1345–1354.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Scully, O.J., Bay, B.-H., Yip, G., and Yu, Y. (2012). Breast cancer metastasis. Cancer Genomics Proteomics </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">9</span><span class="font3">, 311–320.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semenza, G.L. (2003). Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font3">, 721–732.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Snezhkina, A.V., Krasnov, G.S., Zaretsky, A.R., Zhavoronkov, A., Nyushko, K.M., Moskalev, A.A., Karpova, I.Y., Afremova, A.I., Lipatova, A.V., Kochetkov, D.V., </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2016). Differential</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expression of alternatively spliced transcripts related to energy metabolism in colorectal cancer. BMC Genomics </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">17</span><span class="font3">, 1011.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Warburg, O., Wind, F., and Negelein, E. (1927). THE METABOLISM OF TUMORS IN THE BODY. J. Gen. Physiol. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">, 519–530.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">116 • ASIA OCEANIA BIOSCIENCE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY CONSORTIUM</span></p>