---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Code Switching Found in TV Programs"
author: "Ni Putu Dewi Wulan Widyasari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 21.1 Nopember 2017: 115-119</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Code Switching Found in TV Programs</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Dewi Wulan Widyasari</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">[</span><a href="mailto:wulanwidyasari8@gmail.com"><span class="font1">wulanwidyasari8@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul dari skripsi ini adalah Analisis Tentang Alih Kode Dalam Program Televisi. Dalam tulisan ini, pembahasan terfokus pada alih kode bahasa Indonesia-bahasa Inggris yang dilakukan oleh pembawa acara akibat dari bilingualisme di kehidupan yang modern ini. Tulisan ini terbatas pada poin berikut; jenis alih kode bahasa Indonesia-bahasa Inggris dan fungsi dari alih kode bahasa Indonesia-bahasa Inggris. Semua data diambil dari program televisi; BREAKOUT NET TV dan CNN Indonesia TRANS TV. Data tersebut dalam bentuk lisan, didapatkan dengan cara mengunduh video dari Youtube dan merekam program dari televisi, dan selanjutnya dirubah ke bentuk tulisan (percakapan). Data dianalisis menggunakan metode kualitatif dan deskriptif, teori yang digunakan dalam tulisan ini adalah teori dari Poplack (1995) yang mengusulkan bahwa ada tiga jenis alih kode; tag, intrasentensial dan intersentensial, dan teori dari Appel dan Muysken (1987) yang menjelaskan bahwa ada enam fungsi alih kode; referensial, direktif, ekspresif, fatik, puitis dan metalinguistik. Hasil analisis dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa tag, inter-sentensial dan intra-sentensial pada peralihan kode ditemukan dalam sumber data. Sementara itu, untuk fungsi dari alih kode, ditemukan empat fungsi; referensial, direktif, fatik dan metalinguistik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: bilingualisme, kode, jenis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Nowadays communication development is getting bigger. Many electronic media offer various alternatives to communicate with others. Nonetheless, language still plays an important role in interacting with others. Language also forms reflection of culture and trend. Without language, we can't communicate with others. Indonesia has one national language and it has many vernaculars. Besides, Indonesians also use International language (English) for some condition. Young people like to switch from Indonesian into English. This can be influenced</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">bysocial, register, education, trend, environmen t or some condition. Thus, they speak two languages in one speech, which is called</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">bilingualism. People speak one language and then switch it into another language in the first, middle and the end of their utterances. Every word that has been spoken has certain meaning and it is the reason why they switch their language. The main goal of switching is to convey messages or information from speaker to listener smoothly and to make good communication between them. The variety of languages can be found in a show or a conversation in Indonesian television programs. It is done by the presenters or public figures appearing on television shows. They sometimes use a variety of language in presenting their program, even mix or switch the language from one to another. In sociolinguistics, this is called code switching. Grosjean (1982) defines code</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">switching as the alternation use of two languages or more languages in the same utterance or conversation. There are a lot of phenomena of code switching in television programs. The presenters can speak English well. Sometimes they switch code from Indonesian into English or switch code from English into Indonesian. They make special characteristics by switching or mixing their language to get all the obstacles out of the path of his message.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of The Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background above the problems are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of code switching used by the presenters of Breakout and CNN Indonesia?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of code switching used by the presenters of Breakout and CNN Indonesia?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What TV program that code switching mostly found on?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of code switching used by the presenters of Breakout NET TV.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the functions of code switching used by the presenters of Breakout NET TV.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what TV program that code switching mostly found.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are two data used; they are Breakout and CNN Indonesia. Data 1 were taken from Youtube entitled “Breakout NET Musisi yang banyak ditolak label di awal karir 30 Maret 2016&quot; which was uploaded by BREAKOUT NET TV and data 2 which is CNN Indonesia were manually recorded from television. The methods of collecting data used in this study are the library research and note taking. The method used in this paper is the qualitative method. In this case, the theory of code switching proposed by Poplack (in</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Romaine 1989) was used to analyze the types of code switching. For the functions of using code switching, the data were analyzed based on the theory proposed by Appel and Muysken (1987: 118-120). To answer the third problem, the data is presented in table percentage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The following examples present the types of code switching and the functions of using code switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;Types of Code Switching</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;Tag Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Tag-switching is simply the insertion of a tag in one language in an utterance which is entirely in the other language, e.g. you know, I mean, right?. The examples of data analysis are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Boy: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Coldplay tinggi juga. Se</span><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">U2 lah</span><span class="font0">. (Breakout, Segment 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the utterance above tag switching occurs and is located in the beginning of utterance by the exclamation ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yeahʼ</span><span class="font0"> and it is separated by comma from its next word. Based on the Oxford Dictionary Fourth edition (2008:517), the word ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yeahʼ</span><span class="font0"> is the informal form of yes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inter-sentential Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Inter-sentential switching is described as the switch between sentence boundaries, where one sentence is in one language and the other is in another language. The examples of data analysis are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Daniar: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dan saya Daniar Achri. Sekali lagi selamat hari perempuan Internasional.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Have a great day and stay positive</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0">(CNN Indonesia, Segment 5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this utterance, the presenter did some code switching between English and Bahasa Indonesia. We can categorize this utterance as</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">inter-sentential switching since there is a complete sentence in the end of the utterance </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻhave a great day and stay positiveʼ</span><span class="font0"> right after Bahasa Indonesia utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intra-sentential Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Intra-sentential switching refers to the switching that occurs inside the same clause or sentence which then contains the elements of both languages. The examples of data analysis are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Boy: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dan sekarang kita mau ngomongin yang unik, nih. Ini musisi-musisi yang hari ini kalian idolain ternyata dulu ya, karya mereka tuh sempet ditolak-tolak sama </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">label-label </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">rekaman.</span><span class="font0">(Breakout, segment 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The sentence above can be categorized as intra-sentential switching because the switch from Indonesia to English occurs within the sentence boundary. Here, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻlabelʼ</span><span class="font0"> means a company that produces recorded music according to the Oxford Dictionary (</span><a href="https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/la"><span class="font0">https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/la</span></a><span class="font0"> bel). The presenter used &nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻlabel-labelʼ</span><span class="font0"> to</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">emphasize that there are more than one labels that ignore musicians who are going to be talked about.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Functions of Code Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are six functions of code switching proposed by Appel and Muskyen (1987). They are referential function, directive function, expressive function, phatic function, poetic function and metalinguistic function. In this study, there are four functions found as listed below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Referential</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Sheryl: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah, true. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jadi Vidi ini akhirnya mendapat salah satu</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> label </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yang merupakan</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> major label </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">waktu itu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tapi dulu itu dia sempat ikut ajang pencarian bakat dan itu juga dia ditolak. Pokoknya semua jenis </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">audition </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dia ikut sampai akhirnya</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> he made his own record label. </span><span class="font0">(Breakout, segment6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Regarding to the function, the data above serve as referential function by using </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻlabelʼ </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻauditionʼ</span><span class="font0">. This is categorized as referential function because there is no appropriate translation in Bahasa Indonesia for those English words. And if the translation is available in Bahasa Indonesia, the word expressed will be heard as a strange expression because that is not a common word used in daily life by the people in our country.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directive</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Daniar: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dan saya Daniar Achri. Sekali lagi selamat hari perempuan internasional. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Have a great day and stay positive</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0">( CNN Indonesia, segment 5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻHave a great day and stay positiveʼ</span><span class="font0"> involves directive function since the presenter used this expression to invite or suggest the viewers to stay positive or in other words keeping being happy and she also wishes everyone to have a great day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phatic</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Sheryl: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah, true. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jadi Vidi ini akhirnya mendapat salah satu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">label </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yang merupakan</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> major label </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">waktu itu. Tapi dulu itu dia sempat ikut ajang pencarian bakat dan itu juga dia ditolak. Pokoknya semua jenis</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> audition </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dia ikut sampai akhirnya</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> he made his own record label. </span><span class="font0">(Breakout, segment 6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">When the presenter switched the utterance from Bahasa Indonesia to English </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ʻhe made his own record labelʼ </span><span class="font0">there is a change in tone of the conversation in order to emphasize the message. Therefore, this can be categorized as phatic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metalinguistic</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Sheryl: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Yes</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, bukan mereka. Nah, pada saat itu</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> manager</span><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nya The Beatles itu langsung membawa demonya The Beatles ini ke salah satu tempat kayak tempat hmm bukan tempat </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">recording </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sih, kayak toko kaset gitu lah ya. Disitu mereka disarankan kalo The Beatles kayanya cocok masuk ke EMI</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font0">(Breakout, segment 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Due to the function of code switching, it serves metalinguistic function because the presenter prefers to use </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">recording</span><span class="font0"> rather than </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">rekaman </span><span class="font0">to show her English skill. It also involves a referential function using </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manager</span><span class="font0"> because there is no appropriate translation in Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The code switching found in the TV programs; </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">CNN Indonesia</span><span class="font0"> has been analyzed in the previous chapter. The types of code switching are analyzed based on the theory proposed by Poplack, while the functions of code switching are analyzed based on the theory proposed by Appel and Muysken.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Indonesian English code switching is a common phenomenon in the Indonesian music program. The three types of code switching found in the TV programs </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">CNN Indonesia</span><span class="font0"> are tag switching, intra-sentential switching</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">and inter-sentential switching. Intra-sentential switching is found as the most dominant occurrence in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout,</span><span class="font0"> while in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">CNN Indonesia</span><span class="font0"> is dominated by tag switching. The occurrence of code switching is mostly found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout </span><span class="font0">rather that in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">CNN Indonesia</span><span class="font0">, since </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout</span><span class="font0"> is a music program which is presented in a non-formal way, so the presenters are easier to use the language they are comfortable with.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The functions of code switching in this study analyzed based on six functions which are proposed by Appel and Muysken are referential function, directive function, expressive function, phatic function, metalinguistic function and poetic function. There are four out of six functions of code switching found in the music program </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Breakout;</span><span class="font0"> they are referential function, directive function, phatic function and metalinguistic function. While in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">CNN Indonesia</span><span class="font0"> there are three functions of code switching found; they are metalinguistic function, phatic function and directive function. Most of the code switching occur as referential function and metalinguistic function since there are many phrases which are better to be expressed in English rather than in Bahasa Indonesia and the presenters showed an impressive expression to the viewer in order to make the utterance sound interesting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Appel, Rene and Peter Muysken. 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language Contact and Bilingualism. </span><span class="font0">London: Edward Arnold British Library.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ayeomoni. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Code-Switching and CodeMixing: Style of Language Use in Childhood in Yoruba Speech Community</span><span class="font0">. Nigeria: Obafemi Awolowo University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cárdenas-Claros, Mónica Stella. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching and Code Mixing in Internet Chatting</span><span class="font0">. The University of Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Crystal, D., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1987. The Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Encyclopedia of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Darsika, I Made. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Code Switching in the Articles of Teen Magazine.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;Non-Regular</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Program, English Department Faculty of Letters and Cultures Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Grosjean, Francois. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two Languages.</span><span class="font0"> Cambridge: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Harvard</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gumperz, Jhon. J. 1971. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language In Social Groups</span><span class="font0">. Standard; Standford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hoffman, Charlotte. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Bilingualism.</span><span class="font0"> London and New York. Longman Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Maoe, Donny Bobyanto. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian-English Code Switching on the Talk Show Program of “Kick Andy” on Metro TV.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Non-Regular Program, English Department Faculty of Letters and Cultures Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Grosjean, F. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two Languages: An Introduction to Bilingualism. </span><span class="font0">London: Harvard University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Poplack, S., and M. Meechan. 1995. Patterns of language mixture: Nominal structure in Wolof-French and Fongbe-French bilingual discourse. In L. Milroy, and P. Muysken (eds), One Speaker, Two Languages. Cambridge: &nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pribadi, Agung Fahmi. 2013. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Code Switching and Code Mixing Used by Front Office Department Staffs of Grand Elite Hotel Medan.</span><span class="font0"> Medan: Department Of English Faculty Of Cultural Studies, University Of Sumatera Utara</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Romaine, Suzanne. 1995. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism. </span><span class="font0">Oxford: Basil, Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Scotton, C. M., and Ury, W. 1977. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingual Strategies: The Social Functions of Code Switching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font0">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basil,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">119</span></p>