---
layout: full_article
title: "Brand Engagement and Word of Mouth"
author: "I Nyoman Nurcaya, Ni Made Purnami"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33369 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33369"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33369"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">85</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>BRAND ENGAGEMENT AND </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">WORD OF MOUTH</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">I Nyoman Nurcaya<sup>1</sup> and Ni Made Purnami<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1,2</sup> Department of Management, Faculty of Economics and Business, Universitas Udayana, Bukit Jimbaran, Badung Telp/Fax: 0361 22413, E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:ichangnur@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">ichangnur@yahoo.com</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font2">Modern marketing using social media such as Facebook allow the marketers to have a two-way interaction with the consumers, let them give appreciation each other, allow the consumers to leave comments about the products, and the company can directly provide answers to the consumers’ questions and complaints. The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of brand engagement on word of mouth. This research was conducted in Denpasar. The respondents are those who have clicked “like”, “share”, or “comment” button upon a particular brand on Facebook. The data were collected by distributing questionnaires to the respondents who have met the criteria. This study used Partial Least Square (PLS) analysis technique. The results show that 1) Inner self has positive and significant impact on brand love Oriflame; 2) Social self has positive and significant impact on brand love Oriflame; 3) Brand love has positive and significant impacton Word of Mouth Oriflame on Facebook.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: consumer involvement, word of mouth, inner self, social self, brand love, Facebook</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">I.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The traditional way of marketing has changed in accordance with the improvement in technology. Nowadays, the marketers are required to have a twoway communication with their customers. Customer engagement has come as a more dynamic yet interactive concept to understand the nature of customer relation (Naumann&amp;Bowden, 2015). This research focuses on the customer engagement to particular brands, which is known as brand engagement. It is a combination between experience and social dimension (Gambetti </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2012). Brand engagement is a level of customer’s motivation to take part in a certain brand, marked by direct coginitive activities, emotion, and behaviour (Hollenbeek </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2012).Maholtra </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2013, state that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook</span><span class="font2"> is a key marketing channel to drive brand engagement and awarness. It enables the customers to keep in touch with the brand as well as driving other people to share the same preference (Hollenbeck &amp;&nbsp;Zinkhan, 2006). On Facebook, the consumers’ identity is created by a self-description and byhow they communicate with others (Gilly, 2003).A customer who cliks “like” botton for a brand can show their real personality (Ahuvia, 2005). The numbers of “like” or comments in a brand’s page is thevariable to measure the brand’s engagement (Chauhan &amp;&nbsp;Pillai, 2013; Hoffman &amp;&nbsp;Fodor, 2010). Facebook in 2010 (in Wallace, 2004) stated that customers who clicked “like” were more</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">active and highly connected comparing to other Facebook users. The latest data from BrandZ shows that those who cliked “like” spent money five times more than those who did not (Hollis, 2011). Brands that are more discussed on Facebook have greater chance to influence others. Users who chose “like” tend to have more friends on Facebook and tend to click 5.3 times more links than other users (NelsonField, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font2">, 2012). It is already identifed that there is a relation between a brand’s engagement, brand love, and brand use to improve self-expression (Bergkvist &amp;&nbsp;Bech-Larsen, 2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study focuses on a question whether brand’s engagement can be proven with the “like” button, expressed with self expression, brand love, and word of mouth. Inner self can be reflected in brand which is in accordance with the statement that brand is a reflection of personality, brand can symbolize one’s true self, and brand forms the extension of the (customer’s) inner self. Social self is how people want to be seen and treated by others such as the statement that brand contributes to self-image, brand provides positive impact on what others think of oneself. Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font2">, 2014, said that inner self and social self have positive impact on brand love. It can be measured by people’s preference and view. Someone can contribute in a good word of mouth if he/she likes particular brand.This research test customer’s engagement on Facebook. It is important to carry out this research because online customer’s engagement is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">crucial in maintaining a long-term relation between a company and their clientele. Modern marketing using social network, like Facebook, create a two-way communication between the marketers and the customers, both marketers and customers can appreciate each other, the consumers are allowed to give commets or complaints about the product, and the company can directly respond to the consumers’ questions or complaints. This study was conducted in Denpasar. The criteria for the respondents are students who have clicked “like” or “share” button, or given comments about Oriflame products on Facebook.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">II.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is an associative research. It discusses the impact of inner and social self on brand love and word of mouth. This research was conducted in Denpasar. This research tested customer’s engagement on Facebook. The variable is everything in any form that has been determined by the researcher to study in order for the researcher to get information on it and finally reach conclusion (Sugiyono, 2013:58). Based on the research concept, research variables can be seen on Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 1. Identification of Research Variables</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Inner Self</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Brand ‘Oriflame’ reflects my personality The brand ‘Oriflame’ reflects my real identity The brand ‘Oriflame’ is the extension of my inner self</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Social Self</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The brand ‘Oriflame’ contributes to my image</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The brand ‘Oriflame’ gives good impact on people’s perception of me</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The brand ‘Oriflame’ improves the way people look at me</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Brand Love</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The brand ‘Oriflame’ makes me happy</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I like the brand ‘Oriflame’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The brand ‘Oriflame’ is great</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Word of Mouth</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I clicked the “like” button on ‘Oriflame’ pages to tell it to my friends</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I clicked the “like” button on ‘Oriflame’ pages in order to spread good things about the product I recommend ‘Oriflame’ to my friends and family on Facebook</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Population is a scope of generalisation that consists of qualified objects/subjects with particular characteristics that determined by the researchers to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">study and to finally come to a conclusion(Sugiyono, 2013: 61). The population of this research is students of Faculty of Economics and Business, Universitas Udayana (regular and non-regular program). The population of this research is the people in Denpasar. The potential respondents must be in accordance with the following criterias and characteristics, namely: (1) They must be the citizen of Denpasar and (2) They must have clicked the “like” or “share” button, or given comments to particular brands onFacebook. Data collecting for this research was conducted by giving questionnaire to those who match the criterias. The quesionaire for this research is a sort of questionnaire with closed questions list. It means that the respondents were only able to give answer based on one or several options provided by the researcher. Component or variance-based SEM, called PLS (Partial Least Square) was applied to this study as the data analysis technique. According to Ghozali (2011:18) PLS is a factor indeterminancy which is a strong analysis methode. It is assumed that the data does not have to be processed through certain scale, however, few samples are helpful enough to corfirm a theory as well as to obtain latent variable value for predicting the result.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">III.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The first hypothesis in this research shows that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">inner self</span><span class="font2"> has good influence on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. This is identified with the value of path coefficientof 0.339 with a t-statistic value of 2.661. The t-statistic value is higher than t-table value which is of 1.981. Based on the second hypothesis test, it shows that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">social self </span><span class="font2">gives good influence on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. It shows that the value of path coefficient is of 0.539 with t-statistic value of 4.417. It is lower than t-table value which is of 1.981. The test of the third hypothesis shows that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2"> influences </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">word of mouth</span><span class="font2"> with good impact. The value of path coeficient shows the figures 0.0877 with t-statistic value of 38.494. This t-statistic is higher than t-table which is of 1.981.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There is significant influence between variable </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">inner self</span><span class="font2"> and variable </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. This result matches the research conducted by Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al,</span><span class="font2"> 2014 which states that inner self and social self have positive impact on brand love. It is possible for customer to like particular brand because of “self image and a prestige” (Albert </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2008). Carrol and Ahuvia, 2006; Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2014 mention that inner self and social self have positive influence on brand love</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2011) . Batra </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2"> (2011) state that brand image includes the way the customers use the brand to express themselves and the identity they want to get after using that brand. There issignificant impact between variable </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">social self</span><span class="font2"> and variable </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. This result hereof is consistent with a study conducted by Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al,</span><span class="font2"> 2014 showing that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">inner self</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">social self</span><span class="font2"> have good impact on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. It is possible for customer to like a certain brand because it reflects “image and prestige” (Albert </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al,</span><span class="font2"> 2008). Carrol and Ahuvia, 2006; Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">, 2014 write that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">inner self</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">social self</span><span class="font2"> have positive influence on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">. Batra </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2"> (2011) state that image of brand includes the way the customers use the brand to express themselves and the identity they want to get after using that brand. There is significant impact between variable</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2">and variable </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Word of Mouth</span><span class="font2">. This is in accord with a study conducted by Wallace </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al,</span><span class="font2"> 2014 showing that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand love</span><span class="font2"> have good impact on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brand word of mouth.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">IV.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result shows that inner self and social self have good impact on brand love. It is followed by another result showing that brand love gives good influence on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">word of mouth</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Acknowledgment</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We would like to express our gratitude to The Head of Institute for Research and Comunity Service, Udayana University; Dean of Faculty of Economics and Business Dayana University; the president and secretary of Department of Management, Faculty of Economics and Business, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ahuvia, A.C. (2005), “Beyond the extended self: loved objects and consumers’ identity narratives”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Consumer Research</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 171-184.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Albert, N., Merunka, E. and Valette-Florence, P. (2008),“When consumers love their brands: exploring the conceptand its dimensions”,</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Business Research</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 61 No. 10, pp. 10621075.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arnett, D., German, S., &amp;&nbsp;Hunt, S. 2003. The identity salience model of Relationship Marketing success: The case of Nonprofit Marketing, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Marketing</span><span class="font1">, 67 (4), 89-105</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Carroll, B.A. and Ahuvia, A.C. (2006), “Some antecedents and outcomes of brand love”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Marketing Letters</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 17, pp. 79-89</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chauhan, K. and Pillai, A. (2013), “Role of content strategy n social media brand communities: a case of higher education institutes in India”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Product &amp;&nbsp;Brand Management</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 40-51</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bergkvist, L. and Bech-Larsen, T. (2010), “Two studies ofconsequences and actionable antecedents of brand love”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Brand Management</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 17 No. 7, pp. 504-518\</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;De Valck, Kristine, G.H. van Bruggen and B. Wierenga. 2009. Virtual communities: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A marketing perspective Decision Support Systems. Vol </span><span class="font1">47, 185–203</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gambetti, R.C., Graffigna, G. and Biraghi, S. (2012), “The grounded theory approach to consumer-brand engagement: the practitioner’s standpoint”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Market Research</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 54 No. 5, pp. 659-687</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hoffman, D. and Fodor, M. (2010), “Can you measure the ROI of your social media marketing?”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MIT Sloan Management Review</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 40-49</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hollenbeck, C.R. and Zinkhan, G.M. (2006), “Consumer activism on the internet: the role of anti-brand communities”, in Pechmann, C. and Price, L. (Eds), Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 33, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Association for Consumer Research</span><span class="font1">, Duluth, MN, pp. 479-485</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hollis, N. (2011), “The value of a social media fan”, Millward Brown ‘Straight &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk’, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.millwardbrown.com/global/blog/Post/2011-04-04/Thevalue-of-a-social-media-fan.aspx"><span class="font1">www.millwardbrown.com/global/blog/Post/2011-04-04/Thevalue-of-a-social-media-fan.aspx</span></a><span class="font1"> (accessed 4 October,2013)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Malhotra, A., Malhotra, C.K. and See, A. (2013), “How to create brand engagement on Facebook”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MIT Sloan Management Review</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 18-20</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nauman, Kay &amp;&nbsp;Hwa Bowden, Jana Lay. 2015. Exploring the process of customer engagement, self-brand connections and loyalty. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Problems and Perspectives in Management</span><span class="font1">. Vol 13 (1), 56-66</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nelson-Field, K., Riebe, E. and Sharp, B. (2012), “What’s not to ‘like’? Can a Facebook fan base give the brand the advertising reach it needs?”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Advertising Research</span><span class="font1">, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 262-269</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wallace, Elaine., Buil, Isabel &amp;&nbsp;Chernatony, Leslie de. 2014. Consumer engagement with self-expressive brands: brand love and WOM outcomes. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Product &amp;&nbsp;Brand Management</span><span class="font1">. Vol 23 (1), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;33– &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;42</span></p></li></ul>