---
layout: full_article
title: "Pattrens of NSM Syntax of Semantic Primitives Prototypes in the Fields of Custom and Religion in Bali"
author: "I Made Netra"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33368 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33368"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33368"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">80</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Pattrens of NSM Syntax of Semantic Primitives Prototypes in the Fields of Custom and Religion in Bali</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">I Made Netra</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Department of English Letters, Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Udayana University, Bukit Jimbaran Campus, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:dektih@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">dektih@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font4">Efforts in documenting variations and clusterrs of Balinese lexicons, particularly in the fields of custom and religion, have been gradually made</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font4"> The patterns of NSM syntax of prototypes of semantic primitives were thoroughly examined. Thus, an example of the use of the lexicon that represents each prototype of semantic primitives was made to complete the list of the lexicon previously studied.Therefore, NSM dictionary on prototypes of semantic primitives can be easily come into being.Data were obtained by the methods of participative observation, during which the techniques of Focus Group Discussion, recording, and note-taking were employed (Bungin, 2001:57; Moleong, 2000).In-depth interviews to several informants in the two regencies were carried out. The results of the interview were then cross-referenced to such key informants as tradition and community leaders. Data were comprehensively studied by the methods of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">padan</span><span class="font4"> of which relevant theories were used to study data and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">agih</span><span class="font4"> of which supporting equipment was sourced from the language itself (Sudaryanto, 2003). The results of data analysis showed that the patterns of NSM syntax were novelties by combination of several prototypes of semantic primitives accordingly. The patterns comprise of simple patterns, complex patterns, and the related specific patterns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: pattern, NSM syntax, lexicon, prototype, semantic primitives</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>14</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Cultural practices in Bali include customary and religious activities which are conducted in every social interaction among Balinese people. Such cultural practices contain values and norms as well as local wisdom. By identifying and understanding their contents of values, Balinese people then know how to apply them accordingly in their customary and religious life in Bali. In order to maintain and preserve these cultural practices, it is necessary to make thoroughly documentation and develop it accordingly in the form of lexicon networks in the fields of custom and religion based upon the inherent proximity of meaning with its semantic primitives prototypes. A few examples of sentence and its use are really needed just to complete draft of the semantic primitive dictionary,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A dictionary is an effective tool in maintaining a language from extinction, as it lists lexicons along with description of their lexicographical meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">based on the contexts of use and culture. Therefore, this research is designed to drafting semantic primitives dictionary in the field of custom and religion in Bali of which it is the so-called NSM dictionary. In addition, the drafting of this dictionary is intended to maintain the cultural characters which include norms, values, and ideology of Balinese people. The NSM dictionary is made through several stages, namely mapping and making lists of lexical networks which are commonly referred to as a glossary, and exemplifying based on the syntactic patterns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Many compilations of lexically glossary lists completed with their lexical meanings has already been carried out and made by linguists and researchers making use of primary data or secondary data. Based on the idea suggesting that language can influence human mind – in this case, human uses language to preserve cultural characters including the local wisdom – a glossary containing words and terms of the semantic primitive prototypes of Balinese language in the field of customs and religion has been successfully compiled. They are classified or</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">prototyped into 16 prototypes in which they have their own lexical representations</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lexical representations categorizing into the semantic primitives prototypes can be used in the customary and religious life in Bali. Their use is dependent on the factors and aspects of the Balinese culture. Efforts in documenting the variations and clusters of Balinese lexicons, especially in the field of custom and religion, have been gradually carried out. One of the efforts being observed concerns on the patterns of NSM syntax of semantic primitive prototypes in the fields of customs and religion in Bali. Therefore, an example of the use of a lexicon which is a representation of each semantic primitive prototype is given to complete the list of lexicons, simplifying the making of the semantic primitive (NSM) dictionary. Based on the background described above, this article is then focused on the patterns of NSM syntax of semantic primitive prototypes in the field of customs and religion in Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">II.</span><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The design of this research starts from knowledge claim or hypothesis that a semantic primitive dictionary has special characteristics, of which the meaning of lexicon as the representation of semantic primitives can be particularly explained by the techniques of explication and configuration. Then, the explanation of meanings needs to be completed with examples in order to enhance the draft of the semantic primitive dictionary. This claim is supported by research strategies and methods. The strategy adopted is in terms of a field and qualitative research. The methods applied include method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Participative observation method was applied to collect data (Bungin, 2001:57; Moleong, 2000). It was in the form of Focus Group Discussion (FGD) with recording and note-taking techniques. Furthermore, in-depth interview method was also applied to collect further information. The in-depth interviews were conducted first with few informants at the research location and then the results of these interviews were cross-referenced with key informants, comprising of notable figures in the society, academicians, and policy makers. Samples were selected from the available population based on the purposive sampling technique (Bungin, 2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Once the data were obtained and classified, the next step was to carry out data codification. Then, the data were analyzed systematically with padan method</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">with such supporting instruments as relevant writings or theories, and the agih method in which the supporting instruments are part of the language itself, while the basic technique applied was the technique of sorting determining elements (Sudaryanto, 2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are two methods of presenting the results of data analysis, namely the formal and informal methods. The formal method is a method of presenting the results of data analysis using statistics in the form of tables and figures, while the informal method is the method of presenting the results of data analysis by describing detailed and elaborated explications of words. To obtain reports or complete results of data analysis in this research, the methods employed to present the results of data analysis were the formal and informal methods, while the techniques used were adding, substituting, and paraphrasing (Sudaryanto, 1993: 36).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">III.</span><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result And Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Semantic primitive is one important concept of the NSM theory which is a limited set of unchanging meanings. Within this meaning there are also semantic features that will not change (Goddard, 1996a:2). Semantic primes are a reflection of the formation of human mind that is innate by humans since birth. To represent them, semantic primitives can be explicated by paraphrasing with natural language and words that are intuitively related or are in a similar semantic field, rather than using technical language (Wierzbicka, 1996d: 31). For that reason, the existence of the concept of semantic primitives is believed to have a theoretically impact in which semantic primitives can be used to explicate naturally and simply any whole complex meanings. Regularity in semantic primitives is the cause – that is, when the entire lexicons are comprehensively analyzed, the regular feature can be identified. The better the semantic primitives and regularity can be described, the more regular the change and development of meanings can be determined.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The NSM syntactic theory refers to a particular grammatical pattern of a lexicon which is a representation of a semantic primitive prototype. Even though each lexicon has a particular grammatical pattern, it does not mean that this pattern is not universal. Instead, the universality of the grammatical pattern can be easily perceived and it is of a characteristic of the NSM syntax. The NSM syntax is considered the same as a syntactic frame, because every lexical representation of a semantic primitive prototype has a pattern corresponding to the lexical meaning. The lexical meaning can prove that a lexicon</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">can bind the emergence of other meaningful lexicons. For example, the lexicon DO can bind the emergence of two arguments, involving the doer, something, and for someone else, so that the syntactic frame of this lexicon is: SOMEONE do SOMETHING; SOMEONE do SOMETHING for SOMEONE ELSE. The NSM syntactic theory with its syntactic frame suggests that the lexical meaning of a semantic primitive can be expressed in various forms in various context of situation and culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wierzbicka (1996) states that certain lexicons have a universal and natural meaning. For example, the concept of the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">say</span><span class="font4"> in English which is used to give a statement or to declare something can be paraphrased in (1) I declare something to you; (2) people say something bad about you; and (3) I want to say something now. Wierzbicka (1996b) states that even though the grammatical patterns of a language are specific, universal patterns can always be identified. These universal grammatical patterns are expressed as a set of basic sentences in various languages. These basic sentences are constructed by universal lexical elements. The relation of universal lexical elements based on the grammar of a language is referred to as the NSM syntax. Furthermore, the said expert formulated the principles of the NSM syntax, as follows: (1) every pattern is predicted to exist in the languages of the world; (2) those patterns are the innate grammar of human cognition; and (3) they use universal semantic lexicons. The patterns of the NSM syntax described in this section consist of simple patterns and complex patterns, as well as various possible developed patterns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Patterns</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The simple pattern referred to in this section is a pattern consisting of a combination of two prototypes constituting a simple sentence.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Substantives + Determiners</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">canangé patuh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive(something) Determiner The offering is the same</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Substantives + Quantifiers</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yéhé &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bek</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (something) Quantifier The water is full</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Substantives + Evaluators</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pénjoré &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tegeh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (something) Evaluator</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The decorated bamboo pole is tall</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Substantives + Descriptors</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bantené &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;patut</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptor</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">banten</span><span class="font4"> (offering tray) is right</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Substantives + Mental Predicates</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiang &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngadek</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (first person) Mental Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I smelled (something)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Substantives + Speech</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manggalané &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nyawis</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pengurus adat</span><span class="font4">) Speech Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The leader of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pengurus adat</span><span class="font4"> (customary functionaries) answers</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Substantives + Actions</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kramane &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;matektekan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (people) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Action Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The people are chopping (food)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Substantives + Events</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">reramané &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mapiteket</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (family) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">His parents are giving advice</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Substantives + Movement</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ia &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngaba</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (third person) Movement Verb She carried (something)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Substantives + Existence</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">saténé &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ada</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (food) Existence</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There is (still) some </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satay</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Substantives + Life</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">reramané</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (family)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Her parents are (still) alive</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Substantives + Death</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bébéké</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (an offering)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The duck is dead</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Patterns Followed by a Complement.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The complement can be filled with a prototype of time, place and space, and intensity.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Simple Patterns + Substantives</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kramané &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngulat klakat</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">idup</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Alive</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mati </span><span class="font4">Dead</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (people) Action &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substantive</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(something)People are making bamboo weavings</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Simple Pattern + Time</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kramané &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tedun mangkin</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Substantive (people)Action &nbsp;&nbsp;Time</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">People are starting to work together now</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Simple Pattern + Space (Place)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Panglisire mesanekan ring gedong</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Substantive (customary elders)Event Place/Space</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The customary elders are resting inside the house</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Simple Pattern + Space (Location)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gambelan kagenahang ring bale gong</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Substantive (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gambelan</span><span class="font1">) </span><span class="font3">Action &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Location</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gambelan</span><span class="font4"> (traditional musical instrument) is kept in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bale gong</span><span class="font4"> (a building in which gambelan music is performed)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>3.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Other Possible Patterns</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">These patterns of NSM syntax are highly complex patterns consisting of two or more clauses.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Specific patterns involving similarity</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Substantives + Similarity + Substantives</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This pattern refers to an expression or a proverb which employs a figure of speech or supposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ia cara crukcuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Substantive (third person) SimilaritySubstantive (something)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">She is like a </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crukcuk</span><span class="font4"> (a songbird)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Negative-Imperative Specific Patterns</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This pattern can be found in the expressions that employ proverbs or metaphors in Balinese language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">de ngaden awak bisa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Do not overestimate yourself</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">IV.</span><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conslusion</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">From the above results and discussion, the following can be concluded:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The examples of the use of lexicons were structured by combining multiple lexicons of semantic primitives prototypes based on the NSM syntax.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the data of lexicons that have been collected, a few things need to be suggested as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistic documentation in the form of a dictionary needs to be developed further and needs to be explored to other domains;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A research needs to be conducted on the lexicon prototypes in the Balinese language which is concerned with the explanation of the history of language.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1.</span><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acknowledgment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">First, I would like to thank God, the Almighty for His blessing that this article entitled “The Patterns of NSM Syntax of Prototypes of Semantic Primitives in the Fields of Custom and Religion in Bali” can be completed in time. Special thanks are addressed to the followings who did help in the process of completing the article in forms of funding including: Rector of Udayana University, Dean of Faculty of Arts of Udayana University, The Chairman of the Institute for Research and Community Services of Udayana University, The Head of English Study Program, Faculty of Arts of Udayana University, the informants and key informants coming from Buleleng and Gianyar Regencies, Bali, Indonesia. Last but not least, sincere gratitude is delivered to parties concerned. All comments and suggestions are highly appreciated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Allan, K. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Natural Language Semantics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Blackwell Publisher.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bungin, Burhan. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Data Penelitian Kualitatif. Pemahaman Filosofis dan Metodologis ke Arah Penguasaan Model Aplikasi</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Raja Grafindo Persada</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Goddard, C. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cross Linguistic Syntax from A Semantic Point of View (NSM Approach)</span><span class="font2">. New England: New England University Press</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Goddard, C. 1994. “Semantic Theory and Semantic Universal” Dalam Cliff Goddard and A. Wierzbicka (eds), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">from Semantic and Lexical Universals: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory and Empirical &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins, 7--29.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moloeng, Lexy J. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">. Bandung: PT Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Netra, I M. 2012. ”Tindak Ilokusi Asertif Wacana Slamet Olor Komunitas Petani Adat Bayan, Lombok Utara” dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prosiding Seminar Nasional Bahasa Ibu</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Prodi S2 Linguistik Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Netra, I M. 2013. “Daya Ilokusi Ngidih “Permintaan’: Perspektif Wacana Kebudayaan Bali” dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika Kultura, Jurnal Linguistik-Sastra Berdimensi Cultural Studies</span><span class="font2">. Volume 6 Nomor 3 Maret 2013. Padang: Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Universitas Andalas</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Netra, I M. 2014. “Explication and Configuration of Balinese Cultural Script Meanings” dalam</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prosiding Kongres Internasional Masyarakat Linguistik Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. Bandar Lampung: Universitas Lampung bekerja sama dengan MLI</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Netra, I M. 2014. “Wacana Budaya dalam Bahasa Bali” dalam</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Buku</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cahaya Bahasa, Persembahan Tulus kepada I Gusti Made Sutjaja</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Swasta Nulus</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Netra, I M. 2016. ”Lexical representation os Seantic Primitives in the Field of Balinese tradition and samples of ther Meaning Configuration in Englih”. Dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Linguistics, Language and Culture(IJLLC)</span><span class="font2">. Vol 2. No2, Juli 2016, pp 31-40</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Putra, G. 2014. ”Verba Memotong dalam Bahasa Bali: Kajian Metabahasa Semantik Alami” (Tesis). Denpasar: Program S2 Linguistik, Program Pascasarjana, Universitas Udayana</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Medode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa: Penganlar penelilianWahana Kehudayaan Secara Linguilis. </span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sutjiati Beratha, Ni Luh. 2004. &nbsp;&nbsp;“Semantik dalam Perspektif</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Komunikasi Lintas Budaya”. Dalam Aron Meko Mbete (ed), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika: Wahana Penegembang Cakrawala Lingistik</span><span class="font2">, 67-75. Denpasar: Program Studi Magister (S2) dan Doktor (S3) Linguistik Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wierzbicka, Anna. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Speech Act Verbs</span><span class="font2">. Australia: Academic Press</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics Primes and Universals.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wierzbicka, Anna 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Emotions Across Languages and Cultures: Diversity andUniversals.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wierzbicka, Anna. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics, Culture, and Cognition</span><span class="font2">. New York and Oxford</span></p></li></ul>