---
layout: full_article
title: "Technique Used in Translating Balinese Tradition Terms into French"
author: "Putu Weddha Savitri"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31062 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-31062"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31062"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Technique Used in Translating Balinese Tradition Terms into French</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Putu Weddha Savitri</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This paper aims to analyses the technique used in translating Balinese Tradition terms into French found in the Tourism Promotion Book of Bali Government Tourism Department. This book was published every year as one of the important device to promote Bali abroad especially to the French tourist. This paper is also to figure out whether there is loss and gain of information or skewing in conveying the meaning of the terms. The technique of translating from Harvey (2003) was applied to analyze the Cultural-bounded Terms and also the Theory from Nida (1974) was used as supporting theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The findings showed that all translation technique are used in translating Balinese tradition and society terms, those are functional equivalence, formal equivalence, transcription or borrowing, and descriptive translation. Borrowing was mostly used by the translator in order to avoid skewing and to retain the SL meaning in the TL. The analysis also found that in the process of translating cultural terms, loss and gain, and skewing of information occurred often and need more some revision to gain a better understanding about the terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Translation, equivalence, Balinese terms, French</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Bali has a very unique culture. Its uniqueness attracts tourist around the world to come and to see directly the way of life of Balinese people. Culture also becomes one of the strength in Bali tourism because without its culture, Bali will not as famous as now. For that reason, the uniqueness of Balinese culture must be continually maintained and promoted as the most attractive thing can be found in Bali beside its beautifulness of nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Balinese culture covers almost all part of life of Balinese people. It can be found in the religious life, arts including painting, dance, cloth, architecture, etc, and also the way of life of Balinese people in society. Balinese people have a lot of tradition in society as part of their life and become their identity in the middle of modernization. Balinese tradition and their society life are formed with layers and layers of ritual, tradition, and ceremonies. This is the major aspect that makes Bali a special and captivating place to be visited by tourists from around the world. As mentioned before, to let people know about Bali, it can be ensured that the information about Balinese culture is included in tourism promotion materials, such as in the form of brochures, magazines, or specific book about Bali. These materials must be made in many languages in order to get wider target of country, and also to gain a better understanding about Bali to other communities around the world. English, French, Germany, Russian, Spanish, Japanesse, Chinese, etc are the most language used in tourism promotion book/materials.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In translating cultural terms like tradition or arts, the translator need cultural knowledge in Source language (here Bahasa Indonesia) so the meaning can be transferred well to the reader of target language. It is not easy to do because cultural terms are often not found in the target language (TL). For example, lots of tradition terms in SL, as part of culture, like </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">masegeh</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">macaru</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4">, etc, do not exist in TL and the translator has to find the closest equivalence to transfer the meaning. French is one of the foreign languages whose culture and tradition are different with those of Balinese people. This condition creates many problems to the translator in transferring the original text into French, especially in translating cultural terms like tradition in society. This research deals with translation of Balinese tradition terms into French found in Tourism Promotion Book published by Tourism Department of Bali Government. The analyses focused on the technique used in translating the terms and also to find out wether the meaning was transferred naturally or not.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Translation is an activity of transferring the meaning in one language into another language. This activity is inevitably involved at least two languages and two cultures (Toury, 1978). In translating a Cultural-Based-Text, the problem of a translator is how to transfer the meaning of cultural aspects in the source text to the closest equivalent and successfully conveying the meaning in the TL. The problems</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">found in translating cultural terms is depending on how far the gap of culture or tradition between source language and target language. A pluricultural or has a well-understanding about the culture becomes a valuable skill that should be developed by a translator. Cultural knowledge has been a major focus in translation activity of a translator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Defining culture-bound terms (CBTs) as the terms which refer to concepts, institutions and personnel which are specific to the SL culture (p.2), Harvey (2003:2-6) puts forward the following four major techniques for translating CBTs:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Functional Equivalence</span><span class="font4">: It means using a referent in the TL culture whose function is similar to that of the source language (SL) referent. As Harvey (2000:2) writes, authors are divided over the merits of this technique: Weston (1991:23) describes it as the ideal method of translation, while Sarcevic (1985:131) asserts that it is misleading and should be avoided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Formal Equivalence</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">linguistic equivalence</span><span class="font4">: It means a word-for-word translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transcription</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing</span><span class="font4"> (i.e. reproducing or, where necessary, transliterating the original term): It stands at the far end of SL-oriented strategies. If the term is formally transparent or is explained in the context, it may be used alone. In other cases, particularly where no knowledge of the SL by the reader is presumed, transcription is accompanied by an explanation or a translator's note.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Descriptive</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">self-explanatory</span><span class="font4"> translation: It uses generic terms (not CBTs) to convey the meaning. It is appropriate in a wide variety of contexts where formal equivalence is considered insufficiently clear. In a text aimed at a specialized reader, it can be helpful to add the original SL term to avoid ambiguity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As the translation theory proposed by Harvey does not cover the overall analysis regarding the translation techniques applied in transferring the SL meanings into both the target languages, it is supported by the translation procedures proposed by Newmark (1988b) in Ordudari (2007). The translation procedures are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transference</span><span class="font4">: it is the process of transferring an SL word to a TL text. It includes transliteration and is the same as what Harvey (2000:5) named transcription.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Naturalization</span><span class="font4">: it adapts the SL word first to the normal pronunciation, then to the normal morphology of the TL. (Newmark, 1988b:82)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural equivalent</span><span class="font4">: it means replacing a cultural word in the SL with a TL one. However, they are not accurate (Newmark, 1988b:83)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Functional equivalent</span><span class="font4">: it requires the use of a culture-neutral word. (Newmark, 1988b:83) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Descriptive equivalent</span><span class="font4">: in this procedure the meaning of the CBT is explained in several words. (Newmark, 1988b:83)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Componential analysis</span><span class="font4">: it means comparing an SL word with a TL word which has a similar meaning but is not an obvious one-to-one equivalent, by demonstrating first their common and then their differing sense components. (Newmark, 1988b:114)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Synonymy</span><span class="font4">: it is a near TL equivalent. Here economy trumps accuracy. (Newmark, 1988b:84)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Through-translation</span><span class="font4">: it is the literal translation of common collocations, names of organizations and components of compounds. It can also be called: calque or loan translation. (Newmark, 1988b:84)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Shifts or transpositions</span><span class="font4">: it involves a change in the grammar from SL to TL, for instance, (i) change from singular to plural, (ii) the change required when a specific SL structure does not exist in the TL, (iii) change of an SL verb to a TL word, change of an SL noun group to a TL noun and so forth. (Newmark, 1988b:86)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Modulation</span><span class="font4">: it occurs when the translator reproduces the message of the original text in the TL text in conformity with the current norms of the TL, since the SL and the TL may appear dissimilar in terms of perspective. (Newmark, 1988b:88)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Recognized translation</span><span class="font4">: it occurs when the translator normally uses the official or the generally accepted translation of any institutional term. (Newmark, 1988b:89) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Compensation</span><span class="font4">: it occurs when loss of meaning in one part of a sentence is compensated in another part. (Newmark, 1988b:90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Paraphrase</span><span class="font4">: in this procedure the meaning of the CBT is explained. Here the explanation is much more detailed than that of descriptive equivalent. (Newmark, 1988b:91)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Couplets</span><span class="font4">: it occurs when the translator combines two different procedures. (Newmark, 1988b:91)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Notes</span><span class="font4">: notes are additional information in a translation. (Newmark, 1988b:91)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Translating cultural or art terms could be difficult to be conducted when they do not have the equivalence in the target languages. Nida (1974) stated that loss, gain and skewing of information may occur in the target language. Loss of information occurs if the translation of items in the SL does not explain the whole information in the TL or is not translated or transferred into the TL, addition of information may occur if the translation of items in the source language into target language is with addition of extra information, and skewing of information may occur if the translation of items from the source language is not the exact equivalence in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data of this paper was found in the Tourism Promotion Book by Bali Topurism Departement, 13th edition, which entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Sekilas</span><span class="font4"> in Bahasa Indonesia and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Un Coup d’Oeil</span><span class="font4"> in French.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">There are many Balinese cultural terms was found in the data source but only five data will be presented that can showed various technique used by the translator. Not all cultural terms will be discussed in this paper, but only the terms about traditions of Balinese people in society as their way of life. The translation of those terms was analyzed using the theory from Harvey (2000) and Newmark (1988) as supported theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : … filosofi </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">, sebagai tiga jalan menuju kesempurnaan hidup, yaitu hubungan manusia dengan Tuhan, hubungan manusia dengan manusia dan hubungan manusia dengan alam lingkungan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : …la philosophie du </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">, les trois voies qui mênent à la perfection: la relation entre l’homme et la Divinité, entre l’homme et ses prochains et entre l’homme et la nature qui l’entoure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4"> is a concept in Hindu which is often used in describing the life of Balinese people in relation with another element to create a peaceful life. It can be included in the terms of Balinese tradition (the way of life) which is always held and run in the community. From the data above, the technique used was </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing</span><span class="font4">, it means that the term in SL was not translated in TL, or the term in SL was the same used in TL. This can be happen when there are no equivalence of the term in TL. Afterwards, the meaning of the terms itself, was explained in the following phrase both in SL and TL. By this technique, the meaning of the terms Tri Hita Karana was transferred very clear and sound natural to the target reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Upacara </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Megedong-gedongan, otonan, menek kelih, pawiwahan, hingga ngaben</span><span class="font3"> adalah wujud upacara Hindu di Bali yang termasuk dalam tingkatan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Magedong-gedongan, otonan, menek kelih, pawiwahan, et ngaben</span><span class="font3"> sont des forms de ceremonies hindouistes balinaises comprises dans les ceremonies </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Magedong-gedongan</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otonan</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menek kelih</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pawiwahan</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngaben</span><span class="font4"> are terms in Balinese tradition which is related to Balinese Hinduism. These terms are ceremonies held to human being as their steps of life, started from they were born until they passed from the world. This kind of ceremonies called </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> which they have to do throughout their lives. The data above showed that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transcription </span><span class="font4">or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing</span><span class="font4"> technique was used in translating the terms. It means the terms in SL were used completely in TL because those terms are formally transparent or explained in the context. In the context, there is an explanation about what kind of ceremonies referred by the terms </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Magedong-gedongan, otonan, menek kelih, pawiwahan</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ngaben</span><span class="font4">. It was explained generally that the terms are included as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> ceremonies, but the meaning of each terms were not described in detail. There are loss of information occurred in translating those terms because at the end, the term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> was not explained. The reader in TL will not understand what is meant by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya </span><span class="font4">because they are not Hindus and they are not familiar with this term, so that the important meaning about </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> should be mentioned as ceremonies for human being itself which is done according to life stage. While the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusa Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> was not clear, the other terms were also</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">cannot be understood. For example, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">magedong-gedongan</span><span class="font4"> is a ceremony to purify the baby in the womb, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otonan</span><span class="font4"> is ceremony for the baby of seven month, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pawiwahan</span><span class="font4"> is a ceremony of marriage, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Pada pelaksanaan suatu upacara di Pura dikenal tahap upacara </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Masang Busana atau Masang Pengangge</span><span class="font3"> yaitu memasang busana, hiasan dan dekorasi pada bangunan pura.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Une ceremonie dans un temple en particulier appelée </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Masang Busana ou Masang Pengangge </span><span class="font3">signifie l’habillage, la decoration et l’ornement d’un temple</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3), the meaning of tradition terms </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Masang Busana or Masang Pangangge</span><span class="font4"> are transferred by using </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing technique</span><span class="font4"> into TL, it is because the following text in SL is the explanation about the terms itself. The meaning of the terms was described into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">l’habillage, la decoration et l’ornement d’un temple ‘</span><span class="font4">dress up, decorated and ornamented the temple.’ The meaning after the text was very clear so the translator borrow completely the term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Masang Busana</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Masang Pangangge</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Seorang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">undagi</span><span class="font3"> pada dasarnya adalah manusia utama yang mesti mampu memahami seni, komposisi, proporsi, teknik, rasa ruang, filosofi agama, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat (awig-awig)…</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Un </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">undagi</span><span class="font3"> est hautement respecté car il doit comprendre l’art, la composition, les proportions, la technique, le sens de l’espace, la philosophie réligieuse, les </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">savoirs ancestraux (awig-awig) …..</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are 2 tradition terms in data (4), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">undagi</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4">). The term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">undagi</span><span class="font4"> is translated by using borrowing technique because the context has explained about the meaning. The title of the context where this term occurred was talked about Balinese architecture, and based on the context, the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">undagi</span><span class="font4"> (an architect) can be easily understood with the addition of some qualifications from an architect in the following text. This qualification of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Undagi</span><span class="font4"> was explained into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hautement respecté car il doit comprendre l’art, la composition, les proportions, la technique, le sens de l’espace, la philosophie réligieuse, les savoirs ancestraux (awig-awig)</span><span class="font4"> highly respected person because he has to understand about art, composition, proportion, technique, the sense of space, religious philosophy, ancestral knowledge,… The second term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4">) in SL was translated into TL as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les savoir ancestraux</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4">). In this case, the translator combined two technique, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Functional equivalence</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing technique</span><span class="font4">. Functional equivalence was used in translating the term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat</span><span class="font4"> into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les savoirs ancestraux</span><span class="font4"> (ancestral knowledge), while borrowing used in translating term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4"> in SL into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4"> in TL. The first term, the translator considered that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les saviors ancestraux</span><span class="font4"> is a referent in the TL culture whose function is similar to that of the source language (SL) referent. But the result was not accurate because the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat</span><span class="font4"> could be translated by its words to become custom rules/society rules (formal equivalence technique). It will be more natural because </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat </span><span class="font4">was not an ancestral knowledge, but a custom rules which was made by the community in one village which contains some rules that must be obeyed by the society in that village. Besides the rules on how to live a good and peacefull society, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4"> also contains sanctions, fines, punishment physically or spiritually, and also this </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4"> can be changed anytime if it is required. There is a loss of meaning here because the sense or the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aturan adat</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font4">) is wider than just an ancestral knowledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Krama adat, warna, wangsa, soroh, sekeha</span><span class="font3"> atau kelompok tradisi lain di Bali…..</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Les manières d’être, les couleurs, les dynasties, soroh, sekeha</span><span class="font3"> ou les groups traditionels à Bali ……</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In data (5), the translator uses some technique for five terms in the sentence, which are:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(i)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Krama adat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">les manieres d’être</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">descriptive translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(ii)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Warna</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">les couleurs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">formal equivalence</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(iii)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Wangsa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">les dynasties</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">formal equivalence</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(iv)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Soroh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">soroh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">transcription or borrowing technique</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(v)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sekeha</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">sekeha</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">transcription or borrowing technique</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The term (i) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">krama adat</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les manières d’être</span><span class="font4"> (the ways of being, how to behave or act) by using descriptive or self-explanatory technique because it uses generic terms (not CBTs) to convey the meaning. But in this case, there is skewing of information because the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">krama adat</span><span class="font4"> is not about manners, but </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">krama adat</span><span class="font4"> is a term for community members who must follow custom/society rules applicable in the village where they live. In a text aimed at a specialized reader, it can be helpful to add the original SL term to avoid ambiguity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For the term (ii) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">warna</span><span class="font4">, translator used formal equivalence or word-to-word translation; it was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les couleurs</span><span class="font4"> (the colors). It was totally skewing of information, because the meaning warna here have no relation with red, yellow, blue etc, but it is generally referred to the division of society based on its work, and nowadays its develop became a caste class in Bali (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">brahmana</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">weisya</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ksatria</span><span class="font4">, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sudra</span><span class="font4">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The term (iii) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wangsa</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">les dynasties</span><span class="font4"> (dynasty) in TL by using formal equivalence or word-to word translation. This technique was appropriately used because the meaning of wangsa itself refers to dynasty (family lineage). But it will be helpful and more appropriate if the translator adds the original SL term to avoid ambiguity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For terms (iv) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soroh</span><span class="font4"> and (v) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha</span><span class="font4">, were translated into the same word in TL. It is called transcription or borrowing and it happen when there is no equivalence in the TL culture. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Soroh</span><span class="font4"> in Balinese is a class of community, smaller than wangsa or dynasty, or it can be equivalence with clan. In Bali, there are some </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soroh</span><span class="font4"> known such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">soroh pasek, soroh pande, soroh dukuh, soroh penyarikan</span><span class="font4">, etc. The use of borrowing technique can be acceptable, but it will be clearer if the translator add some information about this cultural term. For the last term (v) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha</span><span class="font4">, borrowing the word in SL to be used in TL was right because lack of equivalence word in TL culture. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sekeha</span><span class="font4"> is known to refer a performance arts group in society, like </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha gong kebyar</span><span class="font4"> (gong kebyar group), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha angklung</span><span class="font4"> (angklung group), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha tabuh</span><span class="font4"> (gamelan group), etc. But it will be more natural if there are additional information to the term </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekeha</span><span class="font4"> to make the reader know the meaning clearly and the differences between the other group of society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>IV &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based the analysis above, it can be concluded that all technique from Harvey (2003) was used in translating cultural term especially the term in Balinese tradition and society. Those four techniques are Functional equivalence, Formal equivalence, Transcription or borrowing, and Descriptive or self-explanatory translation. The technique that mostly used in translating Balinese tradition and society terms are transcription or borrowing because cultural terms are difficult to be translated when the culture in SL and TL were very different. It will be the simplest and safety way in translating cultural bounding terms if the culture terms words are not exist in other language. In the process of transferring the meaning, loss and gain, and skewing of information occurred, because there are no two or more cultures are perfectly similar, and that is why the translator must be very careful in translating cultural terms to avoid a wrong perception on the meaning of the terms.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Bell, Roger T. 1991. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Translating: Theory and Practice</span><span class="font4">. New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Baker, Mona (ed.). 2005. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies</span><span class="font4">. New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dinas Pariwisata Provinsi Bali. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Un Coup D’oeil</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dinas Pariwisata Provinsi Bali. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sekilas Bali</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harvey, M. (2003). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A beginner's course in legal translation: the case of culture-bound terms</span><span class="font4">.Retrieved April 3, 2007 from </span><a href="http://www.tradulex.org/Actes2000/harvey.pdf"><span class="font4">http://www.tradulex.org/Actes2000/harvey.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Munday, Jeremy. 2001. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Translation Strategies: Theories and Practice</span><span class="font4">. London: Routledge. Nida, Eugene A. 1974. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Practice of Translation</span><span class="font4">. Leiden: E. J. Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nida. E.A. (1975). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Language Structure and Translation</span><span class="font4">. Essays by Nida. Stanford: Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, P. (1988a). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font4">. Hertfordshire: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ordudari, Mahmoud. 2007. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Procedures, Strategies and Methods</span><span class="font4">. Translation Journal, Volume 11, No.3, July 2007. Retrieved from: http:/translationjournal.net/journal/41culture.htm, cited on 29 October 2015</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Toury, G. 1978, revised 1995. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Nature and Role of Norms in Translation</span><span class="font4">. In Venuti, L. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font4">. London: Routledge.</span></p>