---
layout: full_article
title: "Characterization and Pshychological Aspects in “Begin Again” Movie"
author: "I B Wahyu Adhi Triyasa Maha Putra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 269-278</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Characterization and Pshychological Aspects in “Begin Again</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Movie</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I B Wahyu Adhi Triyasa Maha Putra</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department-Faculty of Arts-Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:wahyutriyasa28@gmail.com"><span class="font1">wahyutriyasa28@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul, “Caharacterization and Psychological aspect in “Begin again movie”. Topik ini di pilih karena ingin lebih memahami tentang karakter utama dari seorang Greta di film Begin Again dan metode karakterisasi dari karakter utama pada film ini. Karakter utama pada film ini menginformasikan seorang yang mendalami cerita dan berperan penting dalam cerita film itu sendiri. Pada diskusi ini di focuskan pada aspek psikologi dari karakter utama dan metode yang di pakai untuk menggambarkan tokoh pada film tersebut. Ini adalah sebuah penelitian perpustakan dan data didapatkan dari film Begin Again berupa skrip film. Data ini dianalisis dan di kumpulkan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif dan teknik mencatat dan juga menonton film. Langkah pertama adalah mengumpulkan data dengan cara menonton dan memahami skrip film kemudian dilanjutkan dengan cara membaca skrip film tersebut. Langkah kedua adalah mengidentifikasi dan mengelompokan data dan yang terakhir langkah ketiga adalah menemukan statement yang menyangkut skrip film yang bisa berhubungan dengan teori human motivation. Ada 2 teori yang dipakai pada skripsi ini, yaitu Theory of How to Analyze Fiction (Kenney, 1996) diantaranya metode discursive dan metode character on character dan Theory Psychology (Karl Berhardt, 1953) diantaranya feeling emotion, want, the appetites, social motives dan feeling attitude. Hasil dari analisis ini memperlihatkan Greta adalah tokoh utama pada cerita. Penulis menggunakan dua metode untuk mendiskripsikan Greta diantaranya: metode Dramatic dan metode Character on Character dari karakterisasi. Dengan itu menggambarkan Greta adalah wanita yang keras kepala, pintar, cantik and peduli pada sesama. Dari aspek psikologi, tokoh utama memperlihatkan jika Greta adalah wanita yang mudah bergaul, pintar, peduli dan juga cerdas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Tokoh, Karakterisasi, Psikologi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">All of people know that movie is a part of literary work and movie belongs to drama. Drama is a literary work written in dialogue and displayed by a figure depicting a story of life in the community and is displayed on the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">stage. Literary work can be divided into three kinds; such as drama, poetry, and prose. Movie is a drama that is recorded with cameras and premiered in cinemas or broadcasted on televisions. It has many kinds of genre such as romance, action, comedy, horror, etc. There are two types of movie, fiction and non-</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">fiction. Fiction is a story that is created based on the imaginations of the director or writer, whereas non-fiction is based on a true story in everyday life. There are some methods to describe the main character such as Discursive Method and Dramatic Method. There are important things in drama, one of them is character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Character is one of the important aspects in a movie because the characters make the movie more interesting to watch and make the story of the movie become different. There are some characterizations in movie such as antagonist and protagonist. The character is described totally into three aspects that are physiological, sociological, and the psychological aspects. The aspects are very important as they show the perfect character of human being. Characterization usually describes the expression of human life and attitude in human life as well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Main character is a character in a story that tells about his life or his experience. Almost several films begin a story with a main character described in detail first and begin to get into the story in more detail. The main character has a central point in a story because a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">problem in the story that makes sure that there is always a connection with the main character and is always visible from the beginning to the end. This film is very interesting to discuss from the psychological aspect in this movie because there are many kinds of expressions and emotions presented by the main character in this movie and this study analyzed the main character in Begin Again movie in the form of movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background stated above, the research problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;method &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">characterization was used to describe the main character in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font1">Begin Again </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font1"> movie?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the psychological aspect of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">the main character was described in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font1"> Begin Again </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">” </span><span class="font1">movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of the study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what kind of method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">of characterization is used to describe the main character in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font1">Begin Again</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font1"> movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the characteristics of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">the main character in term of psychological aspect in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font1">Begin Again</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font1"> movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source is the source where the analyzed data were taken from in this paper. The data were taken from the movie “Begin Again” in the form of conversations of the main character. According to</span><a href="http://www.imdb.com/"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.imdb.com</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">the movie was directed and written by John Carney. It was released on September 7, 2013 and made a worldwide total $63.5 million. This movie was started by Kiera Knightly as Greta, Mark Ruffalo as Dan Mulligan and Adam Levine as Dave Kohl.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were obtained from dialogue among the characters in the movie entitled “Begin Again” movie. The documentation method was applied in order to obtain the data. The process of collecting data was done by watching and reading the movie script among the characters of the movie several times. In the following is the step-by-step technique of how the data were collected.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the method of analyzing data, the descriptive qualitative-method was applied. The analyzed data applied the theories of characterization by Williem Kenney and psychological aspect by Karl Benhardt. There are several techniques used in this study to analyze the data as follows: The first step is describing the general of the situation, the second is analyzing the characterization and the psychological aspect in the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the method of characterization of the main character.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Dramatic Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This scene tells about Dan and also Greta who had just arrived at a studio where Dan was working. When they arrived, Dan asked Soul to listen to a song which Greta performed; however, Soul is not interested and asked them to make a demo and come</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">back to the studio with them. Dan is not discouraged; instead he comes up with brilliant ideas when he is at his down times. His idea is to make a demo with a very limited budget and also a location which is far from luxurious. And both of them decided to undertake the situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">produce it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yeah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No, I haven’t</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">produced in a long time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’ll get</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">somebody young to produce it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: No, but I want</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">you to do it </span><span class="font1">Dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Why?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Because I do</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: I will give you strings, but we need piano</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: &nbsp;&nbsp;Fill in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">guitars underneath.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the conversation above, it shows that Greta trusted Dan. She trusted him to produce her album and she wanted Dan to be a producer by saying “no, but I want you to do it”. This is also based on how Greta expressed it to Dan; she was smiling</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and walking casually beside Dan. It also concludes that she has trusted Dan. Greta also shows her effort to convince Dan with the phrase “because I do” in order Dan to be her producer for their upcoming album project.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Character on Other Character Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This scene tells about the first time when Greta met Dan in a bar in New York. Dan was very satisfied with Greta’s performance. Dan tried to persuade and offer partnership to her. However, it did not work because Greta assumed that Dan was a stranger who was drunk. A lot of things made Greta feel weird when she saw Dan’s untidy appearance and unpleasant odor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">That’s some song you got there</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: I promise you it could be a big hit</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: &nbsp;Plus, you’re</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">beautiful</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Sorry, what’s beauty got to do with anything</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the conversation above, it shows that Dan Mulligan says that Greta is a beautiful woman. In the first time they met, Dan found Greta was talented to be a famous singer. It is supported by the sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“That’s some song you got there” “I promise you it could be a big hit plus, you’re beautiful”</span><span class="font1">. Here Dan, as a secondary character, described Greta’s figure. He said Greta was a beautiful woman. A bit of flirting when he tried to persuade her to work together.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Psychological Aspect of The Main Character</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and Emotion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The second </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Feeling Emotion </span><span class="font1">told about Greta, when she felt stressed and sad when her ex-boyfriend had an affair with Mim. Her feeling was very broken and her mental was down. She was quiet and she was just looking to her laptop, then she booked a ticket to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">back to London. Because she felt so stress and she wanted to leave New York with many kinds of memory with Dave</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Steve : Please, won’t you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Come out with me tonight?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: I’m gonna play some songs</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Down at this open mic night</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Why don’t you come with me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Cause I hate your fucking songs </span><span class="font1">Steve : All right, I think we both know that, that isn’t true, so..</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sorry, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">didn’t..no</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: &nbsp;I love your</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">song, but I just...</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’m being</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">fucking horrendous right now</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Cause I hate your fucking songs</span><span class="font1">”. This sentence shows the Feeling</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">emotion from facial expression and the emotion of Greta when she said those words. This sentence tells if Greta has a problem with her life and she had lied to Steve by saying if she did not like the song that’s Steve wrote. Greta said if</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">she did not like Steve’s song, because at that moment Greta felt stressed and she wanted to leave New York.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The appetites</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This scene tells about Dan Mulligan and Greta when they succeeded releasing their album, Soul as a director approves her album to be released by his label. They were very happy because their demo was successful and they were proud of themselves and their friends because they made this album in limited cost. Then they were dreaming to make the new album and the video clips around the world and Greta wanted to invite Malcolm, Rachel and also Steve to join in her new project.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : Ah, you had them. You wound him up</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : I know. It’s amazing when you’re not actually</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: That interested, you always win hand. Dan : &nbsp;Yeah, that’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">never really worked out that well for me</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : You’re gonna get a deal</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: That as hole is gonna give you a deal, babe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: You might have to compromise a little bit but…</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Never</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : Of course</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">Hey, we should do a bunch of these</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : What do you mean?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Could do, like, the, uh…</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“The European Series</span><span class="font1">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : I like that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Paris tapes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Prague sessions”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Berlin...recordings” Greta : Yes</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : All over Europe by rail</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : We could take the whole gang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: &nbsp;You know?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rachel, Malcolm, Steve : So …</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan ; So..</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Look, I guess, I’ll see you in a while : Thank you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From their conversation, there was a wish from Greta to invite her friends to join with her in new project. A lot of ideas had shared and made them very interested to join in the new project that would be created next.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta also looked very enthusiastic with what she had achieved. She also knew what she would do in the future with more enthusiasm and patience.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>C. Want</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The third </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Want</span><span class="font1"> tells about Greta contacting Dan Mulligan to join his production house. They both met in a pub. Dan came to the pub and saw Greta performing a song called “A Step You Can Take Back”. Dan Mulligan loved the song, then he approached her after the performance to offer her a chance to join his label, but Greta rejected him because she thought he was a madman looking from the way he was dressed. Dan chased Greta until outside of the pub, there he asked Greta to re-think about her decision. Dan also told her about whom he was and the reason why his life had become like this, a bit of connection grew between them. Finally, Dan gave her his business card in case Greta changed her mind and decided to join with his label. After a couple of days, Greta contacted Dan and asked him to meet and discuss her future projects. Dan introduced Greta to his director straight away in the production house where Dan works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Unfortunately, both Dan and Greta got rejected because the director is not interested in her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Hey, were you serious last night</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: About signing me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : Who is this?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Really?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dan : I’m joking. Yeah, I was serious.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">:</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Hey, were you serious last night about signing me?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this sentence, we can see that Greta was interested in joining Dan Mulligan’s label. Where she said </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Hey, were you serious last night about signing me?”</span><span class="font1"> it is enough to conclude that she was interested in joining Dan’s company. Her would be to take the offer because she wanted to have an activity which could distract her from her problems, and also to find a tool so her abilities to write songs can be well channeled. After that she would like to express every song as she wanted from the lyrics and also the arrangements. From this moment Greta’s life became colorful ever since she met Dan Mulligan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The second </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Feeling Attitude</span><span class="font1">, Dave Kohl asked Greta to meet again after he received her song. They shared</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">their songs and Greta asked Dave to listen to her song. Dave was very happy with the outcome of her song. However, Greta felt disappointed when she listened the song, she wrote which was performed by Dave. She felt that it was very different from the one that she composed with Dave in the first place. The rhythm was faster than the original; it caused Greta to be unsatisfied with the song. But Dave had a different opinion; he thought that it was the best version. Greta disagreed and asked to Dave to change it to the original. And then Dave asked Greta to come to his event in Garmecy, where he would sing the song </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Lost Star”</span><span class="font1"> as per Greta’s request.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dave : All right, what do you think?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : I think I need to listen again</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dave : No. no I want… I want you immediate reaction</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;immediate</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">reaction?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dave : Mm-hmmm Greta </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Ok um... I … I think that you’ve lost the song</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: In production</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: You know? I mean, ok, take ‘LOST STAR”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: I wrote it as a...as a ballad, and… I don’t know,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: It sounds like a piece of stadium pop</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dave : Ooh. Yeah, but I wanted to turn into a hit</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Why?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dave : Why? What kind of question is that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: You’re the writer. You get sole writing credit on it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: This is for you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : Yeah but I mean,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: You weren’t supposed to lose the song in it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: You know? I mean, it’s… it’s delicate</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: I really… I just… I think you should get it remixed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Here we can see from Greta’s words “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ok um, I… I think that you’ve lost the song in production you know? I mean, ok, take “Lost Star” I wrote it as a… as a ballad, and… I don’t know, it sound like a stadium pop.”</span><span class="font1"> She took action by complaining to Dave who changed the song, because that song had become a pop song. Greta’s action was based by her disappointment towards the change of the song, and it was in a form of complaint to Dave. She also explained that the song was supposed to be a ballad, and she also felt that the chemistry of their relationship was erased by the change.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>E. Social motives</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This scene tells about when Greta and Dan got back from soul’s label after they made a negotiation about how to release Greta’s album.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta was very happy when she could show to soul if she could make this album more awesome. Then she was made surprised to Soul when he listened her album and soul very interested in signing Greta be a super star. She made this album with limited founds, limited tools and shooting on the street, on the bridge and also at rooftop a building. Greta also made this album with amateur musician so why Soul was amazed at the success of their album. Finally, Soul offered to let her release her album in his label.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Greta : So Dan : So Greta : Look I guess</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: I’ll see you in a while</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Thank you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This moment showed when Greta said </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“THANK YOU”</span><span class="font1"> to Dan Mulligan. She said sincerely from the heart, because at this moment of expression Greta concluded that Dan was very important for her life. The sentence already reflected all Greta feeling of gratitude toward Dan who always accompanied her in New York. All about life lessons are given by Dan to Greta. Now Greta is a strong woman and also women who are not easily discouraged. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Thank you”</span><span class="font1"> this sentence</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">also means a farewell to Greta and also the new life for both of them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Characterazation used dramatic method and character on character method. It is concluded that Greta was the main character of the movie. In dramatic method it is shown that Greta was a smart, care, and stubborn woman. In character on character method it is shown that Greta is a beautiful, smart woman, great song writer, good singer. This method is more lifelike and invites the audience’s active participation in a story. The audience can learn the character through the character’s gesture, physical appearance, costume and vocation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are five psychological aspects that describes Greta; they are feeling and emotion, appetites, want, feeling attitude` and social motives. The Feeling and Emotion aspects describe Greta as a heartfelt woman. Then, in the Appetites aspect Greta was described as a hopeful woman. Next, from the Want aspect Greta it can be seen that he was an ambitious person. Greta showed that she was an assertive person from the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Feeling Attitude aspect. Lastly, Social</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Motives concluded that Greta was a humble soul.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Arikunto, Suharsimi. 2006. Metodologi Penelitian. Yogyakarta: Bina Aksara</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Begin Again, Movie Script [internet].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Available from</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">http//www.springfield.co,uk/</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mov ie_script </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">[Accessed on 25, June,2016]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bernhardt, Kerl S. 1953. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font1">. Canada: Me Graw-Hill BookCompany</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hall, Calvin S. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Primer of Freudian psychology.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Harper Collins Publishers Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Haryati, Esther DwiJunia. 2011, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Main Chacracter in The Novel Suzanne’s Diary For Nicholas by James Patterson</span><span class="font1">, Denpasar UniversitaUdayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Journal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">psychoanalysis.</span><span class="font1"> 1928. “The Psychology of Character With a Survey of Temperament”, 1927. 9:493-497</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">. New York: Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">M, Sutrino A. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of The Main Character in Eoin Colifier’s Artemis Fowl</span><span class="font1">, Denpasar UniversitasUdayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Putri, Chandra Eka Sari. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Main Chacracter in Jules Verne’s Around The World in Eighty Days.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar UniversitasUdayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sukada, I Made. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Kayumas &amp;&nbsp;Yayasan Ilmu dan Seni Lesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1962. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">278</span></p>