---
layout: full_article
title: "The Acquisition of English by Bilingual Playgroup Students in Bali Kiddy School"
author: "Ni Kadek Sintya Purnama Dewi, A. A. Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 21.1 Nopember 2017: 77-83</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Acquisition of English by Bilingual Playgroup Students in Bali Kiddy School</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Kadek Sintya Purnama Dewi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:sintyapurnamadewi@gmail.com"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[</span><span class="font3">sintyapurnamadewi@gmail.com</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">]</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berfokus pada dua aspek, yaitu: (1)Akuisisi bahasa Inggris oleh siswa dua bahasa di Sekolah Bali Kiddy; dan (2)Faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi perolehan bahasa Inggris oleh siswa bahasa di Sekolah Bali Kiddy. Data tersebut diambil dari tiga anak dua bahasa dengan kebangsaan yang berbeda, yaitu Catherine Yvone Ann Beeck yang merupakan orang Australia, Nino Angelo Donato yang merupakan orang Perancis dan Keiran Andreas Hughesyang merupakan orang Inggris. Semuanya berbahasa Inggris. Pengumpulan data dilakukan di Sekolah National Plus, Sekolah Bali Kiddy. Penelitian lapangan dilakukan dari tanggal 14 Februari 2017 sampai 16 Maret 2017. Data dikumpulkan dengan observasi langsung (mencatat) dan wawancara yang dilakukan di kelas selama kegiatan kelas berlangsung. Instrumen yang digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data adalah kuesioner '(lihat lampiran) dan jawabannya dijawab oleh para guru. Data penelitian ini dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa (1)Pada usia tiga tahun, anak-anak mampu merangkai lebih dari tiga kata, kebanyakan adalah kata-kata tindakan dan kata-kata nominatif umum dan spesifik, menggunakan kata-kata fungsi kecil, kata penghubung, meniru kalimat yang sering didengar memiliki suku kata yang sederhana, dan memahami pesan kalimat; dan (2)Faktor yang paling dominan mempengaruhi perkembangan bahasa adalah lingkungan dan kemampuan dua bahasa mereka. Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa setiap anak memiliki perkembangan bahasa yang berbeda dalam menghasilkan kata-kata. Dorongan dan peniruan digunakan sebagai perangkat dalam perolehan kata-kata dan membantu anak mengingat kata-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kata yang telah dilupakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Bahasa, Bilingual, Playgroup.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Language is common to all humans; we seem to be programmed to know it. Language is the way to communicate to others. By using language, we can ask questions to others, introduce ourselves, greet people, express how we feel, our like and dislikes, agree with others, etc. We know at least one of language since we were born. When we know a language, we can speak and be understood by others who know the same language. “Wherever humans exist, language exists. Any normal children, born</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">anywhere in the world, of any racial, geographical, social, or economic heritage is cable of learning any language to which he or she is exposed.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Children usually want to participate in a conversation with people that surrounds them, even they aren’t able to speak well yet; they try hard to express their desire by using their body language or by crying. Their parents didn’t teach children how to walk as well as how to speak. “We are designed to walk... That we are taught to walk is impossible, and pretty much</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the same is true of language. Nobody is taught language. In fact, you can’t prevent the child from learning it.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study discuss about language acquisition as language development of 3 years old bilingual children, and the factors which affect their language development, while they study in Bali Kiddy School. It is interesting to observe the language acquisition of 3 years old children because of the process, starting from the babbling stage (children only said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ba, ba, ba,</span><span class="font3"> in this stage), until they can say a word, some words, and make a sentence, finally can say some sentences to others. It makes me appreciate the process. It is enticing to find out the factors affecting the language acquisition, from knowing the factors; it really gives influence in acquiring a language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the background above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the development of language acquisition of English by bilingual playgroup students in Bali Kiddy School?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors are affecting the acquisitions of English by bilingual playgroup students in Bali Kiddy School?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The general aim of this study is to apply the theory of first language acquisition and language development proposed by foreign linguists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The specific aims of this study can be formulated as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the development of language acquisition of English by bilingual playgroup students in Bali Kiddy School.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the factors affecting the acquisitions of English by</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">bilingual playgroup students in Bali Kiddy School.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The academic aim of this study is to give a good influence to the readers in comprehending children language development and can be a guide to do another research in the future.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study applied the method of field research in obtaining the required data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this study were taken from 3 students, they are: Catherine Yvone Ann Beeck, Nino Angelo Donato and Keiran Andreas Hughes. All of them are bilinguals who come from mixed marriage families and are around 3 years old. The students were chosen because they have good physiological condition and motor ability. The secondary data were taken from the teachers of the students.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Taking place in a National Plus School, Bali Kiddy, the field research was done for 3 times, starting from February 14<sup>th</sup>, 2017 as the first meeting, February 22<sup>nd</sup>, 2017 as the second meeting, and March 16<sup>th</sup>, 2017 as the last meeting. The data were collected through direct observation (note-taking) and interview done in the classroom during the class activities in order to collect the original data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The instrument used to collect the data was questionarie (see appendix 1) and it was answered by the teachers. First, the data were collected by observing the children and teachers in order to know the ability of the children to produce certain words. The children were observed while they were doing same activities in the same situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Then, the teachers were teaching like usual, speaking with the children and their conversations were observed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this research were analyzed &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;using the descriptive</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">qualitative method. The analysis started by classifying the language development of children, and then analyzing the factors which affected them. The data were analyzed using the theory of language development proposed by Victoria Fromkin et al. (2003), kinds of vocabulary proposed by Katherine Nelson (1973) and the factors &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;affecting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;vocabularies</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">development of children proposed by M. F. Berry and Eisenson J (1973).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting the Result of Data Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The descriptive qualitative method was used to present data analysis. The results of data analysis were presented based on two problems. 1. The results of data analysis of the first problem were shown through Grammar, Semantic and Vocabulary Development based on the theory of Victoria Fromkin et al. in her book entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Language</span><span class="font3"> in 2003, supported with the types of vocabulary spoken by the children in Bali Kiddy School; they were categorized based on the theory proposed by Katherine Nelson in 1973 in her book entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Structure and Strategy in Learning to Talk</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of the second problem was presented descriptively to show the factors affecting the children’s vocabulary development in Bali Kiddy School based on Berry, M. F.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">and Eisenson J. (1973) on their book entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Disorder Principles and Practice of Therapy</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language Development</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Nelson in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Structure and Strategy in Learning to Talk</span><span class="font3"> (1973), the category of how a child acquires language can be classified into 5 categories; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nouns</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: Words used to refer to the ‘world’. They may be used to label or demand, in ostensive reference or relations involving agent or object. Nouns can be divided into two; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font3">Specific Nouns</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: words used to refer to only one exemple of a category, whether a proper name, (i.e., a class with only one member), such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;People: miss, mommy, daddy</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Animals, valentine cat</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Objects: moving eyes, pink heart, white glue, pocket, present, flashcard, igloo, Lego</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font3">General Nouns</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: words used to refer to all members of this category whether child or adult defined, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Objects: bottle, bag, glue, tissue, class, star, sticker, present, tree, flower, trunk, root, glue, box, present, doll, ball, shoes, socks, car, piano, brush, table, board, meal, beans, sausage, egg, nugget, yellow rice</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substances: milk, water</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Animals and people: rabbit, dog, cat, iguana, insect, butterfly, student</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Letters and Numbers: i, 1, 2, 3, 4</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstractions: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;God,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">birthday</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronouns: we, you, that, this</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Action Words</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: &nbsp;&nbsp;words that describe,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">demand, or accompany action that express attention or demand for attention. They may be used for notice, locative, or action relations, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptive: go, bye-bye, eating</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Demand: put, open, drink,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Notice: look, bring, tap, tidy up, fly, jumping, running, sit, finish, falling</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modifiers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: &nbsp;&nbsp;words that refer to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">properties or qualities of things or events. They express recurrence, disappearance, attribution, location and possession, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Attributes: big, red, green, black, blue, white, yellow, pink, brown, 2. States: hot, dirty, good</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Locatives: there, outside, here</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Possessive: mine</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Social Words</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: words that express affective states and social relationships; these range from highly idiosyncratic to highly conventional (e.g., thank you). They do not express basic operations or relation, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Assertions: no, yes, yeah want, know, thank you, good morning</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social expressive: please, ouch, help</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function Words</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: words that fulfill a solely grammatical function, words relating to other words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Question words: what, where</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Miscellaneous functions: is, to for</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keiran’s Language Acquisition Process</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">At this age, Keiran is able to string more than three words and use a small function, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Don’t do that!”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“We put it here, here.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“You have to put this to here. Wheel, it is like a body.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Tap hand.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“My pocket can’t open.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Besides , he is also able to use a connecting word, for example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “This is my new</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">shoes.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Me &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Ah, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ya</span><span class="font3">. Who</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">buy it for you?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Mommy buy it</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kakung</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Me &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Why not with</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">your father?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Because my</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">father is were working.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He also imitates the sentences which are often heard and have simple syllables. For examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;“Let’s stop</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">playing, it’s time to tidy up!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Tidy up!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">By repeating the words, he will recall and learn the new words; therefore, they can answer the question correctly. For instance:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;(showing a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doll), “keiran, what do you call this?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “a duck.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Right, it’s a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">duck. A duck doll. It is a doll. So, what is it called?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “a doll.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran has a good stimulus from his teachers. He learns some new words by:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The use of an object as can be seen from the following dialog:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;(showing a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">picture of Igloo), “Keiran, do you know what is this?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran : “Hmm... a house?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Yes, it is. It is a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">house called Igloo. Do you know what is the color of Igloo?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran : “White…”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By singing and showing a picture.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to the teachers, by singing he can produce more than one words at once time and string it into a unity of meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By giving some clued, when he finds some difficulty in saying a word, for example:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita : “Do you know what is ink?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran : “I don’t know.” Miss Lita : “It is to fill the marker so we can use it to write on board. Can you say Iŋk?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran : “Iŋk.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita : “Iŋk.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keiran : “Iŋk.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">By giving a clue to Keiran, especially by giving a half part of the word and say it one by one to be followed it will help him remember the word which has been forgotten.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nino’s Language Acquisition Process</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Nino is a talkative student in the class since the first meeting. He is able to speak English, French, and Indonesian. He is able to string words and use the small function words. For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Ah! Look! Coconut tree!”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Where should I sit down?”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Not coming.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Sleeping at home.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Fly.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">He is also able to use a connecting word and he often says the sentences which he often hears, for example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Who feel sad</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">today?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(raised his</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">finger) “me…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “What happened</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to you, Nino?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;“Want slide</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">there.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He always imitates the sentences which are often heard and have simple syllables. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Take a bit.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Nino, say help</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">miss.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Help, miss.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Please take a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">bit.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Please take a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">bit.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Good, Nino.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">When he makes a sentence which is grammatically incomplete, the teachers will repeat the wrong sentence until it is correct. By repeating the word he will recall and learn it. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “I don’t talk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">much.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “You don’t talk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">too much?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nino &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Yes, don’t talk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">too much.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the example above, it can be seen when Nino said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">he doesn’t talk much</span><span class="font3">, but actually he does, and he didn’t use any article to describe his feelings completely.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Catherine’s &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Acquisition Process</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine is shy. She is able to speak English and Indonesian. She is able to string words and use small function words, but sometimes her words are not equal with her age, and impolite. For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Jumping! Jumping!”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“That’s mine.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I am running!”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Arra, I am coming!”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“This is disgusting!”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In adding vocabulary, the teachers used an object or picture to teach them. It can be seen from example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (Carry and show</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a duck doll), “What is this Catherine?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “a doll.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;“Ok, a doll.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">What kind of doll?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Don’t know.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “It is a duck.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “a duck?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Yes, a duck.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Besides, they also tell Catherine to pronoun the names of things on the picture that she has not probably seen yet. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Catherine,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">please see this picture. It is an agloo.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “An agloo? It is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a house.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miss Lita &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Yes, it is. An</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">agloo is like a house, but it made from ice.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From that dialog, it can be seen that the teachers always give good stimuli for the students, one by one, and the environments are very influencing in the language development to the children.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.2 The Factors Affecting the Vocabulary Development of the Children</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The children’s ability in acquiring the language is also affected by some external factors; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>3.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological Condition and Motor Ability</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">All of the children are in good health, there are not mentally retarded recorded. Hence, they are able to produce words or sentences without any difficulties. For example, the children with &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Poliomyelitis</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;will have</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">development delayed. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Poliomyelitis</span><span class="font3"> is a part of motor disorders resulting from</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the damage to the brain that occurs after birth because of virus.The damage of the child’s brain affects the motor system and physiological condition, and consequently the child has poor coordination, poor balance, or abnormal movement pattern – or a combination of these characteristics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>3.3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intelligence</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Catherine, Nino and Keiran are normal children and have a good mental development. More intelligent children have richer vocabulary and in general a control of language which is superior over those who are normal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>3.3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Economic Status</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The children whose parents who are in the professional and managerial classes are exposed to a better language influence at home and in their general environment than the children whose parents in the semiskilled and unskilled (Berry and Eisenson, 1973). Catherine, Nino and Keiran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;come from</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">professional and managerial classes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>3.3.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sex</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Berry and Eisenson (1973), girls begin talking at an earlier age than boys, and the extent of the vocabulary of girls is greater than that of boys. The girl can more closely approximate the vocal tone of the mother than the boy can . The abilities of all the subjects are equal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>3.3.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Environment</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is the one of the most important factors because the children spend most of their time with their families and friends. For example, Nino has been in Miss Lita’s class for the second year, that is, why he is able to speak louder and is more confident than other students when answering questions or giving his opinion, can speak more fluently than others, and sing more song lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>3.3.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bilingualism</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Bilingualism affects the children language’s ability and all of the subjects are bilinguals. For example, Keiran said, “Mommy buy for me with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kakung</span><span class="font3">”, it proved that he is able to master more than one language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">It can be concluded that the development of language acquisition in acquiring English is equal enough for children. In this age, the students are able to string more than three words; use small function words; use connecting words; follow the sentences which are often heard and have simple syllables; understand the message of the sentences. The type of vocabulary that the students mostly first acquire is nouns, both general and specific nouns, followed by action words. Imitation and reinforcement are used as devices for acquiring words and helping them remember the vocabulary that have been forgotten. They are able to make good sentences, although sometimes they forget to put auxiliary verbs or an articles. The most dominant factors that affect the development of the acquisition of English vocabulary are their environment and bilingualism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Berry, M. F. and Eisenson J. (1973). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Disorder Principles and Practice of Therapy</span><span class="font3">. USA. Appleton-Cantury-Crofts, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chomsky, Noam. (1968). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Mind</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;USA. Harcourt Brace</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jovanovich, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Crystal, David. (1978). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Child Language, Learning and Linguistics</span><span class="font3">. London. Edward Arnold, Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fromkin, Victoria et al. (2003) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Language</span><span class="font3">. United States. Wadsworth, a part of Thomson Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hetherington, Eileen Mavis et al. (2006) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Child Psychology</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ingram, David. (1999) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">First Language Acquisition: Method, Description and Explanation</span><span class="font3">. Great Britain. Athenaeum Press Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nelson, Katherine. (1973) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Structure and Strategy in Learning to Talk</span><span class="font3">. USA. University of Chicago Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Strohner, H. and Nelson, K. E. (1974) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Young Child’s Development of Sentence Comprehension: influence of event probability, nonverbal context, syntactic form and &nbsp;strategies</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;Paris. United</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">83</span></p>