---
layout: full_article
title: "Photography Terms In Understanding Exposure And Their Translations"
author: "Ronald Umbas"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-34664 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-34664"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-34664"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol. 24. No. 46</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Photography Terms In </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Exposure</span><span class="font4"> And Their Translations Into Indonesian</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ronald Umbas</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Email:</span><a href="mailto:octonew74@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">octonew74@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sekolah Tinggi Pariwisata Bali Internasional</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font3">—This article aims to analyze the translation procedures adopted in translating photography terms from English into Indonesian. The data were taken from the book entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Photography</span><span class="font3"> (Peterson, 2010) and its Indonesian version </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pintar Eksposur </span><span class="font3">(Andwiani, 2013). The data in this qualitative research were collected using note-taking technique. The analyzed data were presented informally and formally. The theory used to analyze the problems and what procedures were applied in translating photography terms from English into Indonesians and why those procedures were applied were the theory and procedures proposed by Newmark (1988) who presented eighteen translation procedures. There were five translation procedures applied in translating the photography terms including the literal, transference, naturalization, functional equivalent, and couplet procedures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">translation procedures, photography terms</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font3">—Artikel ini bertujuan untuk menelaah prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan untuk menerjemahkan istilah fotografi dari bahasa Inggris ke bahasa Indonesia. Data diambil dari buku berjudul </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Photography</span><span class="font3"> (Peterson, 2010) dan versi bahasa Indonesianya yang berjudul </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pintar Eksposur</span><span class="font3"> (Andwiani, 2013). Teknik pengamatan dalam metode penelitian kualitatif yang dilakukan dalam studi ini disertai dengan pencatatan. Data yang ditelaah kemudian disajikan secara tidak formal dan formal. Teori yang digunakan untuk menelaah masalah, prosedur apa yang digunakan dalam menerjemahkan istilah fotografi dari bahasa Inggris ke bahasa Indonesia dan mengapa prosedur tersebut digunakan, adalah teori yang diusulkan oleh Newmark (1988) yang mengemukakan delapan belas prosedur penerjemahan. Ada lima prosedur penerjemahan yang diterapkan dalam menerjemahkan istilah fotografi. Prosedur terjemahan tersebut adalah </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">literal</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">transference</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">naturalization</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">functional equivalent</span><span class="font3">, dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">couplet</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">prosedur penerjemahan, istilah fotografi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Translation enables dissemination of information to a wider reading society because this intellectual activity links different languages by rendering the meaning from a source language text into a target language text. It is an operation performed on languages: a process of substituting a text in one language for a text in another (Catford, 1965:1). Larson (1984:3), more specifically defines translation as a change of form from the SL to the TL but in such change the meaning is kept. Vinay and Dalbernet (in Venuti, 2000) divides translation into two major categories namely direct or literal translation and oblique translation. The former tends to give a chance for the translator to transfer the flavor of foreign terms while the latter offers an opportunity to be closer to the target language values. In this way, translation contributes to the transmission of knowledge from different fields of study, ranging from natural sciences to social sciences with their specific terms. Through translation of specific terms in different fields of study, people are helped to cope with the communication problems due to language barriers, and, at the same time, they can also learn new things from the specific concepts that the terms carry. In the case of English-Indonesian translation, many terms are not always easily translated due to different points of view and different language systems in which the terms are used. English has many words that express the concepts in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">different fields of study such as sociology, sports, politics, technology, etc. The native speakers of English as the source language (SL) and of Indonesian as the target language (TL) have different points of view on such fields due to different cultural backgrounds. The different points of view of expressing various concepts in many fields make the translation from English into Indonesian a challenging task.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The challenges of transferring the message from one language to another may then be overcome through some procedures of translation. In this study, the translation of the English photography terms into Indonesian are analyzed based on the procedures of translation proposed by Newmark (1988:81-93), which comprise literal, transference, naturalization, cultural equivalent, functional equivalent, descriptive equivalent, synonymy, through-translation, shift, modulation, recognized translation, translation label, compensation, reduction and expansion, paraphrase, couplets, notes, and componential analysis. Photography popularity itself keeps rising. This results from the improved photography technology and various social media which consecutively makes people find it easier to take pictures and provide various spaces to share the pictures they have taken. Quality and exquisiteness of the pictures taken depend on the artistic sense of the people who take the pictures employing the appropriate techniques. The photography terms in the book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Exposure</span><span class="font3"> share those techniques and how those terms are translated into the terms found in the book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pintar Eksposur</span><span class="font3"> may affect the target readers’ understanding of the terms, and the degree of their understanding of the terms which lead to their photography skill. Based on the matters mentioned above, the aim of this research is, then, to analyze the techniques applied in translating English photography terms into Indonesian. The analysis is done to answer the research questions which include; 1) what procedures are applied in translating photography terms from English into Indonesians and 2) why those procedures are applied in translating photography terms from English into Indonesians. By these procedures, the translation could more be easily understood by the TL readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are some benefits that hopefully can be obtained by conducting this research, namely to give contribution to knowledge of the application of translation theory, and, therefore, would be beneficial to the translation studies, to be useful as a reference for the translators, particularly to those who are interested in the translation of technical terms whereby to overcome the challenges faced when handling translation tasks, and to give contribution to Indonesian people who are interested or working in the field of photography.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In doing a translation task as an intellectual activity, a translator needs to apply several appropriate procedures in order to render the source language message naturally and accurately. Many linguists have their own terms in naming the procedures applied by a translator. According to Newmark (1988:5), translation is rendering the meaning of a text into another language in the way that the author intended the text. The following are the different translation procedures that Newmark (1988) proposes:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal translation: it is when an SL word is translated into a TL word literally; it is the procedure from which translation starts (Newmark, 1988:69).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transference: it is the process of transferring an SL word to a TL text. It includes transliteration, which relates to the conversion to different alphabets. The translated word then becomes a ‘loan word’ e.g. French coup d’état, décor into English.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naturalization: it adapts the SL word first to the normal pronunciation, then to the normal morphology (word-forms) of the TL (Newmark, 1988:82).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural equivalent: This is an approximate translation where an SL cultural word is translated into a TL cultural word (Newmark, 1988:83).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Functional equivalent: This common procedure is applied to cultural words, requires the use of a cultural free word, sometimes with a new specific term; it, therefore, neutralizes or generalizes the SL word.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptive equivalent: in this procedure an SL word is translated into description in TL e.g. Japanese Samurai is described as ‘the Japanese aristocracy from the eleventh to the nineteenth century’; its function was ‘to provide officers and administrators’.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonymy: the word ‘synonym’ is used in the sense of a near TL equivalent to an SL word in a context, where a precise equivalent may or may not exist e.g. French personne gentile into English kind person, French conte piquant into English ‘racy story’ (Newmark, 1988:84).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Through-translation: it is the literal translation of common collocations, names of organizations and components of compounds e.g. English ‘Superman’ into German Ūbermensch.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shifts or transpositions: it involves a change in the grammar from SL to TL. Newmark(1988:85-87)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation: it occurs when the translator reproduces the message of the original text in the TL text in conformity with the current norms of the TL, since the SL and the TL may appear dissimilar in terms of perspective (Newmark, 1988:88).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Recognized translation: it occurs when the translator &quot;normally uses the official or the generally accepted translation of any institutional term.&quot; (Newmark, 1988:89).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation Label: it is a provisional translation, usually of a new institutional term, which should be made in inverted commas, which can later be discreetly withdrawn.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compensation: it occurs when loss of meaning in one part of a sentence is compensated in another part (Newmark, 1988:90).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reduction and Expansion: These procedures can be practiced intuitively in some cases, ad hoc in others. However, for each there is at least one shift which we may bear in mind (Newmark, 1988:90).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paraphrase: This is an amplification or explanation of the meaning of a segment of the text. It is used in an ‘anonymous’ text when it is poorly written, or has important implications and omissions (Newmark, 1988:90).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Couplets: it occurs when the translator combines two (couplets), three (triplets), or four (quadruplets) different procedures (Newmark, 1988:91).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Notes, Additions, Glosses: notes are additional information in a translation (Newmark, 1988:91).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Componential Analysis: comparing an SL word with a TL word which has a similar meaning, but is not an obvious one-to-one equivalent, by demonstrating first their common and then their differing sense components.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data analyzed in this research are the English photography terms taken from the book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Exposure</span><span class="font3"> (Peterson: 2010) and their translations into Indonesian in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pintar Eksposur </span><span class="font3">(Andwiani: 2013). In undertaking a scientific study, two types of data are usually involved namely primary and secondary data. The primary data used in this research are 76 English photography terms. The English terms and their translations are in the forms of words and phrases. The secondary data include supporting data that are of use to elaborate the analyses like the references that show how the translation of technical terms is made, and the findings of previous similar research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Library research is central to this study. It is, according to Semi (1993:8), a study that is undertaken in the library, where the researcher collects the data and information from the sources in the forms of books under concern. Since the data used were taken from documents or printed texts this research belongs to the type of library research. The method of collecting the data in this study</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">is observation as proposed by Sudaryanto (1988:1-37). This method is implemented by reading the texts and doing necessary note-taking to collect the relevant data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The collected data were analyzed using qualitative method proposed by Djajasudarma (1993). In her book, she argues “qualitative method becomes the starting point of qualitative research that emphasizes the quality of original data according to descriptive understanding.” The data obtained were, then, read and classified based on the procedures of translation proposed by Newmark (1988:81-93). The data were classified guided by the translation procedures which were relevant for that purpose. The results of the analysis are presented informally and formally proposed by Sudaryanto (1993:145). The analysis is presented descriptively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This section presents the results and discussion on the procedures applied by the translator in translating 76 English photography terms into Indonesian found in the book entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Exposure</span><span class="font3"> and its Indonesian version </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pintar Exposure</span><span class="font3">. Based on Newmark’s procedures of translation utilized in this study, several classifications can be made concerning the transfer of meaning from SL to TL. After comprehending the characteristics of each procedure covering how linguistic units are translated from SL to TL as proposed by Newmark, the identification is possibly made in three categories namely (1) the application of one translation procedure, (2) the use of two translation procedures which are, actually, the combination of two procedures of translation that is called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">couplets</span><span class="font3">, (3) the application of three translation procedures in translating a photography term in the form of either words or phrases and (4) the utilization of quadruplet which is the mixed of four translation procedures. Each classification is further discussed completely in the following section.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, one translation procedure in the following discussion demonstrates the translator’s choice in transferring meaning of the English photography terms into Indonesian. The special feature of one translation procedure found in this study is that the translator does not need to translate the English photography terms through the combination of two or more procedures based on Newmark’s procedures of translation. One procedure utilized by the translator in this translation is literal procedure, transference, naturalization, and functional equivalent. After classifying the English terms and their Indonesian versions, it is found that 31 terms are translated by means of one translation procedure; (1) 2 terms are translated through literal procedure, (2) 10 terms are simply transferred by applying transference, (3) 10 terms are naturally translated using naturalization, and (4) 9 terms and their translations show the application of functional equivalent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, the combination of two translation procedures that is called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">couplets</span><span class="font3"> in this study involves three categories i.e. (1) literal procedure and shift, (2) transference and shift, and (3) naturalization and shift. Interesting enough, shift is always used in the combination whether it goes with literal procedure, transference or naturalization. This phenomenon occurs since shift is defined by Newmark (1988:85-87) as the translation procedure which involves a change in the grammar. Having investigated the translation of English-Indonesian photography terms, shift is combined with the other three procedures like literal procedure, transference and naturalization because there is a change in structure shown in the translation products, that is, the different grammar in SL terms and TL terms. As a detailed presentation, the three </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">couplets</span><span class="font3"> found in this study is (1) 15 terms are translated by means of literal procedure and shift, (2) 2 terms are transferred through transference and shift, and (3) 4 terms are translated by the application of naturalization and shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Third, the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">triplets</span><span class="font3"> which is the term used to represent the mixed use of three translation procedures in the present study can be narrowed down into several categories involving the combination of (1) literal procedure, transference and shift as found in the translation of 1 photography term, (2) literal procedure, functional equivalent, shift represented by the translation of 2 terms, (3) literal procedure, naturalization, shift as demonstrated in the translation of 8 terms, (4) </span><span class="font0">100</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">transference, functional equivalent, and shift which is shown in the translation of only 1 term, (5) naturalization, expansion and shift that is reflected in the translation of 4 terms, (6) naturalization, functional equivalent, shift as found in the translation of 3 terms, and (7) naturalization, transference and shift which is presented in the translation of 4 terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Finally, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">quadruplet</span><span class="font3"> that is found in the classification shows the combination of literal procedure, transference, naturalization and shift. Of the 76 English photography terms, only 1 term is translated through the quadruplet procedure. The English photography terms which are translated into Indonesian are in the forms of words and phrases. Of the eighteen translation procedures proposed by Newmark, only five were applied by the translator to translate the terms in the book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Exposure</span><span class="font3">. Each of the applied procedure could be presented in the following discussion.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>The Literal Procedure</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Newmark (1988:69) defines literal procedure as a procedure of translation when an SL word or phrase is translated into a TL word or phrase literally. It is the procedure most commonly resorted to at the commencement of translation process. The following data exemplify this procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : &nbsp;&nbsp;More often than not, to </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">freeze motion </span><span class="font3">effectively you must use fast shutter speeds (p. 84).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Seringnya, untuk </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">membekukan gerakan </span><span class="font3">secara efektif, Anda harus menggunakan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">shutter speed</span><span class="font3"> cepat (p. 90).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one-to-one translation in which the SL words – </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freeze</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">motion</span><span class="font3"> – are individually translated into the TL equivalent words. Here, the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freeze</span><span class="font3"> is literally translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">membekukan</span><span class="font3">. According to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3"> the SL verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freeze</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">stop</span><span class="font3"> (a moving image) at a particular frame when filming or viewing, and its equivalent counterpart the TL verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">membekukan</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">menjadikan beku</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dalam berbagai arti</span><span class="font3">) (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). The verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">membekukan</span><span class="font3"> is derived from the adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beku</span><span class="font3">, which means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tidak mengalami perubahan</span><span class="font3">; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kaku</span><span class="font3">; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">statis</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">) and, in the TL sentence, it must be added with the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">me-</span><span class="font3"> and the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–kan</span><span class="font3"> to function as a verb. As clearly seen, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beku</span><span class="font3"> is initiated with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">b</span><span class="font3">, the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">me-</span><span class="font3"> is then added with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">m</span><span class="font3">, then the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mem-</span><span class="font3"> occurs. In the TL structure, if the word begins with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">b, p</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font3">, the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mem-</span><span class="font3"> occurs (Sneddon 1996: 9). This </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">me-…-kan</span><span class="font3"> derivation system of the TL has a causative meaning; the object is caused to have the characteristic as indicated by the adjective base (Sneddon 2000: 29). Thus the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">membekukan</span><span class="font3"> causes the object </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gerakan</span><span class="font3"> to have the characteristic of the adjective base </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beku</span><span class="font3">. The object </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gerakan</span><span class="font3"> now has such characteristics as rigid and static.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The TL noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gerakan</span><span class="font3"> is the equivalent counterpart of the SL noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">motion</span><span class="font3">. The meaning of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">motion</span><span class="font3"> is the action or process of moving or being moved (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">) and the meaning of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gerakan</span><span class="font3"> is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">perbuatan atau keadaan bergerak</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). Based on the definition of the TL and SL words above, it is seen that the SL verb phrase is translated to the TL verb phrase and the meaning of the SL verb phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freeze motion</span><span class="font3"> is literally translated into the TL verb phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">membekukan gerakan</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">The Transference Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Transference is the process of transferring an SL word or phrase into a TL text. It includes transliteration, which relates to the conversion to different alphabets (Newmark, 1988:81). This could be exemplified with the following data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : And when the available light wasn’t enough, they’d resort to using flash or a </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tripod </span><span class="font3">(p. 14). TL : Dan ketika cahaya yang tersedia tidaklah cukup, mereka terpaksa menggunakan lampu flash atau </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tripod </span><span class="font3">(p. 18).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tripod</span><span class="font3"> is transferred to the TL by the translator. There are pronunciation adaptations for respective part of the term. The part </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tri</span><span class="font3"> that is originally pronounced /trʌɪ/ in the SL, is pronounced /tri/ in the TL and the part </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pod</span><span class="font3"> that is pronounced /pɒd/ in the SL, is pronounced /pod/ in the TL. Word form adaptation, however, as one element in naturalization procedure, is not found in this translation. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tripod</span><span class="font3"> is a three-legged stand used for supporting a camera or other apparatus (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">) and the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tripod</span><span class="font3"> is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">penyangga mesin bor (kamera dsb) yg terdiri atas tiga buah kaki berbentuk batang</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>The Naturalization Procedure</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">It adapts the SL word first to the normal pronunciation, then to the normal morphology (word-forms) of the TL (Newmark, 1988:82). This procedure could be exemplified by the following data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Still, I’m pleased to say that the formula (or what I call the Photographic Triangle) for successful </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">exposure </span><span class="font3">has not changed one iota since the inception of photography (p. 8).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Namun, saya senang untuk menyampaikan bahwa (atau apa yang saya sebut ‘segitiga fotografis’) untuk menghasilkan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">eksposur </span><span class="font3">yang baik tidak berubah sedikitpun sejak awal mula dunia fotografi berdiri (p. 10).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">exposure</span><span class="font3"> is adapted to pronunciation and word form of the TL. First, the first syllable of the SL word that consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">x</span><span class="font3"> is pronounced /ɪk/. In the TL it is pronounced /éks/ which consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font3">, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font3">. Second, the last syllable of the SL word that consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">s, u, r,</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font3"> is pronounced /Ʒə/. In the TL it is pronounced /sur/ which consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">u</span><span class="font3">, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">r</span><span class="font3">. Based on this adaptation the SL word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">exposure</span><span class="font3"> is naturalized to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">eksposur</span><span class="font3"> in the TL. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">exposure</span><span class="font3"> means the quantity of light reaching a photographic film, as determined by shutter speed and lens aperture (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). The TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">eksposur</span><span class="font3"> is sebuah proses penangkapan cahaya yang lebih jauhnya dapat menentukan kualitas suatu hasil foto dari segi pencahayaanya (Rosdiyana, 2010)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The Functional Equivalent Procedure</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This common procedure, applied to cultural words, requires the use of a culture free word, sometimes with a new specific term; it, therefore, neutralizes or generalizes the SL word. This procedure is also used when an SL technical word has no TL equivalent (Newmark, 1988:83). This could be exemplified by the following data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : ….to ensure the maximum </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">depth of field</span><span class="font3">, and then I simply adjusted my shutter speed until 1/100 sec (p. 16).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : ….untuk memastikan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ruang tajam </span><span class="font3">maksimal, dan kemudian saya sesuaikan shutter speed sampai 1/100 detik (p. 21).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Depth of field</span><span class="font3"> refers to the range of distance that appears acceptably sharp (McHugh, 2005). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ruang tajam</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">area ketajaman atau fokus yang ada di dalam foto</span><span class="font3"> (Piskha, 2013). From the definition of the SL term and the TL terms above, it is seen that the meaning of the TL term is equivalent with the meaning of the SL term. It is not word for word translation as the TL equivalent words cannot be used to express the meaning carried by the photography term </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">depth of field</span><span class="font3">. The meaning of the SL noun phrase is transferred to the TL, and a new specific term </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ruang tajam</span><span class="font3"> is produced to transfer the meaning.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>The Couplets Procedure</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Couplets occurs when the translator combines two (couplets), three (triplets), or four (quadruplets) different procedures (Newmark, 1988:91). The following data exemplify this procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Combination of Two Translation Procedures (Literal and Shift).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Then, press the DOF </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">preview button </span><span class="font3">while looking through the viewfinder (p. 58).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Kemudian, tekan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tombol pratinjau </span><span class="font3">Dof sambil tetap melihat melalui jendela bidik (p.64).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">preview</span><span class="font3"> means an opportunity to view something before it is acquired or becomes generally available (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). It is literally translated into the TL equivalent word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pratinjau</span><span class="font3"> which means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tinjauan pendahuluan</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">preview </span><span class="font3">that functions as a modifier precedes the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">button</span><span class="font3"> in the SL while its equivalent counterpart the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pratinjau</span><span class="font3"> that also functions as a modifier is preceded by the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tombol</span><span class="font3">. This shift occurs because the TL structure requires modifier to be preceded by head. Newmark (1988: 85) argues that shift occurs when SL grammatical structure does not exist in the TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">button</span><span class="font3"> which means a small device on a piece of electrical or electronic equipment which is pressed to operate it (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">) is literally translated into the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tombol</span><span class="font3"> which means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">alat</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">knop</span><span class="font3">) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pada mesin dan sebagainya</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">yang gerak tekan atau gerak tariknya dapat menjalankan, menghentikan, atau mengubah gerak pada mesin</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Combination of Three Translation Procedures (Literal, Transference, Shift)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Use your camera’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">manual settings </span><span class="font3">(bottom)…….(p. 14).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Gunakan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">setelan manual </span><span class="font3">kamera Anda (bawah)…….. (p. 19).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manual</span><span class="font3"> in the SL pronounced as /manjʊəl/ is transferred to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manua</span><span class="font3">l in the TL that sounds /manual/. Phonetic adaptation occurs but spelling adaptation is not seen. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manual </span><span class="font3">means (of a device) operated or controlled by hand, rather than automatically or electronically (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). The TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manual</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dilakukan dengan tangan</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). Second, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">settings</span><span class="font3"> is translated literally into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">setelan</span><span class="font3">. Setting means a speed, height, or temperature at which a machine or device can be adjusted to operate (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Setelan</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">hasil menyetel; cara menyetel</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). Third, there are two shifts that occur. In the TL, instead of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manual setelan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">setelan manual</span><span class="font3"> occurs in that the TL head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">setelan</span><span class="font3"> precedes the TL modifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">manual</span><span class="font3">. In the TL, head precedes modifier while in the SL, </span><span class="font0">103</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">head is preceded by modifier. Another shift is the SL plural </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">settings</span><span class="font3"> that is shifted to the TL singular </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">setelan</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Manual settings</span><span class="font3"> can be translated into the reduplication </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">setelan-setelan manual</span><span class="font3"> but it sounds unnatural or odd, in this context. Newmark (1988:86) argues “literal translation is grammatically possible but may not accord with natural usage in the TL”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Combination of Four Translation Procedures (Literal, Transference, Naturalization, Shift)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Whether you shoot with a Minolta, Olympus, Pentax, Nikon, Sony, or Canon </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fixed</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">lens digital camera</span><span class="font3">,…… (p. 54).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Kalau Anda menggunakan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">kamera digital berlensa tetap</span><span class="font3">, apakah itu Minolta, Olympus, Pentax, Nikon, Sony, atau Canon,……. (p. 60).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fixed</span><span class="font3"> is literally translated into the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tetap</span><span class="font3">. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fixed</span><span class="font3"> means (especially of a price, rate, or time) predetermined and not able to be changed (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). The TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tetap</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tidak berubah</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keadaannya, kedudukannya, dan sebagainya</span><span class="font3">). The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lens</span><span class="font3"> is naturalized to the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lensa</span><span class="font3">. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lens</span><span class="font3"> that consists of one syllable is adapted to two syllables in the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lensa</span><span class="font3">. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lens</span><span class="font3"> that consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">l, e, n</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font3"> is pronounced /lɛnz/. In the TL, it is pronounced /lénsa/ in which the first syllable </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">len</span><span class="font3"> consists of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">l, e,</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">n</span><span class="font3">. The sound /z/ that is part of the first syllable in the SL is adapted to the sound /s/ in the second part of the TL word. The sound /s/ is then added with the sound /a/ to make the second syllable /sa/ in the TL. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lens</span><span class="font3"> means a piece of glass or other transparent material with curved sides for concentrating or dispersing light rays, used singly (as in a magnifying glass) or with other lenses (as in a telescope) (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">) and the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lensa</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kaca bulat melengkung</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti kaca pembesar, kaca potret</span><span class="font3">) (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3"> is transferred to the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3">. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3"> means (of signal or data) expressed as series of the digits 0 and 1, typically represented by values of a physical quantity such as voltage or magnetic polarization (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">). In the TL, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berhubungan dengan angka-angka untuk system perhitungan tertentu; berhubungan dengan penomoran</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">). Phonetic adaptation occurs from /dɪdƷɪtəl/ in the SL to /digital/ in the TL but there seems no spelling adaptation that is required for the naturalization procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">camera</span><span class="font3"> is naturalized to the normal pronunciation and word form of the TL. The first syllable of the SL word that consists of the orthography </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">c, a,</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">m</span><span class="font3">, and pronounced /kam/ is, in the TL, pronounced /ka/ which consists of the orthography </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">k</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font3">. The letter ‘m’ in the SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">camera</span><span class="font3"> is placed in the first syllable while in the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera</span><span class="font3">, it is placed in the second syllable. The second syllable of the TL is, then, pronounced /mé/ which consists of the orthography </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">m</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font3">. In this case, one syllable in the SL is naturalized to two syllables in the TL. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">camera</span><span class="font3">, which sounds /kam(ə)rə/, is naturalized to the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera</span><span class="font3">, which sounds /kaméra/. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Camera</span><span class="font3"> is a device for recording visual images in the form of photographs, film, or video signals (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries</span><span class="font3">) while </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera</span><span class="font3"> is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kotak kedap sinar yang dipasang dengan lensa yang menyambung pada lubang lensa tempat gambar</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">objek</span><span class="font3">) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">yang direkam dengan alat yang pekat cahaya</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two types of shift that are applied in this translation. First, the shift that is caused by the different structures between SL and TL. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital camera</span><span class="font3"> is shifted to the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera digital</span><span class="font3">. Here, in the SL, the modifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3"> precedes the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">camera</span><span class="font3"> it modifies while in the TL the modifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital</span><span class="font3"> is preceded by the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera</span><span class="font3"> it modifies. The SL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fixed lens digital camera</span><span class="font3"> is shifted to the TL </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera digital berlensa tetap</span><span class="font3">. The modifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fixed-lens</span><span class="font3"> precedes the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">digital camera</span><span class="font3"> it modifies while in the TL the modifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berlensa tetap</span><span class="font3"> is preceded by the head </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera digital</span><span class="font3"> it modifies. Second, the shift that is applied as the natural usage in the TL. The SL adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fixed-lens</span><span class="font3"> is shifted to the TL verb phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berlensa tetap</span><span class="font3"> instead of the TL noun phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lensa tetap</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamera digital berlensa tetap</span><span class="font3"> sounds more natural to the TL readers than </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kamera digital lensa tetap</span><span class="font3"> does. The prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ber-</span><span class="font3"> in the TL functions as a verb-forming prefix transforming the noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lensa </span><span class="font3">to the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berlensa</span><span class="font3">. The TL verb phrase, then, implies that the camera has a fixed lens as also implied by the SL adjective.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the discussion presented above, this study reveals that, in the translation of the photography terms from English to Indonesian, there are two categories of translation procedures applied by the translator, i.e., single translation procedure – literal, transference, naturalization, cultural equivalent – and combined translation procedures – couplets, triplets, quadruplets. While the percentage of single translation procedure application reaches up to 40.23%, combined translation procedures application covers 59.77%, resulting from the fact that the photography terms are mostly phrases in which most of the SL words must be each translated through different procedures. In the application of the combined procedures of translation, shift – the procedure that keeps the TL values – always occurs. Newmark (1988:85-87) proposes four types of shift; they are are; 1) the change from singular to plural, 2) SL grammatical structure does not exist in the TL, 3) literal translation is grammatically possible but may not accord with natural usage in the TL, and 4) the replacement of a virtual lexical gap by a grammatical structure. All of the types of shift mentioned above are applied by the translator in this translation. The shift that occurs the most is the second type of the shift, which is the SL grammatical structure that does not exist in the TL. In this matter, the modifier-preceding-head structure of the SL does not exist in the TL. Conversely, in the TL, head-preceding-modifier structure exists. This occurrence of the second type of the shift relates very closely to the phrases that dominate the photography terms in this matter. This is due to different language systems between English and Indonesian and naturalization of translation that must be established for TL readers. The five procedures are applied in order to reach accuracy and naturalness of the translation to the TL readers.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Catford, J.C. 1965. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Djajasudarma, T.F. 1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik: Ancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian 2nd edition</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bandung: Eresco.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S. 2015. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford: Oxford University Press. </span><a href="http://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/"><span class="font3">http://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/</span></a><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Larson, M.L. 1984. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence</span><span class="font3">. New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">McHugh, S. 2005. “Tutorials: &nbsp;&nbsp;Depth of Field” viewed 15 May 2014.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.cambridgeincolour.com"><span class="font3">http://www.cambridgeincolour.com</span></a><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Text Book of Translation</span><span class="font3">. London: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Piskha, A. 2013. “Mengenal Depth of Field Dalam Fotografi” viewed 15 May 2014. </span><a href="http://www.infotografi.com"><span class="font3">http://www.infotografi.com</span></a><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sugono. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font3"> Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rosdiyana. 2010. “Sekilas Tentang Pengaturan Eksposur” viewed 15 May 2014. </span><a href="https://rosdiyana.wordpress.com/"><span class="font3">https://rosdiyana.wordpress.com.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semi, A. 1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Sastra</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sneddon, J.N. 1996. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian Reference Grammar</span><span class="font3">. New South Wales: Allen &amp;&nbsp;Unwin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sneddon, J.N. 2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Indonesian Grammar</span><span class="font3">. New South Wales: Allen &amp;&nbsp;Unwin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudaryanto. 1988. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bagian Kedua: Metode dan Aneka Teknik Pengumpulan Data</span><span class="font3">). Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Data</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguis</span><span class="font3">) Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vinay, J.P &amp;&nbsp;Dalbernet, J. 2000. A Methodology for Translation. In: Venuti, J.L., editors </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font3">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">106</span></p>