---
layout: full_article
title: "Green Tourism Development as Community Empowerment Efforts in Pemuteran Village, Buleleng, Bali"
author: "I Ketut Suwena, Ni Ketut Arismayanti"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33377 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33377"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33377"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">108</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">GREEN TOURISM DEVELOPMENT AS COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT EFFORTS IN PEMUTERAN VILLAGE, BULELENG, BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Ketut Suwena<sup>1</sup>, Ni Ketut Arismayanti<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism Faculty, Udayana University<sup>1</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism Faculty, Udayana University<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:suwena_ketut@yahoo.co.id1"><span class="font2">suwena_ketut@yahoo.co.id<sup>1</sup></span></a><span class="font2">; </span><a href="mailto:arismayanti_pariwisata@unud.ac.id2"><span class="font2">arismayanti_pariwisata@unud.ac.id<sup>2</sup></span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font2">Pemuteran has tourism potential and stunning natural beauty. Pemuteran village communities have not been involved in tourism activities resulting maximum untapped tourist potential to the maximum, limited opportunity society are involved in tourism development, and creativity in tourism in the village. This research is objective to maximize the role of the community in various aspects of tourism development. The development of tourism is expected to: (1) empowering local communities; (2) diversification of rural tourism products; (3) demonstration model to develop green tourism; (4) produce a tourism product of high quality and competitiveness; (5) the development of a more responsible and sustainable tourism. Data were collected through observation, interviews, questionnaires, literature studies, and technical documentation. Data were analyzed using qualitative descriptive analysis of IFAS, EFAS, and SWOT. The strategy resulted in the development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity in the village of Pemuteran is green tourism marketing strategy; Strategy creation and development of green tourism products; Strategy commitment and development of community-based tourism development in North Bali; The strategy for improving the quality of human resources through the mastery of information technology and entrepreneurship; Waste management strategy together and independently; Infrastructure development strategy based tourism green tourism; Strategy green tourism travel packages in Buleleng. Advice can be given is the importance of the commitment in the development of tourism development in North Bali-based green tourism; the need for management of solid waste management; the need for the identification and development of a tourist attraction; importance of improving the quality of human resources that are highly competitive; the importance of increasing public participation in the planning, implementation and monitoring of tourism development in the region.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: development, green tourism, community development, Pemuteran village</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>18</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism was developed for a variety of purposes, among others: as a driver of economic growth, a source of foreign exchange, opening jobs and generating growth in related sectors, namely agriculture, fisheries and manufacturing industries. Tourism can also improve education, arts and culture revive endangered and the preservation or conservation of the environment. Countries that rely on tourism sector mention that tourism brings economic benefits as well as a wide range of issues related to destruction of the environment and the burden on local communities caused by the high cost of living and others. Sustainable development should be pursued, especially to alleviate the poor. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">purpose of sustainable development is the implementation of economic development in integrated development environment. Sustainable development is thus expected to reduce the gap between the rich and poor. Environmental degradation, among others, is the destruction of landscapes, destruction of vegetation, wildlife, coral reefs, and large amounts of waste.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bali is a barometer of the advancement of tourism in Indonesia, which has an area of only 5,632,086 km2 or equal to 0.29% of the total across the Indonesian archipelago, it has tremendous appeal. Bali as the Island Tourism is an island that has a small size, dense population, economic growth better than its neighbor, limited natural resources and water, and has limited space. As an island tourism land use in Bali should really planned well and the pace of development should be controlled. The percentage</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">area of the province of Bali in 2003 by district and city, recorded (CBS, 2004): Badung 7%, Gianyar 7%, Tabanan 15%, Jembrana 15%, Buleleng 24%, Klungkung 6%, Bangli 9%, and Karangasem 15%) and the City (Denpasar 2%) of the area of Bali. Buleleng Regency is a district located on the northernmost island of Bali which has the largest area among 9 regencies and municipalities in Bali, which is almost 1/3 of the island of Bali (± 1365.88 hectares) with the western border districts of the State; south Tabanan, Badung and Bangli; east Karangasem and the northern Java and Bali. Buleleng Regency tropical climate with an average rainfall of 1,365 mm per year, the rainy season ranges from October s / d April while the dry season between April s / d in October. Buleleng regency which covers an area of 1,370 km2 divided into nine districts, namely Sub Tejakula, Kubutambahan, Sawan, Buleleng, Sukasada, Banjar, Busungbiu, Seririt and Gerokgak consisting of 127 villages, 19 villages and 166 indigenous villages fruit. In accordance with Regulation Bali Province No. 4 of 1999 that in Buleleng has been set into two Regional Tourism area, the Tourism Region Kalibukbuk which is better known as Lovina area which has extensive development of 3,542 hectares which includes 7 pieces villages namely: Desa Pemaron, Tukad Mungga , Anturan, Kalibukbuk, Kaliasem, Temukus, Tigawasa and Batu Ampar Tourism Region is located in the west of North Bali with an area of 14 124 ha development, which includes 5 pieces villages namely: Penyabangan, Bonyupoh, Pemuteran, Semberkima, and Pejarakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran is one village in the district Gerogak which have tourism potential is very attractive with a stunning natural beauty. Pemuteran village, located on the west coast of Bali, or about 55 km west of the city of Singaraja and 30 km from Gilimanuk. It is located between the hills and the sea, so that makes this place so beautiful and quiet, away from the crowds. Pemuteran beach is one of the beaches frequented by tourists in North Bali. Black sand stretches about 6 kilometers to the potential of the sea and the coral reefs are well preserved. Coral reefs in Pemuteran Beach area can be enjoyed with snorkeling not far from the shore. Pemuteran has the largest area of shallow coral reefs in Bali that is easy to enjoy the beauty of the sea currents given the relatively safe and quiet. Pemuteran is also famous as an area with a high passion for marine conservation projects artifisal Biorock coral reef in the world. There are several foundations engaged actively in coral reef conservation efforts in the region, including several hotels, dive shops, and local communities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although it has been developed as a tourist area, Pemuteran still maintained natural beauty and the people who live in the traditional way. It can be seen from the traditional equipment used, such as boats and nets for fishing activities. Pemuteran relatively low rainfall areas, making it less suitable for agriculture. Therefore, most of the population dependent as traditional fishermen. By exploring the potential of community-based tourism and sustainable community expected more actively involved and benefit from the development of tourism in the region. One that may be developed in the area of tourism development that still exist is to develop green tourism were friendly and caring environment, in accordance with the potential and the tendency of the current trend of world tourism. Green tourism is the term used for the practice of sustainable tourism that is substantive wherein the sustainable environmental, economic and social budaya. In fact, that any development program, sustainability is largely determined by the supporting community. This means active participation of the people is absolutely necessary. Efforts to develop green tourism in the village of Pemuteran needs to be done to harness the potential of natural and cultural as well as fix the deficiencies that exist and take advantage of various opportunities to overcome the weaknesses. Moreover, Pemuteran village communities are expecting their village could be developed as a rural tourism -based community, so that they can take an active role in it and welfare. Not to many people involved in tourism activities in the village, the village is due to untapped potential to the fullest, the community opportunity limitations to participate in the development of tourism and less tergalinya creativity with the development of tourism activities in the village. In order to prepare local communities to face the competition ahead of the ASEAN Economic Community in 2015, it turns out there are many obstacles and unprepared community in recognizing the potential of the area and have not been able to do the colaboration and utilization of tourism potential in the region as because of non-optimal involvement of local communities in tourism development. This causes the appearance of a society undermined by tourism development. Fore required an independency in management, innovation, creativity and collaboration between the uniqueness of the village community empowerment, it needed the development of sustainable tourism and eco-friendly. This study aims to: 1) to identify the potential of tourism in the development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment activities economy in Pemuteran village; 2) to analyze the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">factors internal and external factors on the development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity in the village of Pemuteran; and 3) to develop a strategy development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity in the Pemuteran village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">II.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methodology</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is a qualitative and quantitative research, which intends to understand the phenomenon or research subject is emic by means of qualitative descriptions. Multidimensional and holistic approach used to find problems and the solution by identifying environmental factors internal and external to formulate a development of the tourist area in accordance with the potential and environment that influence it. The research was conducted in the village of Pemuteran, District Gerogak, Buleleng Bali. Pemuteran village, located on the west coast of Bali, or about 55 km west of the city of Singaraja and 30 km from Gilimanuk. It is located between the hills and the sea, that makes this place so beautiful and quiet, away from the crowds. Pemuteran beach is one of the most visisted beaches in North Bali. Black sand stretches about 6 kilometers to the potential of the sea and the coral reefs are well preserved. The research instrument used to collect the data is in the form of an interview guide and observation guides, as well as questionnaires. The interview guide contains guidance interviews to obtain in-depth data from the community, stakeholders, and tourists, as well as give an opportunity to the public, stakeholders, and visitors to answer freely according to their understanding and their experience, that would be obtained variative answers. Observation guidelines used when making observations in the field, to obtained the expected information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data obtained in this study were collected through: observation, in-depth interviews (interview guide), distribution of the questionnaire, literature study and documentation study. Key informants in this study are figures that are considered to know about the object of research undertaken. These figures, which are: the leader of the Village, Indigenous Community Leaders, Tourism Potentials Foundation business, Tourism Industry, Head of Culture and Tourism in Buleleng, and tourists who visit the village Pemuteran. Techniques used in the determination of the informant is purposive. Informants taken by purposive consists of three pillars of tourism people, the community, the tourism business (private) and government to complete a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">questionnaire related to the determination of indicators of the opportunities and threats from external factors. Indicators strengths and weaknesses of internal factors to the development of the village of Pemuteran defined sample of 100 tourists. Samples were given a questionnaire with accidental sampling method that visit Pemuteran, both tourists and foreign tourists. Data analysis is the process of organizing and sorting into patterns, categories, and the basic outline of the unit, it has a theme and can be formulated the hypotheses, as suggested by the data. This study used qualitative descriptive analysis; Internal External Matrix analysis is used to help formulate a grand strategy to be applied, after knowing the position of the village of Pemuteran in Internal External Matrix; and a SWOT analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">III.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Buleleng regency is one of nine regencies in Bali. Tourism development in Buleleng generaly influenced by the number of tourists visiting to Bali. Increasing the number of tourists to Bali in addition to the cultural attractions and natural beauty, it is also encouraged by the organization of international events held in Bali, such as Miss World 2013, APEC 2013, the WTO (World Trade Organization) in 2013 and others. Tourism development in Bali is already crowded epecially in southern Bali, nowdays it began to expand in northern Bali. Buleleng regency which is located on the northern island of Bali has a stunning natural attraction is began visited by tourists. Tourism in Buleleng in particular is not only supported from domestic tourists but also foreign tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tourists who visited Buleleng within five years are significant increase from number of visits 349 981 people (2013) into 372 814 people (2014). Characteristics of tourists who visited Buleleng dominated by tourists who coming from Java, such as Jakarta, Bandung, Surabaya and Yogyakarta. The dominant age of domestic tourists is young tourist who is productive, educated and mostly work as selfemployed. The average length of stay the tourist around 2-3 days and generally stay in various types of commercial accommodation along Lovina Beach. Sources of information other than the recommendation of family or colleagues, 55% obtained from the internet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The movement of tourists is increasing accordance to the development of the transportation sector as well as the tendency of traveled motivation as fulfilling the needs of recreational towards lifestyle. While the number of visits of foreign tourists who visited Buleleng dominated by European travelers, such as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the Netherlands (19.54%), France (17.34%), and Germany (15.77%). Then followed by tourists visiting Australia (11.23%), Denmark (9.34%), USA (8.45%), Canada (7.12%), the UK (4.90%), Malaysia (3.98 %), and Belgium (2.33%) with most traveling purpose is vacation. Characteristics of foreign tourists who visited Buleleng is a young age and still productive, educated, work as great as professionals. Foreign tourists who visit have an income of 5-14 million per month with spending during a visit in Buleleng range from 1-5 million. Older travelers stay around 2-3 days and a great stay in star hotels along Lovina Beach (Disbudpar, 2014). Foreign tourists who visited Buleleng reached 288 166 people (2013) increased to 291 012 people (2014).</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Domestic Tourists</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Foreign Tourists</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Tourists</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Atrraction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Presentase (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Tourists</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Atrraction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Presentase (%)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Air Panas Banjar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">36,22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Lovina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">47,09</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran Gerogak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">19,66</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Air Terjun Gitgit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">17,41</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Lovina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">15,88</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran Gerogak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">15,19</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Air Terjun Gitgit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">15,88</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Air Panas</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Banjar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">11,94</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kota</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Singaraja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3,19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Air Terjun Sanih</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1,78</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Others</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">9,17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kota</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Singaraja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">0,56</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Others</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6,03</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">100,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">100,00</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Tourist’s Favourite Location in Buleleng Source: Departement of Tourism and Culturein Buleleng, 2015.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Number of Tourists Arrivals in Buleleng Regency</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Domestic Tourists</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Foreign</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourists</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Total</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourists Visit</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2010</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">94.902</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">187.980</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">282.882</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2011</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">101.652</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">196.699</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">298.351</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2012</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">268.794</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">266.053</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">534.847</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">349.981</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">288.166</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">638.147</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">372.814</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">291.012</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">663.826</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1.188.143</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1.229.910</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2.418.053</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Average</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">237.628,60</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">245.982</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">483.610,60</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Source: Departement of Tourism and Culture, Buleleng, 2015.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran is a village with an attractive tourism potential with the natural beauty of the calm and natural. Pemuteran village, located on the west coast of Bali, or about 55 km west of the city of Singaraja and 30 km from Gilimanuk. It is located among a cluster of hills and the sea, that makes this place so beautiful and quiet, away from the crowds. The establishment of Pemuteran village is unknown certainly the date, month and year. But according to the story penglingsir (Prominent Citizens Pemuteran village trustworthy) saying that the village of Pemuteran which was once an area called Banjar Dinas (local intitutional) Pemuteran village, Sumberkima Village, Pengastulan Distric. The history of Banjar Dinas Sumberkima and Pemuteran Village is separated on August 16, 1967, hereinafter it called Pemuteran village. The election word of “Pemuteran&quot; is due to the mountain Pulaki is the east divider between The Banyupoh Village whose existence to the surface beach, thats causing people who are passed Pulaki should walking around to the west and the east, but there is also the statement of penglingsir who said Pumeteran Village names is taken from the Pura Pemuteran which is Pulaki Banyupoh village called Pura Muttering Jagat. In the temple there is source of thermal water which is a place for worship that highly trusted by Hindus as Pura Kahyangan Jagat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Vision of Pemuteran Village in 2011-2016 was &quot;&nbsp;to achieve the prosperity based cultural tourism that is imbued Tri Hita Karana&quot;. Furthermore, based on the vision of rural development, it has been set the Rural Development mission for two years 2011-2016 as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To create a prosperous society, through improved access to quality health and empowerment of micro and small enterprises as well as the acceleration of infrastructure development and environmental preservation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To create Pemuteran village as a tourist area of culture through developing and strengthening the values of art and culture as well as increased awareness of the environment function.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran has several border area such as The north side border is Bali sea; the south border is State Forest; The east border is Banyupoh Village; The west border is Sumberkima Village. Gerokgak Pemuteran village, Buleleng regency has an area of 33.03 km2 consisting of 9 (nine) village, namely: Kembang Sari, Pala Sari, Segara Loka,Yeh Panes, Sendang Lepang, Pengumbahan, Mekar Sari ,Sumber Wangi, and Sendang Pasir .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pemuteran Village Tourism Potential</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The development of Green Tourism as an effort to community empowerment In Economic Activity. Pemuteran village has a variety of tourist potential that is natural and attractive. The potential of tourism in the village of Pemuteran should be extracted and sharpened so that the community will realize the local potential that can be developed to improve the welfare of local communities. As for the tourism potential Pemuteran village, among others: a. Conservation of coral reefs</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Conservation program in Pemuteran village combines with tourism activities by the Karang Lestari Foundation. it attracts tourists to come and participate in the conservation of the biological environment. Conservation of coral reefs in Pemuteran village has been initiated in 1989 to the present. The conservation program has gained recognition not only at local level but also at national and international level. Pemuteran village has a variety of tourism potential that can be developed are located in hills, mountain, and sea that spanning from the east to the west. Pemuteran village also has a natural thermal water that is is very beautiful and the coral reef and wide blue sea which has quite small waves, therefore, its place is quite calm and comfort</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran Village Community is a traditional society that holds strong customs and culture. The development of tourism in this village is expected to advance the village also the coral reef conservation; it was stated by Mr. I Gusti Agung Prana which is pioneering the Yayasan Karang Lestari who is concern about coral reef conservation and biorock in Pemuteran village. He said that through tourism activity the community welfare, and preservation of the natural and the social and cultural awake is expected to be increased. Through the foundation he seeks to restore the natural potential and raising community awareness of the importance to save the coral reef ecosystem underwater biota.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coral reefs are one of the oldest ecosystems are economically and biologically important in the world. However, coral reefs face a number of serious threats, including pollution of land, the impact of fishing, climate change and the depletion of reefs, ocean acidification, and lack of public awareness. Coral reefs and all life within it is on a wealth of high value. The benefits contained in the coral reef ecosystem is very large and diverse, both direct and indirect benefits. Coral reefs have a role as a food source habitat for marine biota of high economic value. Coral reefs have aesthetic value that can be used as a tourist area and has a handle nutva high plasma source. It can</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">also be instrumental in providing sand beach, and the brunt of the waves as a barrier to coastal erosion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Biorock technology is a process of electro mineral deposits that took place in the sea, usually referred as mineral accretion technology. This technology was developed by Prof. Wolf H. Hilbetz a marine scientist from Germany in 1974. Furthermore, since 1988, Prof. Wolf H. Hilbetz with Dr. Thomas J. Goreau (AS), a reef ecologist conducting research to develop longer biorock technologies with a focus on cultivation, maintenance and restoration of coral reefs and coastal protection structures. The scientists research has been done in the world, including Indonesia. Biorock has a structure in the form of low-voltage electrified iron, chemical mekananisme occurs when the electrical flow electrolityc cause a reaction that encourages the formation of natural minerals in sea water, such as calcium carbonate and magnesium hidroxyde. At the same time, electro-chemical changes encourage the growth of organisms around the structure. Consequently, when the coral seed paste on the metal structure, the growth will occur more quickly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The traces of coral reef restoration in Pemuteran village was started in 1990 by Karang Lestari Fondation. At that time, the development efforts of the tourism destinations starting from reef restoration efforts that have been vandalized and destroyed by the communities. Mr. I Gusti Agung Prana along with several environmental pioneers dedicated to saving the environment in the village of Pemuteran. Karang Lestari fondation put Buleleng regency as Protector, while some national figures such as I Gde Ardika (Former Minister of Culture and Tourism), Drs. Dewa Made Beratha (Former Governor of Bali), Kwik Kian Gie (Former Coordinating Minister for the Economy) and Robi Johan. Supervisory Board filled by local luminaries, including Head of Pemuteran Village. Chairman of the Foundation chaired by I Gusti Agung Prana secretary I Nyoman Vienna, SH, and Treasurer I Gusti Agung Mantra and Mrs. Rani (a German) (Pitana et al, 2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The efforts to make the reef as in the past is the main goal to make it become a tourist attraction under the sea. The first and most strenuous efforts perceived by a pioneer of environmental leaders who joined the Karang Lestari Foundation is to develop and tranfor the culture of community who crushers ecosystems become the savior of coral reef ecosystems. The approach used by Karang Lestari fondation in the preservation of coral reefs in Pemuteran village is through traditional approaches, cultural, and religious. Approach customs, culture and religion are very</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">binding and obeyed by the community. With the participation of local communities care for and maintain the existence of coral reefs guarantee the success of coral reef restoration and rescue of the marine ecosystem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Karang Lestari Fondation initial efforts in the restoration of coral reefs in the village of Pemuteran in the beginning show results that small fish begin to move from the open sea to the center of growth in the artificial reefs created Yayasan Karang Lestari. In 1996 the growth of coral reefs are naturally good enough that reflects that the work done quite successfully. In fact, corals grow very rich in variety, so some say as one of the locations of the richest coral reefs in the world. Stepping in 2001, a year since the introduction of technology biorock in the village of Pemuteran, Pemuteran Bay area reborn and transformed into a marine park with a rich coral reefs. The growth of coral reefs with biorock technology was able to accelerate the growth of coral reefs three to six times faster and produce coral reefs more resistant to the effects of climate change and contamination of various water pollution, when compared with coral reefs that grow naturally. Marine life is back to normal invited the fish colonies and the coral reefs become it home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This condition is more encouraging to begin the arrival of tourists. In general, tourists who come are special interest tourists with the objective of enjoying nautical tourism, diving, snorkeling, spiritual tourism and ecotourism. With the increasing number of tourists, it is inviting business opportunities and attract some people to invest in the village of Pemuteran. Some hotels and tourism facilities being developed. Looking at the various characteristics of the tourists come, this implies the effort to fulfill the needs of travelers are very diverse, so that the needs of travelers are not only satisfied by tourism entrepreneurs, but also it is able to increase the entrepreneurial spirit of the community to build lodging services, homestay, food stalls, sellers drinks, massages, instructur submarines for amateur divers, diving equipment rental, boat rental, or in becoming a local tour guide.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Spiritual Potenstial Tourism</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the village of Pemuteran there are many temple that has potential as spiritual tourism, although it yet developed yet at this time. The kind of Spiritual activities such as worship of Hinduism and other travelers can enjoy the beauty of nature combined with the buildings of the temple. The name of temple ostensibly in the village of Pemuteran, such as:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemuteran temple, Batu Korsi temple, Wed Pemuteran Temple, Bukit Ser Temple,Teledu Temple, Beratan Temple,Batu Temple,Bukit Saab Temple,Bukit Udeng-Udengan Temple, Taman Temple, Mas Pahit Temple, Majapahit temple,Goa Giri Putri Temple, and Bukit Encahan Taluh Temple.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pura Agung Pulaki</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Pura Agung Pulaki is one of the temples with the religious aura surrounding natural beauty that is very intriguing. The location is at the top of a rocky cliff overlooking the sea with views directly into the charming surroundings and background of steep rocky hills. This temple is located in the village of Banyupoh, District Gerokgak, the place is quite strategic because it is located on the edge of the highway-Gilimanuk Singaraja. In addition to functioning as a place of worship to Sang Hyang Widhi, Pulaki Temple also became a place of worship to the glory of Sri Patni Kaniten who has attained moksha (the freedom of life cycle death and birth). Sri Patni Kaniten revered as gods and regarded as the goddess Dalem Ketut. Based on a review of its history, the establishment Pulaki Temple is also related to Melanting temple in terms of Nirartha tirta yatra. Establishment temple Pura classified as universal heaven during the reign of King Gelgel, Dalem Waturenggong (1460-1552 AD). Additionally, Pulaki Temple is located near to MelantingTemple is regarded as Predana-purusa or as a place of worship to apply for economic prosperity. Quite often people come to this temple is a merchant or businessman.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pura Dalem Melanting</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Dalem Melanting Temple is located quite close to Pulaki Temple, it was because Melanting Temple is one Stana &quot;Pesanekan Ida Batara Sami&quot; which included pesanekan of Ida Batara Pulaki, Ida Batara Kertaning Jagat (in the village of Banyu Poh), Ida Batara Mutering Jagat (in the hamlet of Eze Panes Pemuteran), and Ida Batara Customs. Said Melanting taken from two different words namely &quot;mel&quot; and &quot;lanting&quot;, mel means garden or crops and lanting meant relying on the rope. Melanting is a place dedicated crops offerings presented to Ida Ayu Swabawa as Melanting Goddes. This temple is very important position in the life of the people of Bali especially traders. Melanting Tempel is a very magnificent temple and it was in the jungle, the atmosphere is so beautiful, very beautiful natural surroundings and outstanding stand proudly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another potential form Pemuteran village such as: wineries, forest tours, art gamelan, Sendang Pasir</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Beach or Pandan Wangi beach, tambourine music is culture and art in the Sendang Pasir village. Artifici sendang pasir village is the management of coconut shells into raw material for making souvenirs because here there are many coconut trees. The waste can be used as raw material souvenir coconut shell and processed directly by the people of Sendang Pasir itself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism activity in the village of Pemuteran in Green Tourism Development to Increasing Community Empowerment In Economic Activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the tourism potential contained in Pemuteran village, while some activity that can be done by tourists are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Snorkeling</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Snorkeling is one marine tourism activities that most attractive to tourists who visit the village Pemuteran. In contrast to the diving that requires special expertise and equipment are complex and expensive as well, snorkeling is just using simple equipment. Usually this is done on a snorkeling in the morning until noon when the sun is high intentitas so, the snorkler is able to see the underwater well. Depth to snorkel generally does not exceed 5 meters. Basic equipment snorkeling prepared in this place are: a life jacket that is useful to float on the surface of the body of water; snorkel / pipe for breathing from the mouth; mask / goggles while closing the nose; and fin / fin foot to help swim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diving</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In addition to snorkeling, diving activities and did not lose any existing demand. Diving is activity using breathing apparatus using air from the air tube. For diving, the diver can not be arbitrary, there must be a diving certificate. One of the data that we get from a diving equipment rental or dive center has a background established dive center is due to open up employment opportunities for local people in the village of Pemuteran. Income derived from this business amounted to 15 million. Dive center also provides a diving package including diving equipment, meals, transportation, and entrance West Bali National Park, as well as providing guide services. For local guides were 8 people, while foreign guide 5 people. The number of tourists visit are France, Germany and the Netherlands the highest last June through August. As for the rules of the Dive Center, namely: diving equipment is replaced every 5 years; local tourists can rent diving equipment; and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">tourists rented diving equipment but with a guide. While follow kegiataan requirements are: must have a certificate of diving; and if you do not have a diving certificate, diving is permitted only 10-12 meters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Man Made Attraction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In addition to the natural tourist attractions (nature), there are also man-made tourist attractions, such as buildings or tourism infrastructure including historic and modern architecture, monuments, parks, gardens, historic sites, golf courses and much more. In Palasari village there area a temple that was used as a place to worship, as usually done Hindus in general, but the temple has not been developed as a tourist attraction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural tourism attraction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Cultural tourism attractions commonly known as the dances, festivals, folklore performances and art. Generally often staged dances at the hotel to travelers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Factors Internal and External Environment In Green Tourism Development to increasing the Community Empowerment in Economic Activities in the Pemuteran village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Factors internal and external environment in the development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity in Pemuteran Village can be explained as follows: Internal environmental factors consisted of factors strengths and weaknesses with variable green tourism and community development. The factors the strength of Pemuteran village are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The highly public awareness to reduce carbon emissions, biodiversity conservation, maintain and sustain the availability of water resources. It has been described in outline in the Pemuteran Village, at first people who fishing tend to perform actions by damaging marine habitats with explosives, which was then due to the role of Mr. I Gusti Agung Prana is able to change the mindset of society that invites the public to play an active role in protecting potential, habitats and marine ecosystems, so that people get the economic benefits to such activities. Marine ecosystem protected marine tourism potential which is owned by Pemuteran Village resulted in rapidly developing tourism and economic benefits in communities with the development of tourism in the region.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The existance of good waste management . The development of tourism in the Pemuteran village and the growing range of tourist activity, the relevant stakeholders more aware of the existence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">of waste and its management. However, according to the tourists who visit, the garbage is still a threat and a problem in the village of Pemuteran, ranging from garbage that littered the streets, on the shore, and garbage stuck on coral in the ocean. Trash on the high seas, if not addressed could lead to a threat to the habitats and marine ecosystems in Pemuteran village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a marketing and public relations. Tourism development tourism industry creates an enormous popping various service providers for travelers. Each toruism industry contribute to the market and provide information about its own products as well as the village of Pemuteran and its tourism potential that has implications for the increasing number of visiting tourists Pemuteran village.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is an effort to prevention and alleviate the impact of tourist activity on nature and culture. Pemuteran village, not only has the natural wealth of coral reefs are extremely diverse with a sea view is very beautiful, but also has the potential of culture as the wisdom in keeping its nature. Pemuteran Village Community also includes traditional society that holds strong customs and culture.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The community is beginning to participate in planning and participation of all stakeholders, regulation and good governance in the development of tourism in the Pemuteran Village. The community involvement not only during the implementation, but also in planning and conservation of coral reefs in Pemuteran village.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Increasing people's incomes in the tourism sector and direct revenue to the region with the development of tourism in the village of Pemuteran.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The public has the ability to maintain harmony with nature, the carrying capacity of the environment through environmental education, capacity building and education, culture and local wisdom lived.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The weakness factors Pemuteran village as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The limited availability of capital and financing local communities. There is a lack of capital and financing of local communities in the management of venture capital in the future will lead to and controlled by foreign capital / outside the local community.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The need of environmental education. To manage, maintain, and conservation of coral reefs in the village of Pemuteran, so the importance of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">providing education for local communities, the communities involved in tourism in the village of Pemuteran, as well as tourists visiting the village of Pemuteran, so has the level of awareness of the importance of protecting the marine ecosystem in the village of Pemuteran ,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The need to keep the alignment direction of development of infrastructure in Buleleng. The limited accessibility to the village of Pemuteran and other tourist attractions in Buleleng. Accessibility is very important for travelers heading visited tourist attraction. The more varied tourist attraction in the region / area to attract tourists to come visit and a longer stay in the area.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lack of internet access in the Pemuteran village to facilitate the tourists and the public in providing information and marketing. With the growing sophistication of technology that is widely used to share information and transportation technology, access to the internet is a basic requirement for a destination and an increase in marketing destinations. Similarly, the development of social media are extremely massive able to help destination marketing if it can achieve the satisfaction of tourists going to a destination that will generate positive marketing.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a shortage of accessibility to the village of Pemuteran and tourist attraction in the village of Pemuteran.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The External Environmental Factors</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The External environmental factors consisted of factors opportunities and threats with variable political, economic, social, and technology. The factors opportunities of Pemuteran village are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conductive safety situation in Bali. This was proved by various national and international events organized in Bali. In addition to its security as well as the beauty of the island, so many MICE events held in Bali.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali regain award as the best destination and Best Overseas Tourism City. Bali is able to retain the title of the best destination and Best Overseas Tourism City.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The direction of development of infrastructure in North Bali is still in the planning process. If development in the north, including Buleleng Bali, it can reduce congestion and density of development and excursions in South Bali. It also has implications for the improvement of facilities and infrastructure development in North Bali and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">ease of access and the increasingly short time and distance to Buleleng.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The trend of green and eco-friendly tourism. The trend today is the development of green tourism which is a continuation of sustainable tourism but more specific and more easily measured. Green tourism is the term used for the practice of sustainable tourism that is substantively wherein the sustainable environmental, economic, social and cultural. Green tourism must implement the four pillars, namely: reducing carbon emissions generated from tourism activities are carried out; biodiversity conservation; waste management and waste management which is good; and maintain the availability of water resources in a sustainable manner. In principle, the four pillars of the green tourism can be implemented if it is supported by the following factors: regulation and good governance; participation of all stakeholders; availability of capital and financing; capacity development and education.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Increased efforts in tourism industry. The increasing number of visits to Bali and Buleleng, both domestic and foreign tourists visit implications for the improvement of the tourism product supply by the tourism industry.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Support local community organizations, the Institute for Indigenous Village and Village People Empowerment Institution.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conservation of marine ecosystems and the natural environment. The development of marine tourism in the world leads to increased stakeholder awareness and conservation of marine ecosystems and the natural environment.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internet technology in the provision of information and promotion. Ease of information via the Internet can improve and expand the market segmentation of a destination and help the marketing and promotion of tourist destinations.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The threat factors of village Pemuteran as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The limited access and transport technologies. Limited access and transportation to Buleleng because development is still concentrated in South Bali and the limited development of road infrastructure and transport to Buleleng which causes the length of time and the distance from the point of tourist arrivals (airports).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is the uneven development of North and South Bali. There needs to be a policy as an effort equitable development of tourism between South Bali with North Bali.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The era of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC). With the enactment of MEA at the end of 2015, required readiness and increasing the quality of human resources in order to compete with HR from other ASEAN countries.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The complicated problems of waste management. Trash in Bali is not manageable with good, thus also the reuse of waste generated by a household as well as an industry have not been carried out to the maximum.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lack of a tourist attraction that supports the existence of a tourist attraction located in the village of Pemuteran. The more varied tourist attraction in a region or destination, it is able to increase the number of travelers and length of stay at the destination.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3.4. The strategic Development of Green Tourism to Improving Community Empowerment In Economic Activities in the Pemuteran Village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on internal factors (strengths and weaknesses) and external factors (opportunities and threats), the strategic matric is prepared through a SWOT analysis (Strengths, weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats), then the resulting strategy can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Matrix Green Tourism Development SWOT Analysis for Improving Community Empowerment In Economic Activities in the Pemuteran Village</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IFAS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EFAS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strengths </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(S)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The highest of public awareness to reduce carbon emissions, biodiversity conservation, maintain and sustain the availability of water resources</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The presence of good waste management</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a marketing and public relations</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a deterrent and alleviate the impact of tourist activity on the natural and cultural</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The existence of prevention efforts and alleviate the impact of tourist activity on the natural and cultural</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The community begin participate in the</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Weaknesses </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(W)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The limited availability &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">capital &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">financing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;local</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">communities</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The need for environmental education</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The alignment direction &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">development &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">infrastructure &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buleleng</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lack of internet access in the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pemuteran</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Village to facilitate the tourists and the public in providing information &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">marketing</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is a shortage &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">accessibility to the village &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pemuteran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">tourist attraction in the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pemuteran</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Village</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">planning and stakeholders participation, regulation and good governance</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The increase of community incomes of the tourism sector and direct revenue for the region</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The public has the ability to maintain harmony with nature, the carrying capacity of the environment through environmental education and capacity development and education</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Opportunities</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(O)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1)The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;conducive</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">security situation in Bali</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali is awarded as the best destination and Best &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Overseas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tourism City</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of infrastructure in North Bali</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The trend green and environmentally friendly tourism</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The efforts increased in tourism industry</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The support of local community</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">organizations and The Empowerment</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Community Institution</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conservation of marine ecosystems and the natural environment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">8)The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internet</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">technology &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">providing information and promotion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SO Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Green Tourism Promotion Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Establishment and Development of Green Tourism Product</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">WO Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Commitment and Development strategy of Community based Tourism in North Bali</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Threats</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(T)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The limited access and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;transport</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">technologies</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There is the uneven development of North and South Bali Bali</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The era of the ASEAN Economic Community</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The complicated problems of waste management</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lack of a tourist attraction &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">supports the existence of tourist attraction located &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ST Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Improvement of Human Resources through Mastery of Information Technology and Entrepreneurship</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Integrated Waste Management Strategy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">WT Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Development Strategy of infrastructure based Green Tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Green strategy of Tour Packages in Buleleng</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Pumetaran Village</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Source:Result Research, 2016.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the SWOT analysis matrix generated the following strategies:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1 . SO Strategy (Strengths Opportunities)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">1 ) The marketing strategy of green tourism.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy through several phases of activities, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The market segmentation that leads to the concept of green tourism, namely sorting of market awareness and high concern about environmental, economic and socio-cultural. The market should have the knowledge and practice that refers to the principles of green tourism, such as: reduce the activities that produce carbon emissions; tourism activities that lead to biodiversity conservation; not use or limit the plastic waste products; practice energy saving and water saving; choose your accommodation and tourism industries that implement energy-saving practices and water saving, as well as empowering local communities as well as the products produced by the local community.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The target market which led to the selection of the chosenmarket segments. According to the tourist characteristics, which leads the segment in question is a European traveler. European travelers have characters traveling individually, so the pressure on the environment is not as big tourist mass, a high concern for the environment and social culture of local (host), and a tendency to maintain (not destroy) things that are enjoyed in the tourist destination.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The positioning lead to the planting of the image in the minds of consumers, so the markets always remember with a host of products. The selected positioning should be in harmony and in accordance with the selected target market. This will facilitate the establishment of reputation and branding a destination and tourist attraction.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marketing Mix leading to the creation of products thatsuit the needs and desires of the market, the budget or the price that corresponds to the ability of the market, distribution channels, easily accessible by the market, the focus of the promotion is seen from the media which is used as a reference by the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">market, service expected by the host, the physical evidence that facilitate market find products and enjoy the product, as well as a focus on product creation process that aims to improve the quality of experience of the market and satisfaction of market.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1 ) The creation and development strategy of green tourism products.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy through several stages steps:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The creation of green tourism products. The creation of green tourism product has focus and detail of products (goods and services), which refers to the level of awareness and concern to the sustainability of the tourism product, and requires a service provider / service providers who have the knowledge and practice of green tourism. Green tourism will be more appreciated if reflected from the beginning before the arrival, at the time of the visit, and after the visit of consumer at a destination or tourist attraction. It must also be reflected in the value of which is believed to be the host and practice daily.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of green tourism products. Development of tourism products should have the same spirit with the core product. Green tourism product development can be done with the addition of products facilities, support and complement the core product that point in increasing the value product.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The differentiator with competitors. In the open era now, the product is very easily copied by competitors. As long as the products developed full of cultural value and have characteristics that are not owned by competitors or other regions, as well as the service and atmosphere were different, then it will not be a threat.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The WO Strategies (Weaknesses Opportunities)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The strategy of commitment and development community-based tourism development in North Bali. In this strategy is needed the commitment from policy makers to the development of community-based tourism development in North Bali. Tourism is not only beneficial to the people who are involved in tourism, but also multiflier effect generated by tourism, can move almost all sectors of the economy in a area. In the development of tourism development should be from the beginning of the planned community-based, resulting in the development of tourism more people involved and get the economic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">benefits with the development of tourism in the region.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategy ST (Strengths Threats)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategy for improving the quality of human resources through the mastery of information technology and entrepreneurship.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is important in the development of green tourism is the empowerment of local communities, both in terms of manpower, venture capitalists, supplying the needs of the tourism industry in the region, as well as managing destinations and attractions. It will not be achieved if local communities do not have the qualities and qualifications required by the growing tourism activities in the region. It is important continuously strived to improve the quality of human resources in the village of Pemuteran and Buleleng, in order to compete with human resources from outside the region and human resources from abroad. Improving the quality of human resources, particularly in the mastery of information technology and the improvement of the entrepreneurial spirit of the community.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The waste management strategy together and independently.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Trash will not be endless and often cause problems that are difficult to overcome. Waste management policy in the event that each member of the family, industrial, or rural areas to be able to manage independently their garbage and recycle waste generated and reused on the scope of each region will certainly be able to solve the garbage problem. Relevant stakeholders facilitated by the government, work together and choose a method of waste management at its best, and reward the successful industries and regions would be able to answer the question. Moreover, the effort will become a habit, a time without given rewards, industry and the public will have an awareness of itself in waste management in the region.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The WT Strategies (Weaknesses Threats)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The infrastructure development strategy based tourism green tourism.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Infrastructure development not only cater to tourists and tourism activities, but is destined for the local community. Infrastructure development is expected to assist and facilitate the community in carrying out their daily activities. Lack of road infrastructure could be the barrier of the community's economy and could lead to higher prices. While tourism facilities are comprised of the principal means, complementary and supporting tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Development of tourism facilities should be based on green tourism. In the sense of small-scale facilities constructed and ownership by local communities. Because of tourism development should ideally provide highest benefits for the welfare of local communities. Otherwise, local communities will be marginalized in its own country, defeated by venture capitalists. In accordance with the intended target market, European tourists prefer natural tourism product provided in accordance with tourism potential that there is in the area.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Strategy of Tour Grren Tourism Packages in Buleleng.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The variations product (not similar products) is important for the sustainability of a destination, where between one tourist attraction to another can be complementary. This can increase the length of stay of tourists visiting. Packs the few tourist attraction into a tour package, can attract tourists to visit. Customized tour package tourism potential in the area based green tourism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">IV. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusions and Recommendations</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the discussion, it can be concluded as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development potential of Tourism Pemuteran village green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity, among other things: the conservation of coral reefs; spiritual tourism potential; Agung Pulaki Temple; Dalem Melanting Temple. The Pemuteran Village which has the potential of tour and tourism began to establish the facilities to support various activities of travelers who come to visit, among others: Kembang Sari Distric; Sendang lepang Distric; Mekar Sari District; Sendang Pasir District. Based on the tourism potential contained in Pemuteran village, while some activity that can be done by tourists are: snorkeling; diving; artificial tourist attraction; cultural tourism attractions (cultural). In addition to enjoying nature, the needs of tourists who come can not be separated from something to eat (that something is consumed by tourists). There are restaurant that can be developed to increase the appeal of travel with a culinary destination for tourists who visit the Pemuteran Village.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors internal environment consists of factors strengths and weaknesses. The factors the strength of Pemuteran village as follows: public awareness to reduce carbon emissions, biodiversity conservation, and maintain the availability of water</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">resources in a sustainable manner; presence of waste management and waste management which is good; There are marketing and public relations; their prevention efforts and alleviate the impact of tourist activity on nature and culture; began their participation in the planning and participation of all stakeholders, regulation and good governance in the development of tourism in the village of Pemuteran; increased income communities in the tourism sector and direct revenue to the region with the development of tourism in the village of Pemuteran; people have the ability to maintain harmony with nature, the carrying capacity of the environment through environmental education, capacity building and education, culture and local wisdom lived. While the factors weaknesses of the village Pemuteran as follows: the limited availability of capital and financing of local communities; the need for environmental education; necessary alignment of infrastructure development in Buleleng; lack of internet access in the village of Pemuteran to facilitate the tourists and the public in providing information and marketing; the limited accessibility to the village of Pemuteran and tourist attraction in the village of Pemuteran. The factors opportunities of Pemuteran village are as follows: security situation Bali; Bali awarded as the best destination and Best Overseas Tourism City; directions of development of infrastructure in North Bali is still in the planning process; the trend of green tourism and ecofriendly; increased efforts in the field of tourism; the increasing number of visits to Bali and Buleleng, both domestic and foreign tourists visit implications for the improvement of the tourism product supply by the tourism industry; support local community organizations, th community empowerment Institution; conservation of marine ecosystems and the natural environment; Internet technology in the provision of information and promotion. While the factors threat owned village Pemuteran as follows: There are limited access and transport technologies; the uneven development of North and South Bali Bali; AEC era; the severity of the problem of waste management; lack of tourist attraction that supports the existence of a tourist attraction located in the village of Pemuteran.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategies in the development of green tourism as an effort to increase community empowerment in economic activity in the village Pemuteran as follows: green tourism marketing strategy; Strategy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">creation and development of green tourism products; Strategy commitment and development of community-based tourism development in North Bali; The strategy for improving the quality of human resources through the mastery of information technology and entrepreneurship; The waste management strategy together and independently; Infrastructure development strategy based tourism green tourism; Strategy green tour packages in Buleleng.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The advice can be given are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The importance of commitment to developing them tourism development in North Bali-based green tourism, the negative impacts of tourism development might be minimized and can benefit as much as possible for the welfare of society.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The need of waste management in the Pemuteran village.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The identification and development of tourist attraction in the Pemuteran Village, as known as Pemuteran village has a lot of tourism potential, both natural and cultural.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The importance of improving the quality of human resources that are highly competitive.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The increased importance of community participation in planning, implementation, and monitoring of tourism development in the region.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Acknowledgment</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research can be done, because of the support of all parties, therefore, on this occasion our research team expressed appreciation and gratitude profusely to the Rector of Udayana University; Chairman of the Institute for Research and Community Services University of Udayana; The Head of Pemuteran village and staff employees; Mr. I Gusti Agung Prana; Bendesa Pemuteran village, community leaders; public and tourists who visit the village Pemuteran thank you for all your help in providing information, data, and participation in questionnaires and focus group discussions have been conducted in the Pemuteran village. Thanks also go to the students who have participated in this research activity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Region.</span><span class="font1"> Journal of Enviromental Management and Tourism. Vol 2(3), 2013. pp.6-15.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biro Pusat Statistik (BPS). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Produk Domestik Regional Bruto Propinsi Bali Tahun 1999-2003</span><span class="font1">. Biro Pusat Statistik Propinsi Bali.2004.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C. Cooper, S. Jackson. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Destination Life Cycle: The Isle of Man Case Study.</span><span class="font1"> Dalam the Earthscan Reader in Sustainable Tourism. United Kingdom: Earthscan Publications Limited.1997.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C. Cooper, J. Flecher, D. Gilbert, S. Wainhill. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Principle and Practice</span><span class="font1">London: Pitman Publishing.1993.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;E.Inskeep. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Plannning “An Integrated and Sustainable Development Approach”.1991.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ismayanti.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Pariwisata.</span><span class="font1">Jakarta: Grasindo.2010.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H. Kodyat. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Hakekat dan Perkembangan Wisata Alternatif”.</span><span class="font1"> Dalam Prosiding Pelatihan dan Lokakarya Perencanaan Pariwisata Berkelanjutan, ed. Myra P. Gunawan. 1997.Bandung: Penerbit ITB.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D. Korten. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Community Management.</span><span class="font1">New Delhi: Kumarian Press.1987.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kusmayadi dan Sugiarto. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodelogi Penelitian di Bidang Kepariwisataan</span><span class="font1">.Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.2002</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H. Marpaung. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengetahuan &nbsp;&nbsp;Kepariwisataan</span><span class="font1">. &nbsp;&nbsp;Bandung:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Alfabeta.2000.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A. Mathieson, G. Wall. 1982. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: Economic, Physical and Social Impact</span><span class="font1">. Pitman Publishing, Oxport.1982.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;G.McIntyre. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainable Tourism Development: Guide for Local Planners.</span><span class="font1"> 1993.Spain: World Tourism Organization.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Middleton, Victor T.C.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainable Tourism: A Marketing Perspective</span><span class="font1">.Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.1998</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nasir. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian</span><span class="font1">.Ghalia Indonesia Jakarta.1988.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N. Natori, (ed). 2001</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. A Guide Book for Tourism Based Community Development.</span><span class="font1"> Publisher APTE.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Nelson, J.G, R. Butler, and G. Wall. 1993. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and Sustainable Development: Monitoring, Planning, Managing”.</span><span class="font1"> 2001.University of Waterloo: Heritage Resources Culture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I.G. Pitana.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pelangi Pariwisata Bali</span><span class="font1">.Denpasar: Bali Post.1999.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anonim. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kepariwisataan Bali Dalam Wacana Otonomi Daerah.</span><span class="font1">2006. Jakarta: Puslitbang Kepariwisataan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;F. Rangkuti. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis SWOT Teknik Membedah Kasus Bisnis</span><span class="font1">.Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.2004.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;J. Ringbeck, E-A. Amira, and A. Gautam. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Green Tourism: A Road Map for Transformation</span><span class="font1">. Booz &amp;&nbsp;Company.2010.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;R.G. Soekadijo. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Anatomi Pariwisata (Memahami Pariwisata Sebagai Systemic Linkage).</span><span class="font1"> 1997.Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[23] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I.M Sukarsa. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Pariwisata.</span><span class="font1">Badan Kerjasama Perguruan Tinggi Negeri Indonesia Timur. 1999.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[24] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;J. Swarbrooke. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainable Tourism Management.</span><span class="font1">New York: CABI Publishing.1998.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[25] &nbsp;&nbsp;O.A.Yoeti.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Pariwisata.</span><span class="font1"> Edisi Revisi. Bandung:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Angkasa.1996</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[26] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.propoortourism.org.uk"><span class="font1">www.propoortourism.org.uk</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anonim. Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 10 Tahun 2009 tentang Kepariwisataan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B. Alma, Buchari. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Teknik Menyusun Tesis</span><span class="font1">.Bandung: Alfabeta. 2004.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I.W. Ardika. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pariwisata Budaya Berkelanjutan: Refleksi dan Harapan di Tengah Perkembangan &nbsp;&nbsp;Global.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;Denpasar: Universitas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Udayana.2003.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;M. Azam,T.Sarker. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Green Tourism in The Context of Climate Change Towards Sustainable Economic Development in The South Asian</span></p></li></ul>