---
layout: full_article
title: "The Meaning of Verbal and Visual Aspect with Reference to “Superheroes” Video Clip By The Script"
author: "I Kadek Haryadi Suryanatha, Ni Luh Putu Krisnawati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 178-184</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Meaning of Verbal and Visual Aspect with Reference to “Superheroes” Video Clip By The Script</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Kadek Haryadi Suryanatha<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Luh Putu Krisnawati<sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>12</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:haryadisurya2@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[haryadisurya2@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:igedeputusudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[igedeputusudana@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul The meaning of Verbal and Visual Aspect With Reference To “Superheroes” Video Clip by The Script. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi dan mengklasifikasi jenis-jenis visual yang ditemukan dalam music video dari The Script serta menjelaskan makna secara verbal yang terdapat di dalam lagu tersebut. Sumber data diambil dari satu lagu yang populerkan oleh pop band asal Irlandia, The Script. Lagu tersebut adalah Superheroes. Teori-teori utama yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diadopsi dari teori visual dan verbal yang dikemukakan oleh John Dyer (1993) dan teori meaning dari Leech (1974). Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode laporan kualitatif . Diawali dengan menonton video music secara hati-hati, kemudian mencatat data yang berhubungan, sedangkan untuk aspek verbal diteliti dengan menganalisa setiap stanza dari lirik tersebut. Hasil dari penelitian ini ditemukan 19 komponen dari aspek visual. Sedangkan untuk aspek verbal menggunakan tekstual analisis. Sedangkan makna yang digunakan untuk mengetahui arti dari setiap stanza terdapat dua macam dari tujuh macam makna berdasarkan teori.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Musik Video, Visual, Verbal, Arti, Komunikasi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Music video clip is the most commonly used tool for delivering the message of songs to viewers.In analyzing a video clip, there are two aspects of sign which are needed to figure out the message of the video clip. The visual aspect, which has been the most important element in communicating the meaning of the video clip and the verbal aspect has</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">something to deal with text and words. In the video clip, there must be a meaning behind the song, and the verbal aspect could be analyzed through the lyric of the song. In order to interpreting the lyric of the song to the video clip, therefore, the audio visual is also needed to support the content of the video clip.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Visual aspects are divided into several kinds, According to Dyer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1993). There are: Appearance, Manner, Activity, Props, Setting and Analyzing photographs or image. Verbal aspects are divided into two kinds, there are: textual analysis and non-textual analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A language or simply a word contains many hidden meanings behind of it. Each word that we speak, hear and listen sometimes can very different from what we understand literally.According to Leech (1974) meaning a word is complex. Leech divided meaning into seven types. There are: conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, stylistic meaning, affective meaning, reflected meaning, collocative meaning and thematic meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Script is an Irish</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pop_rock"><span class="font2"> pop rock </span></a><span class="font2">band. Established in 2001 in</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dublin"><span class="font2"> Dublin,</span></a><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ireland"><span class="font2"> IrelandT</span></a><span class="font2">he script already release four albums to date which are, The Script (2008), Science &amp;&nbsp;Faith (2010), #3 (2012), and No Sound without Silence (2014). The single “Super Heroes” was included in the latest album “No sound without silence”. The “Superheroes” video clip this very interesting to analyzed in order to get the concept and the massage of this video for everyone who watch it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research focused on the meaning of visual and verbal aspect of The Script video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background of the study, in analyzing the song lyrics the research problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What steps of visual aspect used in the “Superheroes” video clip by The Script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of the lyrics based on the verbal aspects in the video clip?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem of study, the aims of study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the steps of visual aspect used in “Superheroes” video clip by the script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the meaning of lyrics based on the verbal aspect in the video clip.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this research, the data of this study were taken from the Script’s music video entitled “Superheroes” and the lyrics of the song. This video clip</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">was taken from the album entitled “No Sound Without Silence”. The music video entitled “Superheroes” was chosen as the data source because the music video consists of a deep story which is closed to our reality which is represented in their lyrics, connected with the music videos, verbally and visually.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study are collected by using method of documentation. The collecting of music video in The Script will be done with following steps. First, downloaded The Script music video “Superheroes” from</span><a href="http://www.youtube.com/"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Next Step was watching the video repeatedly, carefully, and intensively until the content was understood, and then collect the articles from internet telling about The Script biography were collected, in order to get more detailed information relevant to the topic that increases the understanding of the elements of the data source.next step would be browsing the lyrics from the internet, in order to understand the meaning of the song. The last, the important points found in those music video were noted down.The data were analyzed based on the theory of visual and verbal proposed by John Dyer</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1993) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and theory of meaning by Leech (1974).All the data are classified based on the kinds of the visual and verbal aspects. The analyses are continued by analysing the meaning of each stanza.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and discussion of the analysis of visual and verbal communication aspects from the script video clip</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinds &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Communication Aspects</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The identification of the age in “Superheroes” music video was based on the character represented by the actor. The man could be classified into a mature around 3035 years old and the child could be classified into kid around 5-10 years old.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gender</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In “Superheroes” Video clip, the overall classification of gender including all of supporting characters could be divided into two which were male and female.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nationality and race</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the appearance of the actors probably the actors was an African.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hair</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this video clip, “Superheroes” the actor has a normal characteristic just like a normal African male that can be found in the city. He has bald hair while the supporting character has a dyed hair.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body and Size</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The man or the main character of this video clip has big body, around 175-180 cm and the supporting character is a little girl who had a size like normal girl like, it is around 110 – 120cm.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Looks</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The main character was just a hard working father who can secretly hide his facial expression when she met her daughter. Meanwhile the supporting character, looked had a sad expression when her father not around.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Manner</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expression</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The expression of the main character of this video clip was</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">occasionally changed. The main character put his exhausted face when he go to work. And he covered his exhausted when he met her daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eye Contact</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The eye contact between the main actor and the supporting character happened at beginning and nearly end of the video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pose</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The pose that occurred in the video clip was concluded as an active pose. Because they were showed doing an active motion even not in one scene.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clothes</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">They were using a formal and also casual clothes depended on the setting of the video clip. The formal clothes such like grey suit wear by the main character when he pretend to go to office. As for the little girl the clothes she wear is a casual clothes; contained a grey sweater with white shirt inside the sweater.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Activity</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Touch</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">At the near end of the video clip, there was a scene when the father</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">who already back from his work and hugs her daughter on the bridge.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body movements</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It began from both characters woke up and the father goes to work. The father showed how he walk from his house to work place. Next when he work as a scavenger where he separate garbage. While the supporting character play with her friend when his father goes to work although she was not invited. Then showed the girl play with swings alone. When sun goes down she met his father and hugged her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Position of Communication</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The positional communication in this video clip refers to the relationship between the main character and supporting character as a father and a daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Props</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were many props that used in this video clip. Beside the instrument of the band, properties that used in this video clip were the house tools, such as sofa, bed, lamp and other properties such as bag, doll, pickup car, garbage car, garbage, flare and swing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The setting of “Superheroes” music video was filmed entirely in suburb place located in South Africa. At first the setting was a mini stage located in a middle of suburb in one city in South Africa. The band was performed in the stage. Then the next setting was at the actor house. Afterwards the setting was at one street which the story was at the actor wanted to go to work. Then it is showed there was a bus top and the actor goes to his workplace. Next the setting was in a place where a garbage dumped, as the place was a place for the actor worked. As the story goes, the setting was at a park where it shown the daughter play alone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analyzing of Photographs and Images</span></h2></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus and depth of vision</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Focus and depth vision of this video clips was on the activity of the main character based on the setting he moves one place to another place. It appeared for the subject outside of the room.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Close up</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Mostly, in this video used medium shot and also the close up shoot.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lightning and Color</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The video clip where filmed in various time, so the lighting used in this video clip were used in evening and night scene.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Before the both scene there are used a sunshine as a nature lighting. And in the night scene of this video used flares to making the video clip more dramatically.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cropping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the video clip “Super Heroes” were not using a cropping, it used a natural movement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Camera Angle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The position of camera angle in this video clip used two angles; medium and long angles.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Special Effect or Montage</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This video were using natural movement and scene, because of it, there was no special effect which used in this video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Verbal Representation Used in “Superheroes” Video Clip.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The verbal representation for “Superheroes” song was textual analysis. The interpreter or the analyst discovered the meaning of the song without asked the writer or the song itself. It was important to know the message of the song.For the verbal presentation in this “Super Heroes” video clip was done by textual analysis.The meaning of “Super Heroes” song was about hero. For this music and video clip the hero is the father. It is shown that the “father” work secretly as a businessman to made his daughter happy, although his original job was not as a business man.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that The Script video clip under the title “Super Heroes” used six main &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;categories &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;visual</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">communication with total 19 elements used for this video clip. For the verbal presentation in this “Super Heroes” video clip was done by textual analysis.The meaning of “Super Heroes” song was about “the unsung</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">hero” who fight his pain everyday made the main character did his job well.This song video clip following a story of a poor father and daughter with their struggle for dignity and future.And the message of the song is about change the pain that everyone got in their life into a power to make someone or yourself happy. This song talked about the struggle of a man who keep fighting for his and his beloved one happiness. It is pictured well in the video clip where it shown what the real father is should be doing their job. Through all the pain to make his daughter happy is what the video clip literally showed. As a normal being when someone had been fighting for it all the rest of their life. Everyone must be had a one time that they are going to be struggling, while that’s happen do it right. Because everything in this life is not gained instantly, but from a hard work. True heroes don’t glide to an easy victory. True heroes are the ones who know .what pain feels like. That makes everyone strong and understanding.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, Gillian. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font2">. London: Methuen &amp;Co.Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">. Great Britain :Hazell Watson and Viney Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thescript.com. music. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.thescriptmusic.com/g"><span class="font2">http://www.thescriptmusic.com/g</span></a><span class="font2"> b/music</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.azlyric.com"><span class="font2">www.azlyric.com</span></a><span class="font2">. The Script Superheroes Lyric. 2014. Available from :</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/scr"><span class="font2">http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/scr</span></a><span class="font2"> ipt/superheroes.html</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font2">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font2">. The Script. 2014. Available from : </span><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch"><span class="font2">https://www.youtube.com/watch</span></a><span class="font2">? v=WIm1GgfRz6M</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">185</span></p>