---
layout: full_article
title: "The Psychological Aspects of Conflict of the Main Character in the Novel The Guardian by Nicholas Sparks"
author: "Ni Made Wahyu Mustika Cahyaningsih"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 21.1 Nopember 2017: 172-179</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Psychological Aspects of Conflict of the Main Character in the Novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Guardian</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Nicholas Sparks</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Made Wahyu Mustika Cahyaningsih</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Faculty Of Arts - Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">[</span><a href="mailto:wahyu_mustika35@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">wahyu_mustika35@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul Aspek Psikologis dari Konflik Karakter Utama dalam Novel &quot;The Guardian&quot; oleh Nicholas Sparks. Novel ini adalah novel ketujuh yang ditulis oleh penulis Nicholas Sparks, yang diterbitkan pada bulan September 2013. Penelitian ini bertujuan meneliti dan menganalisis konflik yang dialami oleh tokoh utama di dalam novel dan aspek psikologis dari konflik tersebut yang dialami oleh tokoh utama. Data dikumpulkan melalui penelitian kepustakaan dan dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Teori yang digunakan didasarkan pada teori konflik yang diusulkan oleh Kenney, dan teori psikologi yang diusulkan oleh Bernhardt. Konflik Julie dapat dikategorikan menjadi konflik eksternal dan internal. Untuk konflik eksternal terjadi antara Richard Franklin dan Mike Harris. Karakter utama yang diwakili oleh Julie Barenson mendapat banyak perang antara benaknya dan dianalisis dalam konflik internal. Analisis aspek psikologis karakter utama terbagi atas keinginan, emosi, dan perasaan. Keinginan karakter utama yang digambarkan oleh narator cerita ini adalah ketika Julie ingin Richard berhenti mengikutinya lagi. Emosi adalah saat Julie sedih setelah mendapat konflik dengan Mike. Perasaannya adalah saat dia merasa kasihan kepada Richard karena dia tidak bisa pergi bersamanya lagi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: konflik, tokoh, psikologi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature is a kind of art, which offers pleasure and illumination (Kennedy, 1991). Literature is also an individual expression of human beings which entertain and educate other people. According to Wellek and Warren (1962:107), literature is a form of human creativity consisting of idiom, feeling, idea, spirit, faith, and experience.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study is intended to analyse the most important part of literature works, namely the main character. According to Kenney (1966:24-25) the character is expected to be natural of life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">like. Human being is free but the fictional character is never entirely free because it is a part of an artistic whole and must always serve the needs for that whole. The reason to analyze the main character is that the main character takes an important part in the story and appears continually form beginning until the end of the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study is focused on the analysis of the conflict of the main character in the novel “The Guardian” by Nicholas Sparks published in September 2003. This is a novel published by the first New York Times Bestselling Author with over one hundred million copies of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">books sold. It is interesting to analyze the conflicts which were experienced by the main character in this story. Conflict is one of the important aspects built up in the story itself. Many literary works must have conflict because without it, the story would not be interesting to the reader. The story of The Guardian” by Nicholas Sparks is very interesting to analyze which includes many aspects of life especially human conflicts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, the problems that are discussed in this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What conflicts that affect the characterization of the main character in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What psychological aspects of conflicts of the main character are available in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this study are closely related to the problems formulated above. The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and analyze kinds of conflicts in the main character of the novel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find the psychological aspect of the main character through the conflict.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The novel is the source of this study entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian. The Guardian</span><span class="font1"> by Nicholas Sparks is a romance novel. The novel was first published in September 2013 with 494 pages. This is a novel published by the first New York Times Bestselling Author with over one hundred million copies of books sold. I used a copyright book from Hachette Book Group, Inc. The data were chosen because it can give some data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">based on the topic of this study, and also the story is very interesting to analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected based on library research and this method was supported by some techniques. First by reading the novel and the biography of the author, and secondly marking and taking notes of parts of the novel related to the study. After getting the source and taking the relevant data, the data were analyzed carefully.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed using the qualitative method based on the theoretical framework. The analysis starts with the overview of the biography of Nicholas Sparks followed by the synopsis of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian</span><span class="font1"> novel. Afterwards, the conflict of the main character was analysed by applying the theory of conflict from Kenney (1966). Then, description of psychological aspects of the main character were analyzed by applying the theory of psychology by Bernhardt (1953).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In presenting the analysis, the descriptive qualitative method was used. The result of data analysis is presented based on two research questions mentioned above. In the first problem, the conflict of the main character was analyzed by applying the theory of conflict proposed by Kenney (1966). In the second problem, the source of psychological aspects was shown through descriptive explanation based on the theory of psychology proposed by Bernhard (1953).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1. External &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflict &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Psychological Aspect</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Conflict between Julie Barenson and Richard Franklin.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict between Julie and Richard was at Julie’s house. After leaving Swansboro city for a long time, Richard was back again. He came to Julie’s house and brought her a bouquet of roses. It was not easy for Julie. She hesitated before taking the flowers, wishing he had not brought them. Julie explained that she was out with Mike. Then she was on debate with Richard because she could not have dating with him again. Richard was jealous with Mike and became angrier. She tried to say sorry to him and did not want him to get hurt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“So, were you in?” he asked. “Earlier, I mean?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She felt her shoulders give a little. She didn’t want to do this now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I was out with a friend,” she said. “A friend?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You remember Mike? We grabbed a quick dinner.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Oh, yeah. From the bar that night, right?” he said. “The guy who works at the garage?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“That’s the one.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Oh,” he said. “Have fun?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I haven’t seen a lot of him lately, so it was nice to be able to catch up.” “Good.” He glanced off to the side of the porch, then down at his feet, then at her again. “Can I come in? I was hoping we might be able to talk for a few minutes.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I don’t know,” she hedged. “It’s kind of late. I was just getting ready for bed.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Oh,” he said. “That’s fine. I understand. Can I see you tomorrow, then?” maybe we can have dinner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I’m sorry,” she said, “but I can’t. I already made plans.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“With Mike again?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She nodded</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richard absently scratched the side of his cheek, continuing to hold her gaze. “So that’s it then? For us, I mean?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Her expression answered for her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Did I do something wrong?” he asked.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“No,” she protested, “it’s not that.” “Then…..what is it?” Didn’t you have fun when we went out?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Yes, I had fun.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Then what is it?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Julie hesitated. “It’s not about you at all, really. It’s about Mike and me. We just seem….. Well, I don’t know how to explain it. What can I say?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Must have been an exciting few days while I was gone, huh?” he said.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Look, I’m sorry……….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“For what? For going behind my back as soon as I left? For using me to make Mike jealous?” “What are you talking about?” “You heard me.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“I didn’t use you…….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Richard ignored her, his tone becoming angrier. “No? Then why are you ending this when we’re still getting to know each other? And how did Mike suddenly get so interesting? I mean, I leave town for a few days, and the next thing I know, it’s over between us and Mike has taken my place. It sure as hell sounds to me like you planned this all along. You’re a jerk.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">His anger suddenly gave way to an expression of hurt. “This isn’t fair,” he said softly. “Please, I</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">just want to talk for a minute, okay?” he pleaded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Look, I’m sorry, Richard. I should not have said what I did. And I did not mean for you to get hurt. Really.” She paused, making sure he was listening. “But it is late and we were both tired. I think I better head in before either of us says anything else. Okay?” </span><span class="font1">(Chapter 17: &nbsp;181</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">183)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The psychology of Julie was feeling. She felt sorry to Richard because she could not go with him again and she did not tell him about her dating with Mike when he was out of Swansboro city. She also did apologize for what she had said to him. His tone became angrier but she tried to explain it slowly. She was guilty and she did not want him to get hurt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“I’m sorry,” she said, “but I can’t. I already made plans.” </span><span class="font1">“With Mike again?” She nodded</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Must have been an exciting few days while I was gone, huh?” he said.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Look, I’m sorry……….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“For what? For going behind my back as soon as I left? For using me to make Mike jealous?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“What are you talking about?” “You heard me.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I didn’t use you…….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richard ignored her, his tone becoming angrier. “No? Then why are you ending this when we’re still getting to know each other? And how did Mike suddenly get so interesting? I mean, I leave town for a few days, and the next thing I know, it’s over between us and Mike has taken my place. It sure as</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">hell sounds to me like you planned this all along. You’re a jerk.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">His anger suddenly gave way to an expression of hurt. “This isn’t fair,” he said softly. “Please, I just want to talk for a minute, okay?” he pleaded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Look, I’m sorry, Richard. I should not have said what I did. And I did not mean for you to get hurt. Really.” She paused, making sure he was listening. “But it is late and we were both tired. I think I better head in before either of us says anything else. Okay?” </span><span class="font1">(Chapter 17: 181183)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Conflict between Julie Barenson and Mike Harris</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict happened between Julie and Mike was at Julie’s house. They were debating about Richard had spent the night at Julie’s house. He was angry because Julie didn’t tell that Richard had spent the night at her house. She was sad because Mike did not trust her explanation. She had explained that she did not sleep with Richard at the night he stayed at Julie’s, but he still did not want to know the truth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“That was the night of our first date, wasn’t it? It was also, he remembered, the night he’d first tried to kiss her but she hadn’t let him.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Julie nodded. “Nice timing, huh?” It wasn’t the time for jokes, and she regretted it immediately. She took a step forward. “I didn’t know he was going to stop by. I was just thinking of heading to bed when he came to the door.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“And what? You just let him it?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“It wasn’t like that. We had an argument because I told him I didn’t want to see him anymore. It got kind of heated, and then Singer…..”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">She paused. She didn’t want to go into this at all, because it seemed so pointless.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Singer what?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Julie crossed her arms and shrugged. “Singer bit him. When I tried to close the door, he stopped it with his hand and Singer went after him.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mike stared at her. “And you didn’t think any of this was important enough to tell me? Even after everything that’s happened?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“That’s just it,” she pleaded. “It wasn’t important. I told him I didn’t want to see him and he got upset.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mike crossed his arm. “So let me get this straight,” he said. “He comes to the door, you have a fight, Singer goes after him, and then you invite him to spend the night. Correct me if I’m wrong, but your story doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Don’t be like this, Mike. Please….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Be like what? Someone who’s a little upset that you lied to me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I didn’t lie to you”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“No? What do you call it?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I didn’t tell you because it didn’t matter. It meant nothing, and nothing happened. It’s not like all this is happening because of that night.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“How do you know? Maybe that’s what set him off in this direction.” “But I didn’t do anything but listen to him!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mike said nothing, and Julie saw the accusation in his eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You don’t believe me?” she asked. “What? Do you think I slept with him?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I don’t know what to think anymore.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She suddenly knew that this, too, was part of Richard’s plan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Is that what you think of me, Mike? That I’d sleep with a man I barely know on the same day I told him I didn’t want to see him anymore? After I’d told you that I didn’t even like the guy? After all the years you’ve known me, do you really believe I’d do something like that?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mike stared at Julie. “I don’t know.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The words stung, and Julie felt her eyes tear. “I didn’t sleep with him.” “Maybe not,” Mike finally said. He reached for the door. “But it still hurts to think you didn’t trust me with this. Especially after all this stuff started happening.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I do trust you. But I didn’t want to hurt you.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You just did, Julie,” he said. “You just did.” (Chapter 32: 355-358)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The psychology of Julie was emotion. It happened because Julie was sad after getting conflict with Mike. He did not trust her explanation that she did not do anything with Richard. She tried to explain but Mike showed his anger and spoke louder. She cried while explaining, but he left her without listening to the truth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Don’t be like this, Mike. Please….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Be like what? Someone who’s a little upset that you lied to me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“I didn’t lie to you”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“No? What do you call it?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“I didn’t tell you because it didn’t matter. It meant nothing, and nothing happened. It’s not like all this is happening because of that night.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“How do you know? Maybe that’s what set him off in this direction.” “But I didn’t do anything but listen to him!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mike said nothing, and Julie saw the accusation in his eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You don’t believe me?” she asked. “What? Do you think I slept with him?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I don’t know what to think anymore.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She suddenly knew that this, too, was part of Richard’s plan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Is that what you think of me, Mike? That I’d sleep with a man I barely know on the same day I told him I didn’t want to see him anymore? After I’d told you that I didn’t even like the guy? After all the years you’ve known me, do you really believe I’d do something like that?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mike stared at Julie. “I don’t know.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The words stung, and Julie felt her eyes tear. “I didn’t sleep with him.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Maybe not,” Mike finally said. He reached for the door. “But it still hurts to think you didn’t trust me with this. Especially, after all this stuff started happening.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“I do trust you. But I didn’t want to hurt you.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You just did, Julie,” he said. “You just did.” (Chapter 32: 355-358)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflict &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Psychological Aspect</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">An internal conflict is also sometimes called psychological conflict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Interpersonal conflict is struggle that takes place in the character’s mind. The conflict happened when she wanted to answer the questions from the people who asked her condition after her husband passed away.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You want to know what it was like to lose my husband?</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> She wanted to ask</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. Here’s what it’s like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Jim’s dead, and now that he’s gone, I feel like I’m dead too.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> Is that, Julie wondered, what people wanted to hear? Or did they want platitudes? </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I’ll be okay. It’s hard, but I’ll make through this. Thank you for asking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(prologue: xii)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The psychology of Julie was wants. After her husband passed away, she avoided to go outside or meet her friends. She hated everything about Swansboro city. If the people asked her condition, she wanted to answer those questions. She was not in good condition right now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">She wanted to ask</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. Here’s what it’s like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jim’s dead, and now that he’s gone, I feel like I’m dead too.</span><span class="font1"> Is that, Julie wondered, what people wanted to hear? Or did they want platitudes? </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll be okay. It’s hard, but I’ll make through this. Thank you for asking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(prologue: xii)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian</span><span class="font1"> novel, there are two intrinsic elements analysed; they are conflicts and the psychological aspects of the main character. The conflict in the novel describes how Julie Barenson as the main character walk on her life with all the problems she gets. The conflict of Julie could be categorized into two general types: external and internal conflicts. For the external conflict, it is shown in this story that mostly the conflict occurred between man and man, Richard Franklin and Mike Harris. The main character represented by Julie Barenson is described as a very thoughtful character. That is why she gets a lot of wars between her mind and it is analyzed in the internal conflicts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of psychological aspects of the main character is divided into want, emotions, and feeling. The wants of the main character described by the narrator of this story is when Julie wanted Richard to stop following her again. The emotion is when Julie was sad after getting conflict with Mike. The feeling is when he felt sorry to Richard because she could not go with him again.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Almerico, Gina M.(2014). Building Character through Literacy with Children’s Literature.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Research in Higher Education Journal</span><span class="font1">. Volume 26, October.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bernhardt, Karl S. (1953). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font1">. McGraw –Hill Book Inc, Canada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Burns, J. (1978). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Leadership</span><span class="font1">. Harper Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Di Yanni, Robert. (1994). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: Reading Fiction, Poetry, Drama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and Essay. Third Edition</span><span class="font1">. McGraw – Hill, Inc, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. (2002).</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font1">: Seventh Edition. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kennedy, XJ. (1991). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature An Introduction to Fiction Poetry, and Drama</span><span class="font1">. Fifth Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. (1966). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">. Monarch Press, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meredith, Robert C. and John D. Fitzgerald. (1972). Structuring Your Novel: From Basic Idea to Finished Manuscript. New York: Barnest and Noble Book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nita Jayanti, LuhPutu. (2007). The Analysis of Conflict Reflected in the Main Character on the Novel Where The Heart Is by Billie Letts(thesis).Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reaske, Christoper. (1984). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Drama</span><span class="font1">. Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tjosvold, Dean and Mary M. Tjosvold. (1995). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Psychology for Leaders</span><span class="font1">. New York: John Wiles &amp;&nbsp;Sons, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sari Dewi, Sarah. (2009). The Analysis of Characters in Sidney Sheldon’s The Stars Shine Down (thesis). Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sparks, Nicholas. (2003). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Guardian. </span><span class="font1">Hachette Book Group, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tarigan, Henry Guntur. (1985). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-PrinsipDasarSastra</span><span class="font1">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Angkasa,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. (1977). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. (1986). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harcout, Brace and World, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wirastara, KomangGede. (2010). The Analysis of the Main Character in Marty M. Enggle’sDriven to Death: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Approach(thesis). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">179</span></p>