---
layout: full_article
title: "Best Practices of Heritage and Gastronomic Tourism in a Kampong"
author: "Kun Aniroh Muhrofi-G, Rina Rifqie Maria"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-36402 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-36402"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-36402"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.4. No.2. (2017): 94-99</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1</sup> Best Practices of Heritage and Gastronomic Tourism in a Kampong</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Kun Aniroh Muhrofi-G and Rina Rifqie Maria</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Merdeka Malang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Corresponding author:</span><a href="mailto:kun.aniroh@unmer.ac.id"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">kun.aniroh@unmer.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ARTICLE INFO &nbsp;&nbsp;ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">09 November 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">08 August 2017 Available online</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">25 August 2017</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">Kampong as a center of local culture keeps endless-life values that can be explored as a learning resource. In kampong there are genuine values of life which is full of local wisdom that has already existed since the ancient time. People in a kampong in Malang, think simply and use symbols in foods and life values which have been conducted by their ancestors. Culinary and heritage in the form of precious life values are two practices among many which have existed for years until the present time. However, the young generation who inherits the practices from their parents mostly do not know the philosophy or the lesson learned why they are doing these things. This paper aims at analyzing culinary and heritage values in a kampong by arranging in a calendar of events, exploring the philosophy and creatively packing the practices in a kampong for the culinary tourism purposes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: best practice, culinary and heritage, tourism, kampong</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Introduction</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>Background</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Most people in Indonesia are ‘orang kampong’ who have the tight relationship with the kampong where they were born and other memories that they cannot forget until they are grown up and getting old. They will be very proud to tell the kampong to colleagues in the city or overseas when the people are already far away from kampong. There are always memories and impressions that always remind that kampong is a part of people lifecycle. There is a time for leaving kampong for life struggling but there is also time for going back to kampong. Going back to kampong means a lot for most people, showing the successfulness of life, sharing happiness to friends and relatives, and making a devositional visit to parents, and relatives who already passed away. There is always a</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0">The article had been presented in The International Tourism Conference “Promoting Cultural &amp;&nbsp;Heritage Tourism” at Udayana University, 1-3 September 2016.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">feeling of ambience, a feeling of homesick that on a certain day people will go back home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Recently there has been a tendency of successful professionals going back to kampong.They want to contribute their experience to the development of their kampong in order to be more developed by running a business. Some of the reasons are the transports are getting easier, internet access is now available and the existence of many kinds of community who concerned with their kampong. So these professionals pioneered of living in the small cities and this means that they start to have the activities from kampong. Many kinds of business have been being developed from cooperation, café, education to social entrepreneurship. (Kompas 18 Juli 2016, Kaum Profesional Minati Kota Kecil). This phenomenon is good meaning that people do not concentrate on living in the big cities, so there will be a balance number of population who live in the small cities and big cities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">What is actually kampong? A kampong (spelled kampung in Malay and Indonesian) is a conventional group of houses and buildings usually smaller than a town. It is also called village in</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malaysia"><span class="font2"> Malaysia</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">,</span></a><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brunei"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">Brunei</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">,</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesia"><span class="font2">Indonesia</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">,</span></a><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singapore"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">Singapore </span></a><span class="font2">and Cambodia. The term also refers to traditional villages, specifically native people, and has also used to refer to densely populated areas and enclosed developments within towns and cities</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Why do people always miss their kampong? This is because kampong gives a number of memories of people life. Many songs and poetry are created illustrating how people always want to go home. ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pulang kampong</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mudik</span><span class="font2"> is not a culture of Malaysia, Brunei and So kampong is actually an area where people can contemplate where they are from, where they are now and where people finally would like to go. The phenomenon of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pulang kampong</span><span class="font2"> or ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mudik</span><span class="font2">’ is one proof of how strong the relationship among people and their kampongs is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This article is a preliminary study of research of “Developing Malang as a Creative City of Gastronomy to Increase the Competitiveness of Domestic and International Tourism Destination” where some parts of the study is to explore kampongs in Malang with their heritage and culinary. Based on the field observation there are some areas in Malang which are originally heritage in nature and other kampongs have special culinary. In the development later, some kampongs in Malang developed into a creative kampong.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Research Objective</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Objective of the research is to understand the interesting and potential attraction which need to be maintained and developed as a tourist attraction</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Literature Review</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Kampong in Malang</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the field observation here are some kampongs in Malang with its different characteristics which can be categorized into heritage and culinary and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">some kampongs have developed into creative kampongs. Kampong of Arab or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab</span><span class="font2"> in Malang is different from other </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab</span><span class="font2"> in other cities in Indonesia which are usually located close to the coast line or the port. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab</span><span class="font2"> in Malang is in the center of the city. It was because at that time there were 2 regulations published by Dutch in the year of 1860 about the differentiation ofcommunity group into European, Foreign East and domestic people. Then in 1882 the Arab area was located across Jami’mosque and close to it but there was a street named Embong Arab which means that the street was owned by Arab which in a natural way forming a kampong of Arab (Handinoto, 1996).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Many people wonder why this area is called Kayu tangan. Kayu is wood and tangan is hand. At the time when alun-alun was being developed in the corner of the street there was a tree similar to hand. In 1914 there was a big signpost in the form of hand and therefore the street is called Kayutangan. There were many reports in 1890 about Kayutangan one of them is shopping areas along Kayutangan which starts from electricity office to the front of Catholic Church of Kayutangan. This shopping area was built in 1936 (Handinoto, 1996).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Methodology</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Qualitative reseachwas undertaken as the preliminary study of research of “Developing Malang as a Creative City of Gastronomy to Increase the Competitiveness of Domestic and International Tourism Destination” where some parts of the study is to explore kampongs in Malang with their heritage and culinary. Based on the field observation there are some areas in Malang which are originally heritage in nature and other kampongs have special culinary. In the development later, some kampongs in Malang developed into a creative kampong.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Results and Discussion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Many people wonder why this area is called Kayu tangan. Kayu is wood and tangan is hand. At the time when alun-alun was being developed in the corner of the street there was a tree similar to hand. In 1914 there was a big</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">signpost in the form of hand and therefore the street is called Kayutangan. There were many reports in 1890 about Kayutangan one of them is shopping areas along Kayutangan which starts from electricity office to the front of Catholic Church of Kayu tangan. This shopping area was built in 1936.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Kampong of Kauman</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Heritage kampong is a kampong that has long history that belongs to a certain society. In Malang and other parts of Indonesia there are kampongs which have the characteristics of the development of Islam usually called as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Kauman</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kauman </span><span class="font2">is derived from the word ‘Kaum Iman’ which is the place for muslims or ulama muslims.The main characteristics of these kampongs are close to alun-alun. Based on the developmentof of Sunan Kalijaga in developing town planning the buildings of regency or the center of government consists of the palace, one or two banyan trees, and the place for prayer and alun-alun. Alun-alun has the functions of the meeting for many kinds of people and the symbol of the place of togetherness in the center of the city between local authority and its community (Rahimsyah, 2002). In alun-alun in Malang there is a mosque, and a church which is in the same street, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jalan Merdeka Barat</span><span class="font2"> which is bordered only by the Jiwasraya Insurance office</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> In relation to religion tolerance this shows that Malang society has been living harmoniously since long time ago.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Kampong of Arab</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Kampong of Arab or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab </span><span class="font2">in Malang is different from other </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab</span><span class="font2"> in other cities in Indonesia which are usually located close to the coast line or the port. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampong Arab</span><span class="font2"> in Malang is in the center of the city. It was because at that time there were 2 regulations published by Dutch in the year of 1860 about the differentiation ofcommunity group into European, Foreign East and domestic people. Then in 1882 the Arab area was located across Jami’mosque and close to it but there was a street named Embong Arab which means that the street was owned by Arab which in a natural way forming a kampong of Arab (Handinoto, 1996).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Kampong of Kayutangan</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Many people wonder why this area is called Kayu tangan. Kayu is wood and tangan is hand. At the time when alun-alun was being developed in the corner of the street there was a tree similar to hand. In 1914 there was a big signpost in the form of hand and therefore the street is called Kayutangan. There were many reports in 1890 about Kayutangan one of them is shopping areas along Kayutangan which starts from electricity office to the front of Catholic Church of Kayutangan. This shopping area was built in 1936. Another report was that the architect of Kayutangan built two similar buildings to illustrate gates to Jalan Semeru which is inspired by Karel Bos the architect who had twin children. The style of architecture of Nieuwe Bouwen which has the tower above the building functions as observing the surrounding area (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kisah Sejarah Kota Malang</span><span class="font2">, 2012).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Kampong of Pecina</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">As other cities in Indonesia and other countries, Malang has the area where Chinese people live which is called Pecinan or Chinatown area. It is located close to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pasar Besar</span><span class="font2"> as the center of trade. Kampong Pecinan in Malang is on Jalan Wiromargo and the nameof the street is dedicated to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mbah Wiro </span><span class="font2">who was the pioneer of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jalan Pecinan kecil</span><span class="font2">. The graveyard of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mbah Wiro</span><span class="font2"> is also in this area. It is not surprising that on this street there are so may flower sellers for burial, it might be at the ancient time there were many people who made a devotional visit to the graveyard of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mbah Wiromargo</span><span class="font2"> so that there were many flower sellers there. Nowdays, when people want to get married, the birth of the baby and anniversaries they buy flowers here. On this street number 32 there is a Bentoel museum which illustrates the history of the owner Ong Hok Liong in 1925 of how to build the cigarette company.Bentoel is now becoming a big cigarette company with the new management and the company’s name is PT Bentoel Prima. In relation with the town planning of Malang before 1900 small shops and markets are on the south side of alun-alun on the China street; therefore it is called the market of Pecinan. This shows that kampong of Pecinan is really the center of the trade until</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">now.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Kampong of Ijen</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Kampong of Ijen in Malang is the location of Dutch buildings owned by rich Dutch people who were entrepreneurs of plantation and local authority of Malang in the colonial era. On this street there is a military museum, and city library. This area is also called Ijen Boulevard which has a twin street with the green stripes and flower garden splitting the center of the boulevard into two lanes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ijen Boulevard with its villas on both sides were built by Voonerman and Thomas Karsten in the period of 1923 to 1933. There was a concept of housing area which are connected between a small lhousing complex and a big housing complex not based on the people who inhabited as the housing area as in Embong Arab and the area of Kampong of Pecinan. Karsten made a profile standard between the street and its environment so that kampongs in Malang in the city center looked clean and tidy (Septarius, 2010).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Kampong of Madura-Kotamadu</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Kotamadu is in Malang in the area of Buring. Most of Madurese people go to Malang for the reasons of business and education. They were used to be from the low level of society however gradually Madurese people work and struggle hard to be the high level society and decide to live in Malang. Nowdays, we can find Madurese people who work at Pasar Besar who come from certain areas in Madura with its specific stuffs. For example, chicken sellers are from the district of Tragah, Bangkalan. Coconut, cigarette, taro sellers are from the districts of Proppo, Pamekasan, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">soto</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sate</span><span class="font2"> sellers are from Sampang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Madurese in Malang are now having a very strategic position from the lowest society to the highest society. There is a ‘joking’ that silently Malang is dominated by madurese because from parking attendants, traders, sellers of food and the regent of Malang are madurese</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kampong of Arema</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Malang has a long history of football and other branches of sport. One of them is Kampong of Arema in the village of Kasin which is prospected to be creative potential kampong. If we go to this kampong we have to be ready using walikan language which becomes the characteristicsof Arema and Aremanita. Bahasa walikan is a special language for Malang people and using it we have to be familiar with the words that should be upsided down. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rek</span><span class="font2"> becomes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ker</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaos becomes soak</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">arek becomes kera</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Malang becomes Ngalam</span><span class="font2"> etc. This kampong produces merchandise such as T shirts, mug, key holders, and shawl (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampung Arema</span><span class="font2">, 2014).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Kampong of Jodipan</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Kampong of Jodipan is located in the village of Jodipan. At the beginning this kampong which is located in the edge of the river looked dirty. As the initiative of the students of communication Department of Muhammadiyah University create the areas to be more attractive by painting it colorfully. The initiative is from the assignment of Public Relation subject to make an activity of a big event. The group of the students then made collaboration with a famous painting company. As stated by the head of the project Nabilla Firdausiyah, the initiative was from the bad habit of Jodipan community to throw away garbage not in the proper place. With the change of colorfulness of the kampong of Jodipan many people are expected to come to see the kampong, or just making selfie there, and all of these can drive the economy of the kampong.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Kampong of Tridi</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Another kampong which is also attractive is Kampong Tridi which is located on the village of Kesatrian. Tridi means three Ds which means three dimensions. Not like the neighboring village that colorsthe houses, kampong Tridi paints the streets and draws the big three dimension pictures of murals mostly in the form of animals.The story of the kampong started with the painting of a kampong street with the purpose of attracting people to come. The painting was done by local artists sponsored by kampong artists and kampong people. The work then attracts the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">sponsor of a national painting company and the Malang government.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nowdays there are many people who come to this kampong for selfie. The coming of people there is hoped to create activities that can add the income of kampong people.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Kampong of Garbage Insurance Clinic</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Kampong of garbage insurance clinic is in the village of Sukun, where the majority of people are poor people.Whenever the kampong people want to go to the doctors and use medical facilities, they bring the organic or non-organic garbage. With this model they can also have medical insurance by paying 10.000 thousand rupiahsin the form of garbage every month.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As the initiator, Dr. Gamal Albinsaid stated this model has at least two advantages: the kampong people need not topay a lot of money for medical facilities and the kampong becomes clean. This program is now developing into nutrition training and consultation, the advancement of health quality and various sickness avoidance training. This creative idea attracts very important persons and corporate social responsibilities to sponsor this program. The efforts of dr.Gamal Albinsaid is now applied in many kampongs and as what he has been done he got and award of Unilever Sustainable Living Young Entrepreneurs Awards 2013, and in 2014 he was invited by Prince Charles of United Kingdom to receive the award</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Kampong of Culinary</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Culinary is a part of gastronomy in which gastronomy is an art or activity of cooking, and eating delicious food or style of culinary. It can also be regarded that gastronomy focuses on food culture (en.wikipaedia.org/wiki/gastronomy).Culinary is a part of culture of a certain society can tell a story of a variety of cultures, and it is called food tourism (Hall and Sharples, www. digilib.petra.ac.id). Malang as a city that has along history of gastronomy since the colonialization of Dutch era.Malang food has the influence of Dutch, British, india, France, and Arab.Local influence such Java, Madura, Bali and Sumatra also flavours Malang food.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are many spots of culinary tourism inMalang.On Jalan Sukarno Hatta people could find classic,modified and modern food. This spot mostly is visited by youngpeople. Chocolate, pittza huts, cafés, while playing bilyard could be found here. Simple snacking such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">martabak, terang bulan, pohong keju, lumpia Surabaya are also available.</span><span class="font2"> Those who like noodles can enjoy </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mie gang Jangkrik</span><span class="font2">, and many other kinds of noodle. Simple home traditional foods are easy to find here, you can visit </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kedai Bu Gito</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Warung Nasi Pecel Bu Tinuk</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bakso Damas </span><span class="font2">and before going home there are many kinds of speciality foods of Malang that have been waiting to be purchased for the family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are still many other culinary kampongs in Malang that have speciality foods: kampong of Sanan for soyabean chips, kampong of Sumpil for fruit chips. Many kinds of resto from classic to modern can also be easily found: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Toko Oen, Restaurant New Hongkong, Resto Inggil, Kopi Tiam,Ikan Bakar Cianjur, Rumah makan Harmoni, Ayam Goreng Kalasan, Mie Pak Karso</span><span class="font2"> and many others. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Kampong &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Culinary</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ngalam.co/2016/01/15/potensi-wisata-kuliner-kawasan-soekarno-hatta-malang).Recently other creative kampongs in Malang have appeared in Malang based on the potent of the kampong and the capability of the society.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Tourism Kampong Packaging in Calendar of Events, Problems and Prospects</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">To see the potential of many kinds of kampong, the attractiveness and the uniqueness will be a magnet for visitors. However the magnet has to be managed in such a way that the people who will come to kampong can participate and maintain the potential of a kampong.Remembering that in forteen years to come, the year of 2030 people who live in the city will reach five billion, it is not easy to manage the various people (Global City Report on City Tourism, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The development of kampong as a part of the city needs to be seriously taken into consideration. This is due to the residents in the city are included the kampong people who occupy most parts of the city. The activity of the kampong people based on their initiatives or supported by students, CSR and other</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">institution are the valuable assets for developing tourism kampong. The awareness of the community by developing their unique kampong directly or indirectly will grow the sense of belonging of the kampong. When this happens it is not difficult to run the activities that can make the kampong more interesting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Packaging of kampong of tourism is very necessary. People from other kampongs are tourists and they want to enjoy more activities in the kampong. Local arists and kampong people together with tourism program cooperate by arranging tour itinerary starting from 3 hour tour to one day tour. So it is not only selfie activity but other genuine activities conducted by the local community, showing the uniqueness of the kampong needs to be explored. The easy and practical way is exploring history of the kampong by asking to the community figure. When this activity is successful one heritage tour is ready to welcome the tourists. Since some kampongs have certain dates for kampong festivals and some other activities, the announcement of the D-day of the activities is suggested to in advance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another activity is arranging kampong of tourism information center and training the local people to be local guides. In other words once tourist attraction is created, the community step by step thinks of the infrastructure that support tourism activity, accessibility, amenities and ancillary to develop tourist attraction (Buhalis, 2000).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The purpose of tourism,any tourism including kampong of tourism as stated in the tourism constitution no.9, 2010 is to develop the culture, thenation spirit of Indonesia,to enhance the image of the nation, to strengthen the self-identity andto tighten the friendship internationally. This can be conducted and strated from a kampong.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">A kampong is always in the heart of almost everybody. Childhood memory in a kampong which illustrate nature, culture, food, family, friends,relatives cannot be separated from somebody’s life. A kampong is actually very rich in local wisdom in which people can</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">learnalmost everything. A kampong is a heritage but a kampong is also developing. The purpose of developing is to adat,and adopt the changing of the environment. The enthusiasm of kampong shows that the community is active, creative and does not want to be far left behind,and this is actually a big asset that a kampong should be considered as tourist attraction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">References</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Buhalis, D. (2000) ‘Marketing the competitive destination of the future’, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism management</span><span class="font2">. Elsevier, 21(1), pp. 97– 116.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Handinoto (1996) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Perkembangan Kota dan Arsitektur di Malang</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kampung Arema</span><span class="font2"> (2014). Available at: </span><a href="http://radarmalang.co.id/eh-ada-kampung-arema-di-kota-malang-34858"><span class="font2">http://radarmalang.co.id/eh-ada-kampung-arema-di-kota-malang-34858</span></a><span class="font2"> (Accessed: 16 August 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kisah Sejarah Kota Malang</span><span class="font2"> (2012). Available at:</span><a href="http://kelsumbersari.malangkota.go"><span class="font2">http://kelsumbersari.malangkota.go</span></a><span class="font2">. id/kisah-sejarah-kota-malang-yang-tak-banyak-terungkap/ (Accessed: 5 August 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rahimsyah, A. R. (2002) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kumpulan Kisah Teladan Dan Humor Sufi</span><span class="font2">. Surabaya: Indah Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Septarius, I. B. (2010) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ijen Boulevard</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available at:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://septarius.wordpress.com/2010/"><span class="font2">https://septarius.wordpress.com/2010/</span></a><span class="font2"> 08/23/ijen-boulevard/ (Accessed: 19 August 2016).</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">99</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">e-ISSN: 2407-392X. p-ISSN: 2541-0857</span></p>