---
layout: full_article
title: "Transposition in Garuda Magazine’s: English-Indonesian Translation"
author: "Gusti Ayu Oka Cahya Dewi, I Nengah Sudipa"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31059 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-31059"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31059"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">Transposition in Garuda Magazine’S: English-Indonesian Translation</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Gusti Ayu Oka Cahya Dewi, I Nengah Sudipa</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Master of Linguistics Program, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:aiudewi24@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">aiudewi24@gmail.com</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">,</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The aims of this study are at (1) identifying methods of procedures mostly used and (2) describing the reasons why the data belongs to those procedures occurring in the two bilingual articles of Garuda Magazine. The data was collected by note taking and comparing techniques. The classification method for translation proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (in Venuti) was used to analyze the collected data. Based on the analysis, four procedures were found in translation, those are: transposition, modulation, borrowing and literal translation. The result showed that method of transposition (17 data) was mostly applied in the article, due to the pursuit to achieve a closest natural equivalent. Therefore, such procedure cannot be avoided in translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: transposition, modulation, Garuda Magazine.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Recently, translation process is very essential to be discussed because it involves two languages. Translation can be defined as the replacement of the textual material in one language (the source language) by equivalent textual material in another language (the target language) (Catford, 1965:20). Vinay and Dalbernet (1958) states that equivalence refers to cases where languages describe the same situation by different stylistic or structural means. However, when the form in source language has a new form or different form in the target language, it is called a shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Translation cannot be separated from the matter of equivalence. It is because in the process of transferring meaning from source language (SL) into target language (TL), occurrences of different product of translation are mostly aligned to the number of translator conducting it. When people write, the amount of information included in the text will depend on the amount of shared information that already exists between the writer and the reader. The application therefore requires referential, organizational, and situational meaning within the information that should be considered (Larson, 1998:43). Translation is done by going from the form of the first language to the form of a second language by way of semantics structure. It is the meaning that is being transferred and must be held constant; only the form changes. It can be explicitly stated that any translating is intended to have the closest natural equivalent. In translating a language into another language, the form of expressed meaning might be different.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Understanding meanings of words in a text becomes vital in translation, because meanings are the kingpin of translation study. Without understanding the meaning of a text to be translated for the second language users, the translator would be hopelessly lost. Furthermore, Larson (1998:10) states that there are no languages in the world having exactly the same system even though they belong to the same language family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is an undeniable fact that translating is possible due to the language universal. It is proven that many books have been translated into various languages. One of them is an English Indonesian magazine entitled Garuda Magazine. Garuda magazine is one of Indonesian’s leading English language publishing. Since this magazine is a kind of advertisement media, the language used contains a lot of complex grammatical, syntactical constructions and certain lexical items that cannot be easily translated. Therefore, it is very interesting to analyze the shift of translation from English into Indonesian in this magazine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is important for a translator to know that advertisement language has its distinctive characteristics such as word-building structure and lexical concepts, which are unknown in the source language. In addition, it is also important to realize that one word or phrase in one language can be expressed in another either by changing its grammatical category or by changing its point of view for intelligibility. The methodology of translation used in this study is the theory proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (in Venuti, 2000). They proposed seven types of procedures in translation, namely: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">calque</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">literal</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">transposition</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">modulation</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">equivalence</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">adaptation</span><span class="font4">. The aims of this</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">study are to identify which method of procedures were mostly used in this magazine as well as to describe the reasons why the data belongs to those procedures.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II MATERIALS AND METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The data were taken from a magazine created especially for the customers of Garuda Indonesia Airlines. This magazine was made as a gift and to show the appreciation of Garuda Indonesia Airlines to their faithful costumers. In this magazine, the topic is presented in both English and Indonesian language, which is a good source in translation study. This article picked two bilingual texts to be analysed. The first text entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">It’s All About the Beach</span><span class="font4"> and the second text entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sound of the Sasando</span><span class="font4">. There are two reasons why these data were chosen. Firstly, as an expository text the advertisement language is used to inform and to persuade people in order to make them amazed of something (place, thing, culture, etc.), as well as describing something new. Secondly, it is because the second text describes more on culture that there must be ways of how to translate it in order to produce the text as closest equivalent as possible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data were collected by note taking. First, the lexical items that indicated containing the forms of methods or procedures of translation were observed. At the same time, the target language text was compared to make sure that they were equivalent too. Second, the data that have been observed then note down by listed every sentence which data belongs to each procedure by classifying those data. However, not all of the data were analysed. A descriptive qualitative method was used to analyse the translations product..</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1 &nbsp;T</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">RANSPOSITION</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TRUCTURAL </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">S</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">HIFT</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-1) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...that offer tourists some simply </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">stunning panoramas</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...yang menyuguhkan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panorama menawan</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the text in the source language above, it is found that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">stunning panoramas</span><span class="font4"> in the source language was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panorama menawan</span><span class="font4">. It is clear that the source language has different structure from the target language. The </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">stunning panoramas</span><span class="font4"> in source language has modifier in front of head, while in target language the modifier occurred after head.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-2) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: The sasando is an indigenous stringed instrument....</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Sasando mewakili kecintaan dan keterampilan masyarakat Pulau Rote</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">dalam bermain alat musik petik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The text above shows that the source language has different structure from the target language. In source language, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">stringed instrument</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">alat musik petik</span><span class="font4">. The source language phrasal structure is made up of a modifier followed by a head, and in the target language the head is followed by the modifier.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;U</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">NIT </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">S</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">HIFT</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-3) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Expanses of pure white sand </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fuse</span><span class="font3">...</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hamparan pasir putih yang berkilau terasa </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat padu</span><span class="font3">...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The text above shows that the unit shift in translation shows change of rank. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">fuse</span><span class="font4"> in source language was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sangat padu</span><span class="font4"> in target language. It shows that there was a shift from a low to a high unit, as a result from the fact that the target language has more meaning components than the source language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-4) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Almost any </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">local event</span><span class="font3"> would feel incomplete...(second sentence on the second text)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Setiap </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">acara</span><span class="font3"> rasanya belum lengkap...(second sentence on the second text)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The text on the bold type above shows that there was a change of rank between source language into target language. The changes called shift from a low to a high unit results from the fact that the target language has less meaning components than the source language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ATEGORY </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">S</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">HIFT</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-5) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: As the island boasts </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an abundance</span><span class="font3">...</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Mengingat Pulau Rote </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kaya</span><span class="font3"> akan...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the text above, it is seen that the source language has different class word from the target language. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an abundance</span><span class="font4"> is a noun in the source language and was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaya</span><span class="font4"> in the target language, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kaya</span><span class="font4"> is an adjective in this case. Therefore, there is a shift in the word class.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-6) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Almost any local event would feel incomplete without a musical </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">accompaniment</span><span class="font3">...</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Setiap acara rasanya belum lengkap kalau tak </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">diiringi....</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the data above, it is seen that the source language has different word class from the target language. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">accompaniment</span><span class="font4"> is a noun in the source language and was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">diiringi</span><span class="font4"> in the target language, where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">diiringi</span><span class="font4"> belongs to the verb. Therefore, there was a change in the word class.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2 M</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ODULATION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-7) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Expanses of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pure white sand</span><span class="font3">...</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hamparan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pasir putih yang berkilau</span><span class="font3">...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the text above, found that the source language was literally different from the target language. The phrase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pure white sand</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pasir putih yang berkilau</span><span class="font4">, there is a change in point of view from lexical and structural. The modulation which is used in this data is lexical dance, where the process of translation is from implicit to explicit meaning. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pure</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berkilau</span><span class="font4">, in this case it introduces a new mode of expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-8) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...and the exotic stretches of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">coastlines</span><span class="font3">...</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...menggambarkan eksotisme </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pantai-pantai</span><span class="font3">...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the data above shows that the translation between the source language into the target language was different. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">coastlines</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pantai-pantai</span><span class="font4">. This is a kind of modulation in the lexical loose or looseness of meaning. The explicit information was made implicit by changing the view point.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-9) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Almost any local event would feel incomplete without a musical</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accompanimet from this </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fine instrument</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Setiap acara rasanya belum lengkap kalau tak diiringi </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">alat musik tradisional</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As it can be seen on the data above, it shows that there is a change in point of view because the source language was literally different from the target language. The phrase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">fine instrument</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">alat musik tradisional</span><span class="font4">, when translated literally, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">fine</span><span class="font4"> is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">baik</span><span class="font4"> while in this context was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tradisional</span><span class="font4"> which is equivalent in the target language culture. Therefore, it introduces a new mode of expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-10) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: The best way to experience a performance that includes this iconic</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">instrument is by attending </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a traditional Rote ceremony</span><span class="font3"> such as a wedding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Cara terbaik untuk melihatnya unjuk diri adalah dengan mendatangi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">upacara adat</span><span class="font3"> atau pesta perkawinan masyarakat Rote.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the data above, it shows that the translation between the source language into the target language was different. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a traditional Rote ceremony</span><span class="font4"> was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">upacara adat</span><span class="font4">. This is a kind of modulation in the lexical loose or looseness of meaning. The explicit information was made implicit by changing the view point.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ORROWING</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-11) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...and the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">exotic</span><span class="font3"> stretches of the coastlines found on islands...</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: yang tepat untuk menggambarkan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">eksotis</span><span class="font3">me pantai-pantai di pulau Rote...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the data above, it can be said that there is a borrowing procedure used in this process of translation. Borrowing is the simplest method of all translation methods. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Exotic</span><span class="font4"> in the source language was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">eksotis</span><span class="font4"> in the target text; this means that the borrowing used is a natural borrowing,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">because it requires pronunciation adjustment of the word borrowed by natural pronunciation in target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-12) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...the island boasts an abundance of beautiful beaches that offer</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">tourists some simply stunning </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panoramas</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...kaya akan wisata pantai yang menyuguhkan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panorama</span><span class="font3"> menawan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the data above, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panoramas</span><span class="font4"> that was translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panorama</span><span class="font4"> shows a borrowing procedure in this process of translation. This kind of borrowing is pure borrowing because it refers to borrowing of word or expression of source language totally without any adjustment of pronunciation. Therefore, from the source text and the target text, it can be said that there is no change in the form and in the meaning, so that the equivalence of meaning is still there.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-13) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ...who accidentally discovered an alternative use for the area’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lontar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ... yang secara tak sengaja menemukan fungsi lain dari daun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lontar</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the data above, it can be seen that there is a borrowing technique used in this translating process. The kind of borrowing used is a pure borrowing because the expression used was totally the same from source language into target language without any adjustment of pronunciation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.4 &nbsp;L</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ITERAL </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">T</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">RANSLATION</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-14) SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Expanses of pure white sand fuse with the shimmering </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">blue sea</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hamparan pasir putih yang berkilau terasa sangat padu dengan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">birunya laut</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the data above, it can be seen that there is a literal translation procedure, which was applied on the translation text. Literal or word for word translation is the direct transfer of a source language text into grammatically and idiomatically appropriate. As can be seen on the text, the source language and the target language was directly transferred.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>IV CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">From the foregoing analysis it can be concluded that in this study there are four major types found on the data. The procedure of translation that mostly used in this data is by applying transposition method, which found 17 data. Transposition is the shift of word class as a change of grammatical category as a result of the two different linguistic systems and cultures. Furthermore, the second procedure is modulation, which found 16 data. Modulation is the change in point of view or in cognitive category as a consequence of the translator’s preference to make the translation have effect on its intended reader. After that, the other procedures are borrowing and literal translation; each contains 4 data for borrowing and 1 data for literal translation. Borrowing is a technique of translation used by a translator to borrow a word or expression of the source language. In addition, literal translation is the direct transfer of a source language text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate target language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Catford, J.C. 1965. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font4">. London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Garuda Magazine. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Insight Itinerary: 8 Reasons to Visit Rote</span><span class="font4">. Article entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">It’s All About the Beach</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sound of the Sasando</span><span class="font4">: Garuda Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jayantini, I Gusti Agung Sri Rwa (2016). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Art of Translating: Theory and Analysis</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Cakra Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Larson, M.L. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to Cross Language Equivalence</span><span class="font4">. Lanham: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Venuty, Lawrance. 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font4">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Vinay and Darbelnet, 1958. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Methodology of Translation</span><span class="font4"> in Venuty, Lawrance 2000. London Bridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">APPENDICES</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Text 1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">White sand</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pasir putih</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Stunning panoramas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Panorama menawan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Surprising</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Mengherankan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Class shift (Adj-V)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">An abundance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kaya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Class shift (N-Adj)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Fuse</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sangat padu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Ever see</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sinonim</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Stunning panoramas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Panorama menawan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pure white sand</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pasir putih yang berkilau</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">An abundance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kaya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Beautiful beaches</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Wisata pantai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Don’t make it over</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Minimnya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Looseness of meaning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Coastlines</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pantai-pantai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Looseness of meaning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Stretches</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Menggambarkan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Ever see</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sinonim</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Exotic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Eksotis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Natural borrowing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Panoramas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Panorama</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pure borrowing</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Blue see</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Birunya laut</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Direct transfer</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Text 2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Stringed instrument</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Alat musik petik</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Local event</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Acara</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Accompaniment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Diiringi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Class shift (N-Adj)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Rote community</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Masyarakat pulau Rote</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Incomplete</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Belum lengkap</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Without</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kalau tak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Shepherds</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Gembala ternak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Accidently</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Tak sengaja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">An alternative use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Fungsi lain</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lontar palm leaves</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Daun lontar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Structure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Performance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unjuk diri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Unit shift</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Fine instrument</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Alat musik tradisional</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">A traditional Rote ceremony</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Upacara adat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Looseness of meaning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Rote community</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Masyarakat pulau Rote</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Encapsulates</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Mewakili</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Without</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Kalau tak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Having started</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Berawal dari</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical dance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Envolved with the time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Bermetamorfosa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Looseness of meaning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">To experience</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Untuk melihat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Looseness of meaning</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lontar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lontar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pure borrowing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sasando</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sasando</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Pure borrowing</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>