---
layout: full_article
title: "Model of Nature Tourism Development and Its Economic Contributions for Local Communities in Peliatan Village, Ubud, Bali"
author: "NP. Ratna Sari, AA. Putri Sri"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-35799 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-35799"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-35799"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">184</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Model of Nature Tourism Development and Its Economic Contributions for Local Communities in</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>Peliatan Village, Ubud, Bali</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>N. P. Ratna Sari 1<sup>1)</sup>, and A. A. Putri Sri <sup>2)</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fakultas Pariwisata,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Udayana, Jl. DR. R. Goris No 7</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Telephone/Fax : 0361 223798, E-mail :</span><a href="mailto:ratnasariubud@yahoo.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ratnasariubud@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fakultas Pariwisata, Universitas Udayana, Jl. DR. R. Goris No 7 Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p></li></ul>
<h3><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>ABASTRACT</span></h3>
<p><span class="font1">Aims of this study were identifying the potential of nature tourism, assessing the economic contribution to the local community and formulating a model of eco-tourism development in Peliatan village, Ubud, Bali. Results of this research showed that the potential of nature tourism were: natural landscapes, rivers, water springs, rice fields, flora and fauna. The nature tour activities that can be developed were as follows: trekking, cycling, rural tourism, outbound travel, camping, educational nature tours, and flora and fauna viewing. Source of contribution directly to the local economy were from jobs as tour guides, ticketing, palet parking, selling Balinese food, from stalls / restaurants, lodging/accomodation, souvenirs, camping, and outbound activities. The ability of saving money has made it possible for the parents to pay more money for higher education of their children. Tourism activities have contributed indirectly on increasing income for the regency in general, and also have attracted investors to build hotels. Model development of nature tourism in Peliatan village was as follows: For SO Strategy: develop new attractions, developing cooperation with investors for development of natural tourist attractions, penetrating foreign markets (for nature), in cooperation with travel agents, development tourism events, and development of micro-enterprises. The WO strategies were such as: improving the quality of the environment, nature conservation, training guides, providing more interesting information for visitors, arranging nature travel packages, developing public-private partnerships, and mapping of potential tourist destinations. For ST Strategies including: reforestation, erosion control, analyse behavior of tourists, waste management, protection of the area, which was undertaken in cooperation with tourists, and stakeholders, as well as to ensure the safety. For WT Strategies including: to do counseling, to formulate CoC, strengthening organizations, preventing environmental degradation, certification of tourism workers, community development, as well as research for nature tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: Nature tourism, economic contribution, local communities, Peliatan Village, SWOT analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Peliatan village has beautiful trails, water springs, etc which can be utilised as trekking rutes for tourists. In addition, it also has rice fields which can be used for tourist destinations. This activity was developed for overcomming of problems as a result of saturation of tourists with monotonous tourism products. As a results nature tourism has a potential for creating a new source of income for local community in Peliatan Village. Less developed of nature tourism in Peliatan village has motivated researchers to carry out research on the model of development of nature tourism and its contribution on local community in Peliatan village, Ubud. The objectives of this research are as follows: 1) To identify the potentials of nature tourism in Peliatan Village, Ubud, 2) To study the contribution of the development of nature tourism on the economy of local community of Peliatan village, Ubud; 3) To formulate a model for development of nature tourism in Peliatan village, Ubud.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHODOLOGY</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research was undertaken in Peliatan village, Ubud district, Gianyar Regency, Bali. The data collected in this research were classified into qualitative and quantitative. Source of data were either primary data or secondary (taken from publication). Samples were randomly taken that was by interviewing 50 tourists visiting Peliatan village and 100 local community members. Informan on this research were classifiied as local community as well as tourism businessman in Peliatan village, Ubud, and head of the village (perbekel). Data collection was as follows: observation, interview and distributing questionaires. Likert scale data were collected for qualification of perception and attitude of tourists as well as local community on development of nature tourism in Peliatan village, ie., from the scale of 1 until 4. The data collected were then analysed through SWOT analyses.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The characteristic of tourists who responded onto the development of nature tourism in Peliatan village were as follows.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The respondents on this research were male were 40 % while females were 60 %. Form the age perspectives the most dominants (42%) respondents were 30-39 years old. The 62 % of them were graduated from tertiary educations (Bachelor, and Master Degree). Based on their occupations, most (52%) visitors visited Peliatan village were working as as enterpreneur or working in business sectors 52%. The majority (54%) of the frequency of visitation was twice, and the majority (56 %) of length of stay or visit were 3-4 days. Reasons of visit were predominantly (98%) for nature tour. Result of the research were also showed that kind of nature tourism which were suitable to be developed in Peliatan, such as: Trekking (31 %), Cycling (39 %), nature education tour (1 %), village tourism based on nature (19 %), and ATV tour (5 %). The kind of tour package which is frequently bought were trekking (31%). The 88 % of visitors to Peliatan said that they came for recreation so that their physical and mental refreshness were recover. The total of 93% of visitors said that reasons to visit Peliatan was 93 % because of beautiful view and fresh air.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perception of Tourists on the development of Nature Tourism in Peliatan</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Most tourists (76%) agree with the nature tourism potentials if it was measured from from the perspective of location. A proportion of 92% of tourists agreed that rice fields, creeks, flora and fauna can be used as tourist attraction (nature potential) in Peliatan. The perseption of tourists on the infrastructure (public road) showed that they (92%) were agree that the road to Peliatan can be accessed easily. Most visitors (86%) said that they were agree with the availability of transport facilities. Most visitors (84%) were agree that the </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">r</span><span class="font1">estorants and food stalls were available, most visitors agree that accomodations were available, worshipping facilities were considered available by 72% visitors, and hotel has provided them. Most visitirs (76%) were agree that Peliatan village provided enogh parking space for visitors. As many as 78% of tourist agree that the local people were very friendly, keeping their tradition, and positive culture. These become somethings that attarct visitors to visit Peliatan. The 82% of visitors thought that the local community have beeen able to fulfill their need when visited Peliatan. As many as 84% of them haver appreciated the local people of Peliatan because they have helped visitors as a tour guide whenever the visitors hardly been able to search for the tourist destinations, as well as because the local is helping in explaining about the tour destination or aatractions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A proportion of 90% visitors of Peliatan thought that the local people of peliatan have participated in looking after the tourist destinations, such as by involving in village securuty ( Pecalang ).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perception of local community on development of nature tourism in Peliatan Village, Ubud</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">More than 50% of local people of Peliatan said that they were agree on the development of nature tourism in Peliatan. Results of a research showed as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On the promotion, they said that 76% of them involved in promoting Peliatan to visitors. The local community said that 59% of them promoting Peliatan on the exhibitions. In the prmotion processes 67% % of Peliatan community agree that they should worked together with the government and the local community. The 68% of visitors agreed that the promotion was undertaken through other meetings. Peliatan village as been introducted on exhibitions such as: PORDES exhibitions which were undertaken annually. The local community were agree that there has been collaboration available between the government, either in village level, as well as with other communities in promoting Peliatan, such as through travel agents, website of the village as well as others. Promotion were usually discussed on the village meeting, as well as on “banjar”’s meeting, in which where was not tourism only being discussed but also on daily life as well as on socio economic. . On economic aspects, community perception was also agree with tourism development. In general, they believed that by development of nature tourism, it can gives contribution to family’s income.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In detail, result of this research showed that 79% of local community found it not dificult to get ajob when tourism developped. As many as 84% mentioned that nature tourism can add more for the family income. Money from tourism can</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">be used to fulfill daily needs (78%). The 82% of respondents belived that tourism can give a permanent job (82%), while 88% believed that there were able to give money for paying education fee for their kids.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dealing with job opportunities, Peliatan people agree that by development of nature tourism in peliatan can create jobs for the local. A 81% of the local believed that development of nature tourism can open new job such as as a tour guide, 82% believed that the development of nature tourism would increased original local income (PAD), either from tax or others so it can speed up development and created a job opportunity. The development was also believed to open business opportunities, such as opening a food stall or restaurants (88%), give a chance to open accomodation (83%), opening a chance to make a new job making suvenier (87%), opening a business on making balinese food (84%), opening a job in camping and other outbonds (84%), as well as opening opportunitties in selling nature tour packages (84%).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On the attitude of community related to economic development activties related to nature toruism, generally the local people of Peliatan were agree. 85% of Peliatan people agree that development of nature tourism will contributing positively to economic benefits to the local, but 1% only was disagree. Development of nature tourism can attract investment in building a new hotel and other accomodations were 83% agreed by the Peliatan community, but 6% disagree.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">86% local community were agree that development of nature tourism can increased income for saving, while 6% disagree with this, and 2% only was completely diasgree. This indicating that natur etourism development can make economic of local community running.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Potential of Nature Tourism in Peliatan, Ubud</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Kinds of nature potentials that can be developed as nature tourism products in Peliatan such as nature phanorama, rivers, water springs, rice fields, flora and fauna.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">V. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Nature tour activity which can be developed in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Peliatan village:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on result of analysis, it can be concluded that kinds of tour that can be developed in Peliatan, such as as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark20"></a>1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Trekking</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tracking trails which are available in Peliatan Village are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At the south border on Peliatan village (on the northern of Tirta Temple) – rice field of subak Soca – beji spring water – rice fields – compound of banjar Kalah – and banjar Kalah community hall. Duration of tour for about 2 hours.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From banjar Teges Kawan Yangloni community hall to the north to see compond /settlement – to the rice fields - to the Pura Bedugul at Subak Santian – to the west up to banjar pande community hall- cross the bridge – on the south of Panti Pande temple – to the south up to Puri Agung Peliatan Palace. Duration: 2 -3 hours.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peliatan Perbekel office to the north– bale banjar truna community hall to the west– up to the Belong – to the west pass the place to cook “ayam betutu” a special type</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">of coocked chicken of Peliatan – to water spring belong – Tebesaya kelod – to the north – compound of banjar tebesaya to the north – up to Pura Dalem Puri. Duration: 2 -3 hours.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From Puri Peliatan to the north– up to banjar pande- to the east - pura panti pande – rice fields – pura bedugul subak santian to the north–gunung sari street– Pura Gunung Sari – Pura Alas Arum. Duration: 2 – 3 hours.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From Puri Peliatan to the north – up to banjar Pande community hall – to the east to Pura Panti Pande – rice field – Pura Bedugul subak santian to the north– gunung sari street– to the west–Ubud Tegallalang junction (cross road)– to the west to Pura Dalem Puri. Duration: 2 – 3 hours.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flora and Fauna Viewing Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A vast rice field and plantation can be utilised as trail for tours in learnign about flora and fauna in Peliatan. This type of tour can also sold in more specific package such medicine plants tour, local vegetables tours, such as ferns, kelor, daun katuk, taroo, as souce of vegetables, ceremonial plants tour, and spicies tour. Fauna viewing can be more specifically sold as butterfly tour, fire ant (kunang-kunang) tour, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nature Education Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Some of tour activities that are related to edu tour may be developed in Peliatan village, such as learning about rice and planting rice, traditonal way of plowing, etc. thus, tourists can enjoying their tour while learning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Outbond Tour</span><span class="font1">/ Games</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This tour can utilise plantations belong to local community for a place to held outbond games such as flying fox, ATV riding, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Village Tour</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Village Tour can be developed in Peliatan. This kind of tour were held by collaborating trekking activities, flora and fauna viewing, edu-tour and outbound.Village tour can be interesting for visitors who want to experience local lifestyles. After taken to travel around the village and tourists have been able to identify vegetables, species, livestock, the visitors can be asked to learn about the traditional way of Balinese cooking in a traditional Balinese kitchen. Visitors can learn to cook the “ayam betutu” original Peliatan style, “sayur urab” (mix vegetables and otherrr traditional dishes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eco-Cycling</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tourist can enjoy their travel around the village by using bicycle which causes no pollution, while enjoying the nice scenery along their travel, observing the life of the villagers, and at the end of the event tourist will be served by traditional food and entertained by traditional Balinese dances. Before going home, tourist were given a chance to buy handicraft. All those can be a once in a lifetime experience for them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Camping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Camping can be held at the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nista mandala</span><span class="font1"> of Gunung Sari temple, at Banjar Ambengan, Peliatan. On the camping, tourist can be served to enjoy night life and enjoying nite time with shining stars in the sky.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>3.5 Contribution form Development of Nature Tourism on Economy of Local Community in Peliatan</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The contributions of nature tourism on the economy of the local community of Peliatan are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Direct</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of Nature Tourism created jobs for the community such as a tour guide, ticketing, parking officers, selling traditional Bali foods and drinks etc., so giving more income to the local.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of nature tourism can give an opportunity to open business restaurants, food stalls, accommodations, making and selling souvenirs, making traditional Balinese foods, camping business, outbound, and create opportunity in selling nature tour packages.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of nature tourism in Peliatan will make local economy running. This also may attract investors in building hotels other accommodation facilities.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of nature tourism can increase the capability of the community for saving, thus triggering economic activities for the locals.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of nature tourism can give income for daily needs as well as for supporting the education of the local kids.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developments in nature tourism make the local easier to get jobs.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developments in nature tourism can indirectly increase the income of the family, for supporting daily needs, for getting permanent jobs, for getting money for kids educations.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Indirect</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism has the potential to increase local income (PAD) which can provide funding to speed up development, opening more jobs for the local, but, when the tourism developed, the local expected that they should not forget the life philosophy of the Tri Hita Karana, i.e., keeping a balanced and harmonious life through creating a good relationship with the God, cross human being and with the environment. If this balanced situation disturbed, then a problem may emerge. Some villager sent a message that even though tourism has developed, they must not forget with their traditions, with their culture for many generations, because these are very important with a great value as well.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of nature tourism can attract investors such as for building hotels and other accommodation facilities. This may speed up tourism development, but on the other hand, they were also having unrest feeling if the investors keep buying land in Peliatan will cause the change in the social systems and culture as well as the environment in Peliatan. There were also some people of Peliatan were disagree with the involvement of investors in development of nature tourism in Peliatan.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>3.6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SWOT Analysis and Development of Nature Tourism Programs</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Strength</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Location of Peliatan close to the Center for Art, Ubud.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It has a natural potential, namely rice field, beautiful landscape, flora and fauna, rivers/creeks for developments of nature tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourists like trekking, nature-based village tour, cycling.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accsessibility is very good.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public transports available.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A vast parkir space available.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism facilities for supporting nature tourism available including accomodation, restaurants, helath facility.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Support from community on the development of nature tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Location of Peliatan close to the Centre Of Art, Ubud. Weakness</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The community cannot see the opportunity of nature tourism in Peliatan</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Limited resources for the tour guide.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lack of cleanliness.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The “telajakan” has not been maintain nicely.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The use of concrete is getting extensive</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Understanding about environmentally friendly is still limited.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Green Open Space of The Village (Ruang Terbuka Hijau Desa) is getting limitted.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The unique points along the main road of the village habeen changed: before </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">view</span><span class="font1"> of Bali were dominant, now </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">view</span><span class="font1"> of “other culture” were dominant</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Information about tourist atractions are limitted.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">10. A vast proportion of land has been sold for building accommodation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">11. Data of biodiversity has been limited.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Opportunity</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist that interested in nature</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diversification of tourism products, such as: trekking, camping, nature based village tour, cycling, nature based education tour</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collaboration woth travel agents from outside Peliatan</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Improvements of economy of Peliatan community</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jobs opportunity and stimulating the emrging of other tourism activities that supporting nature tourim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Threat</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nature impacts : flood, land slide</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Impacts of tourist’s habits that are not environmentally friendly</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Environmental pollution in Peliatan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many destinations as competitors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As a competitor that possible to develop nature tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The existence of policy in the village that may caused environmental problems.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Provides the opportunity for the investors who has no intention in keeping the environment.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SO Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of new tourist attraction, especially those are unique.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collaboration with Bali’s investors from oitside Peliatan for development of nature tourism attractions</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Market penetration international tourists with focus on special interest tour, that is nature</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of market potential for international visitors who are interested in nature</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Establish collaboration with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">travel agents </span><span class="font1">/</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wholesalers</span><span class="font1"> that have market of special interest</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of tourism events by involving local community as a host or organizer</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of micro business for local community especially on tourism</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">WO Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Improving environmental quality in cleanliness</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Training for the nature tour guide for improving competency</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Providing nature tourism information more broadly and to be more interesting.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Producing more interesting nature tourism package</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developing partnerships private sectors-community in providing tourism facility to support nature tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mapping and providing data of biodiversity potential in tourist destination.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">ST Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conducting tree planting, controlling erosion so that nature can be conserved</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conducting analysis on impacts of behaviour, number of tourists, and waste/sewage that produced</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developemnt of nature tourist attraction through appropriate planning through holistic studies..</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;Set up agreements with other parties in the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">development of nature tourism and site conservation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;Set up collaboration with tourism operators or</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">stakeholders related to formulating and development of nature based tourism;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Developemnt of safe nature tourism in Peliatan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">WT Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conducting extension in tourism in giving a better aunderstanding about nature tourism to community.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formulating and implementation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">code of conducts </span><span class="font1">(CoC) for each product of nature tourist attraction that is offered</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Capacity building on tourist businessmen association and profesionals in tourism, such as to Gahawisri, PHRI, ASITA, HPI, etc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Establishment or empowerment of organisations in the village for preventuon of environmental degradation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standarisation of HR capability in tourism through certification of tourism workers/employees.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Extension to community for having a better understanding on environmentally friendly tourism for a sustainable tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conducting research on nature tourism and its impacts on local community</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Program SO</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Development of unique tourist attractions</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Working together with lcoal investors to create new tourist attractions</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting promotion to international tourists who are interested in nature</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Working together with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">travel agents</span><span class="font1"> /</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wholesalers</span><span class="font1"> that has a special interest market in nature tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hosting a tourism event inPeliatan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Helping local community for setting tourism business from a small scale</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Program WO</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting extension about environment in Peliatan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Training for nature tour guide for improvement of competencey</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Develop information system in nature tourism which contains nature tour attractions through printed media and electronics. Setting up unique nature tour package that are interested for tourists</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Development ownership together, stocks belong to the local.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting research for mapping nature tour potentials</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Program ST</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cunducting social services by planting trees that useful to prevent flooding and erossion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting reserach about nature tourism impacts on local community</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Creating nature tour attraction that can fix with the local.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Create “awig awig” on the village on environmental conservation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Working with stakeholders in development of nature tourism Create Code Of Conducts on nature tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Program WT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting extension program on the potentials of nature tourism when a meeting conducted in the village with community</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Set up COC on each nature tourism product</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conducting colaboration with related organizations in the development of nature tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Creating “awig-awig” based on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sustainable tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Implementing certification for nature tourism workers such as for guide</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lecturing on environmentally friendly tourism in each banjar Workign together with institutions which has got competencies in nature tourism for conducting research on nature tourism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION</span></h2></li></ul>
<h3><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Conclusion</span></h3>
<p><span class="font1">The potential of nature tourism in Peliatan village are scenic nature, rivers/creeks, water spring, rice field, flora, and fauna. Tourism activity that can be developed in Peliatan are trekking, cycling, village tour, outbound tour, camping, nature education tour, flora and fauna viewing. The contribution that nature tourism can give to the economy of the local community can be found in the direct and indirect instances. The direct positive impacts that tourism development can bring are the new jobs for the community such as tour guide, ticketing staff, parking officers, and opening chance to sell traditional Balinese food, drinks. It is also possible to open a business like restaurants, accommodation, souvenirs</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">production, camping business, outbound, and the nature tour packages. This direct impact brings improvement for the local economy and gives more money to the local especially for the education of kids. The indirect impacts of the development would be the improvement of the local income (PAD) for the area providing funding for supporting the development and opening jobs for the local.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Development of nature tourism can attract investors to building hotels and other types of accommodations. Models of development of nature tourism in Peliatan village are as follows, the SO Strategy by developing new tourist attractions, especially the unique ones and provide a chance to working together with the Balinese investors from outside the site for the development of nature tour attractions. The market penetration for international visitors with a focus on special interest tourists in nature, this can lead to the development of collaboration with travel agents/wholesalers which have a market of special interest tours. Further, by realizing the development of tourism events by involving local community as an operator or host, development of micro-business for the local community especially in tourism. The WO Strategy by improving the quality of nature by looking after cleanliness, Training nature tour guides for improving competency, Providing nature tour information in more extensive and more interesting ways, Set up more interesting nature tour packages, develop civil-community partnership in providing tourism infrastructure supporting nature tourism, Mapping and providing data of potentials of diversity of attractions at the destinations. The ST Strategy which includes tree planting, controlling erosion, so that nature in good condition, Conducting analysis on impacts of behaviour, number of visitation, and sewage/waste produced, Development of nature tour attractions are undertaken in a well planned manner referring to holistic studies, Set up agreement with other parties in relationship to development of nature tourism and site protection, encouraging cooperation with tour operators or stakeholders in formulating and developing nature-based tourism, Develop a safe nature tourism programs in Peliatan. The WT Strategy is by conducting extension in tourism for giving a better understanding to community about nature tourism, Formulating and implementing code of conducts (CoC) for each product nature tourism, Empowerment of organization and assosiation of businessmen and profesionals in tourism, such as Gahawisri, PHRI, ASITA, HPI, etc, Formation and or empowerment of organisation in the village for preventing from environmental degradation, Standardisation of capability of HR in tourim through certification of workers tourism sectors, Community ompowerment for better understanding environmentally frindly tourism for a sustainable tourism, Conducting research on nature tourism and its impacts on local community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">creating and promoting a more interesting nature tour packages for the visitors.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">We would like to thank to all parties who have helped in research and writting report such as for Head of community leader of Peliatan village (Kepala Desa Peliatan), Peliatan village community and tourists as well as all pacties who cannot be listed one by one.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eagles, Paul F. J., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2001, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">International Trends in Park Tourism</span><span class="font0">,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">EUROPARC paper, Austria.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eagles, Paul F. J. and McCool, Stephen F., 2002, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism in National Parks and Protected Areas; Planning and Management</span><span class="font0">, CABI Publishing, UK.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kline, Jeffrey D., 2001, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and natural resource management: a general overview of research and issues. Gen. Tech.Rep.PNW-GTR-506.Portland.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rangkuti, Freddy. 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis SWOT Teknik Membedah Kasus Bisnis</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta : Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sumodiningrat, Gunawan, Pemberdayaan Masyarakat dan Jaringan Pengaman Sosial, Gramdeia Jakarta </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tourism and recreation.</span><span class="font0"> Stephen William. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism</span><span class="font0">, 10:132-153.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Waluya - 2012 </span><a href="http://www.ejournal-unisma.net"><span class="font0">www.ejournal-unisma.net</span></a><span class="font0"> › Home › Vol 3, No 2 (2011) diunduh tanggal 18 April 2015.</span></p></li></ul>
<h3><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Recommendation</span></h3>
<p><span class="font1">Recommendation given are as follows, the parking management needs special attentions from village officers for a smoother traffic. Training on workers in nature based tourism need to be undertaken by considering the retification of “awig-awig” on nature conservation in Peliatan village. Hence,</span></p>