---
layout: full_article
title: "The Application of Metaphor Identification Procedure (Mip) And Conceptual Metaphor In Japanese Poetry"
author: "I Gede Pariasa, I Made Rajeg, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38177 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-38177"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38177"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2017</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">p-ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol. 24. No. 47</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Application of Metaphor Identification Procedure (Mip) And Conceptual Metaphor In Japanese Poetry</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">I Gede Pariasa<sup>1</sup>, I Made Rajeg, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati UPT. Taman Budaya Dinas Kebudayaan Provinsi Bali JL. Nusa Indah no 1 Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hp: 081338277269</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Email: </span><a href="mailto:Pariasa_baliboy@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Pariasa_baliboy@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The aims of this study are to apply the method of the metaphor identification procedure (Pragglejaz Group, 2007) to find out the linguistic metaphors in Japanese poetry, and apply the theory of conceptual metaphor (CMT) (Lakoff &amp;&nbsp;Johnson, 2003) to find out the conceptual metaphors that motivate the use of linguistic metaphor in the poetry. Descriptive qualitative method was applied in this research. The data of this research were taken from </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Takuboku Ishikawa dan Segenggam Pasir</span><span class="font4"> book, written by Edizal (2000).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The result shows that metaphor identification procedure (MIP) provides a explicit, reliable, and flexible instrument for identifying linguistic metaphors and conceptual metaphor theory (CMT) provides a systematic tool to identify the concepts behind the linguistic metaphors. The linguistic metaphors identified in the poetry are: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa, kanashimi no tama,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shirokukatsu dainariki</span><span class="font4">. The conceptual metaphors that are found to underlie the linguistic metaphors are: VIRTUE IS WHITE, LOVE IS FOOD OR DRINK, SAD IS INSTABILITY Keywords: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor, Metaphor Identification Procedure, Conceptual Metaphor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengaplikasikan metode prosedur identifikasi metafora (Pragglejaz Group, 2007) untuk menemukan sebuah metafora linguistic dalam puisi Jepang, dan untuk mengaplikasikan teori konseptual metafora (CMT) (Lakoff &amp;&nbsp;Johnson, 2003) untuk menemukan konsep metafora yang memotifasi penggunaan metafora linguistik pada puisi. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode deskriftif kualitatif. Data penelitian ini diambil dari buku kumpulan puisi yang berjudul Takuboku Ishikawa dan Segenggam Pasir yang ditulis oleh Edizal (2000).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa prosedur identifikasi metafora (MIP) menyediakan instrumen eksplisit, dapat diandalkan, dan fleksibel untuk mengidentifikasi metafora linguistik dan teori konseptual metafora (CMT) menyediakan alat yang sistematis untuk mengidentifikasi konsep di balik metafora linguistik. Metafora linguistik yang diidentifikasi dalam puisi adalah: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa, kanashimi no tama,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shirokukatsu dainariki.</span><span class="font4"> Metafora konseptual yang ditemukan mendasari metafora linguistik adalah: KEBAIKAN ADALAH PUTIH, CINTA ADALAH MAKANAN ATAU MINUMAN, and KESEDIHAN ADALAH KETIDAK STABILAN.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metafora, Prosedur Identifikasi Metafora, Konseptual Metafora.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Language is a communication tool to deliver the information from one individual to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">another. In these communications, each individual has aparticular creativity in the use of language, such as manipulating, exploring conventional language that has been created socially. Creative individuals often use a figurative language in both oral and written communication. Figurative language is group of words used to give particular emphasis to an idea or sentiment. One of the figurative languages is metaphor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kovecses, (2010: ix) metaphor is figure of speech in which one thing is compared with another by saying that one is the other. According to Newmark (1988: 85) metaphor can be defined as an indirect comparison between two or more apparently unrelated things or subjects. The point of similarity ‘may be physical but often it is chosen for its connotations. Foley (1997:182) states that all metaphors are the construal of something as part of the features of something else. Warren (1999:133) the interpretation of metaphors involves retrieving at least one attribute, shared by the conventional and intended referents. In order to identify metaphor some people must have a reason why that words, phrases or sentences is metaphor. As a consequence to judgments of metaphor in data, Pragglejaz Group (2007: 2) developed a rigorous procedure called MIP (metaphoridentification procedure) for identifying linguistic metaphors in textand speech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In many cases, linguistic metaphor represent subconscious choices on the part of the speaker or writer, whose choice of language is partly constrained by the conceptual structures shared by members of his or her community. Metaphor can also help people to talk about difficult, emotionally intense or uncommon experiences, and thus, according to conceptual metaphor theory, to think about them. Heywood (2002 : 1), linguistic metaphor identification in two extracts from novel and concluded that if a corpus based approach to metaphor is to become a reality and if relations between conceptual and linguistic metaphor are to be fully understood. Zhang (2009 :1), an analysis of conceptual metaphor in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">western commercial advertisements and concluded that in advertising communication, the mapping process across conceptual domains within conceptual metaphor is the process of the audience’s searching for optimal relevance in dynamic cognitive context and deriving the advertiser’s communicative intension.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The conceptual metaphor approach is potentially very enlightening as a tool for identifying underlying meaning, but it has pitfalls. Researchers need to be alert to the dangers of over generalizing on limited linguistic evidence, and to the need to establish consistent procedures for identifying metaphors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">THEORETICAL BASES</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Metaphor</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lakoff and Johnson (2003: 3) stated that “Metaphor is for most people a device of the poetic imagination and the rhetorical flourish a matter of extraordinary rather than ordinary language. Moreover, metaphor is typically viewed as characteristic of language alone, a matter of words rather than thought or action”. He also argued that metaphors are pervasive in everyday life, not just in language, but also in thought and action. A common definition of a metaphor can be described as a comparison that shows how two things that are not alike in most ways are similar in another important way, and metaphor is a simply understanding and experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Conceptual Metaphor</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lakoff (1993: 203) emphasis that the locus of metaphor is not in the language at all, but in the way to conceptualize one mental domain in terms of another. Metaphors link two conceptual domains,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol. 24. No. 47 </span><span class="font4">the source domain and the target domain. The source domain provide frameworks for target domains: these determine the ways in which think and talk about the activities and entities to which the target domain refer, and even the ways in which behave of carry out activities, as in the case of argument. For example: the metaphor “this gadget will save you hours” the conceptual metaphor of this example is TIME IS MONEY (Lakoff and Johnson, 2003;7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">RESEARCH METHODOLOGY</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study was conducted by adopting the theoretical approach to obtain sufficient understanding of the purposes of solving the problems of the study. The relevant theorie such as the method of metaphor identification procedure (MIP) by Pragglejaz Group (2007) was used, in order to find out the metaphor in the data. The theory of conceptual metaphor based on Lakoff and Johnson (2003) was applied in order to find out the conceptual metaphor of the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data source of this research was taken from the book </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Takuboku Ishikawa dan Segenggam Pasir </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">石川啄木と『一握の砂』</span><span class="font4">written by Edizal (2000). Sudaryanto (1993), assert that observation is a procedure of collecting data by observing the data closely; in this case, the data red attentively with the main focus on the potential metaphor in Japanese. Identification is important part in order to collect the data which was appropriate for analysis in this study. During the identification process, note taking procedure is also applied. The note taking procedure was also included to record all of the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Descriptive qualitative approach (Djajasudarma, 1993:10) was applied by which the data were analyzed by explaining descriptively the metaphor identification procedure, and conceptual metaphor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Metaphor Identification Procedure (MIP)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The method of metaphor identification procedure (MIP) by Pragglejaz Group (2007:3) was used for identification of metaphorical expressions in source text. The steps followed were: (1) reading the source text, and the translation text rendering carefully, (2) identifying potentially metaphorical lexical items in the source text and the target texts, (3) determining the contextual meaning for each lexical unit in the source text, (4) searching for a more basic meaning of the each lexical unit in the source text and the target text, (5) comparing the contextual meaning and the basic meaning of the lexical units and determining the extent to which they contrast. MIP procedure is also notconcerned with the processing of metaphors by readers or listeners. MIP, as a reliable procedure for identifying metaphor, prevents the researcher from seeing the concrete manifestations of conceptual metaphors everywhere (Steen; 2007:27). In using MIP to find metaphors indiscourse, metaphorically used words are regarded as a basis from which to construct cross-domain mappings (Crisp; 2002:7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">The Application of MIP</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tegashiroku</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Katsudainariki</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hibonnaruhito to iwaruruotokoniaishini(p.80)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The lexical units in data 1 are identified below with slashes indicating the boundaries between lexical units:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Te / ga / shiroku</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Katsu / dainariki</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hibon / naru / hito / to / iwaruru / otoko / ni / aishi / ni</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The next step is to determine the contextual meaning, basic meaning, comparing the contextual meaning with basic meaning, and making a final decision as to whether the unit is used metaphorically in the context of the poetry.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Te</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te</span><span class="font4">indicates a behavior of someone.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te</span><span class="font4"> is hand.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Ga</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ga</span><span class="font4">indicates the topic of sentence.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ga</span><span class="font4"> is particle that is indicates the topic of sentence.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ga</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ga</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Shiroku</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroku</span><span class="font4"> indicates a good behavior of someone.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroku</span><span class="font4"> is white.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroku</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroku</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Katsu</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katsu</span><span class="font4"> ‘and’ is used to connect words or parts of sentences.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katsu</span><span class="font4"> is and.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katsu</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katsu</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Dainariki</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dainariki</span><span class="font4"> indicates agreat or famous people.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is big.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Hibon</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibon</span><span class="font4"> indicates the extraordinary image of someone.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibon</span><span class="font4"> is extraordinary.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibon</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibon</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Naru</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naru</span><span class="font4"> is sign of becoming something.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naru</span><span class="font4"> is become.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naru</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">naru</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Hito</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hito</span><span class="font4"> is people.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hito</span><span class="font4"> is people.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hito</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hito</span><span class="font4"> is not ametaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>To</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is a particle used for quoting with speech.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is a particle used for quoting with speech.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Iwaruru</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">iwaruru</span><span class="font4"> is to say.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">iwaruru</span><span class="font4"> is to say.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">iwaruru</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">iwaruru</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Otoko</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otoko</span><span class="font4"> is man.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otoko</span><span class="font4"> is man.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otoko</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">otoko</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Ni</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> ‘with’ is a particle used to connect a noun and verb.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> ‘with’ is particle used to connect noun and verb.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Aishi</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aishi</span><span class="font4"> is to meet someone.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aishi</span><span class="font4"> is to meet.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aishi</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aishi</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis of the data 1</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, te ga shiroku katsu dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is metaphor because the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shiroku katsu dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. The contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shiroku katsu dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is the good and great people, and based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shiroku katsu dainariki</span><span class="font4"> is white and big hand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sakinjite koi no amasa to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa o shirishi ware nari</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjiteoyu(p.152)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The lexical units in data 2 are identified below with slashes indicating the boundaries between lexical units:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sakinjite/ koi / no / amasa/ to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa/ o / shirishi/ ware / nari</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjite/ oyu</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The next step is to determine the contextual meaning, basic meaning, comparing the contextual meaning with basic meaning, and making a final decision as to whether the unit is used metaphorically in the context of the poetry.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Sakinjite</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjite</span><span class="font4"> is before.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjite</span><span class="font4"> is before.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjite</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sakinjite</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Koi</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(a)</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi</span><span class="font4"> is love.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi</span><span class="font4"> is love.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi</span><span class="font4"> is not metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>No</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is particle to connect a noun and adjective.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is particle to connect a noun and adjective.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Amasa</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4"> is refers to happiness.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4"> is sweet.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>To</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is and.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is and.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Nagashisa</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> is refers to sadness.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> is bitter.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> isin contrast tothe basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>O</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is particle that is sign of object.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is particle that is sign of object.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>Shirishi</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shirishi</span><span class="font4"> is understands and knows something.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shirishi</span><span class="font4"> is understands and knows something.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shirishi</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shirishi</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>Ware</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ware</span><span class="font4"> is I or me.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ware</span><span class="font4"> is I or me.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ware</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ware</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>Nari</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nari</span><span class="font4"> ‘or’ is used to link alternatives.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nari</span><span class="font4"> ‘or’ is used to link alternatives.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nari</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nari</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>Oyu</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oyu</span><span class="font4"> is old age</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oyu</span><span class="font4"> is old age.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oyu</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">oyu</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis of the data 2, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> in the context of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> is metaphor, because the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. The contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> refers to the happiness and sadness of love story and based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa to nagashisa </span><span class="font4">is sweet and bitter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aonisuku</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kanashimi no tama nimakura shite</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Matsu no hibiki o yomosugarakiku (p.186)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The lexical units in data 3 are identified below with slashes indicating the boundaries between lexical units:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ao/ ni/ suku</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kanashimi/ no / tama / ni /makura/ shite</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Matsu / no / hibiki/ o / yo/ mo/ sugara/ kiku (p.186)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The next step is to determine the contextual meaning, basic meaning, comparing the contextual meaning with basic meaning, and making a final decision as to whether the unit is used metaphorically in the context of the poetry.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>Ao</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ao</span><span class="font4"> is blue.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ao</span><span class="font4"> is blue.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ao</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ao</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark52"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark53"></a>Ni</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> is particle that is indicates preposition ‘with’.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> is particle that is indicates preposition ‘with’.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4">is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>Suku</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suku</span><span class="font4"> is transparent.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suku</span><span class="font4"> is transparent.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suku</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suku</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark56"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark57"></a>Kanashimi</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi</span><span class="font4"> is sad.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi</span><span class="font4"> is sad.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark58"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark59"></a>No</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is particle use to connect adjective and noun.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is particle use to connect adjective and noun.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark60"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark61"></a>Tama</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is refers tosadness.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is ball.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark62"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark63"></a>Makurashite</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">makurashite</span><span class="font4"> is using a pillow.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">makurashite</span><span class="font4"> is using a pillow.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">makurashite</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">makurashite</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark64"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark65"></a>Matsu</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">matsu</span><span class="font4"> is pine tree.</span></p>
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">matsu</span><span class="font4"> is pine tree.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">matsu</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">matsu</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hibiki</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibiki</span><span class="font4"> is echo.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibiki</span><span class="font4"> is echo.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibiki</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hibiki</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">O</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is particle, sign of object.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is particle, sign of object.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yo</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font4"> is night.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font4"> is night.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark66"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark67"></a>Mo</span></h2>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mo</span><span class="font4"> ‘also’ is particle,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mo</span><span class="font4"> ‘also’ is particle.</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all"></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mo</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mo</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark68"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark69"></a>Sugara</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sugara</span><span class="font4"> is uncanny.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sugara</span><span class="font4"> is uncanny.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sugara</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sugara</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark70"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark71"></a>Kiku</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kiku</span><span class="font4"> is to hear.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic meaning: based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kiku</span><span class="font4"> is to hear.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contextual meaning versus basic meaning: the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kiku</span><span class="font4"> is as the same as the basic meaning. Therefore </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kiku</span><span class="font4"> is not a metaphor.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis of the data 13, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> in the context </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi no tama</span><span class="font4"> is metaphor, because the contextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is in contrast to the basic meaning. Thecontextual meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> refers to sadness, and based on gozoku digital dictionary, the basic meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> is ball.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Conceptual Metaphor</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lakoff (1993: 203) assert that the locus of metaphor is not in the language at all, but in the way of conceptualizing one mental domain in terms of another. Lakoff and Johnson (2003) identify three overlapping categories of conceptual metaphor, namely; orientational metaphor, structure metaphor and ontological metaphor. Lakoff and Johnson (2003:14) state that orientational metaphor is a figure that organizes a whole system of concepts with respect to one another. This is a metaphor that involves spatial orientation (e.g., </span><span class="font2">UP-DOWN, IN-OUT, ON-OFF, FRONT-BACK</span><span class="font4">). For examples; </span><span class="font2">HAPPY IS UP. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">concept HAPPY is oriented UP leads to English expressions like “I’m feeling up today.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Structural metaphors Lakoff and Johnson (2003: &nbsp;14) are cases where one concept is</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">metaphorically structured in terms of another. Metaphors link two conceptual domains, the source domain and the target domain. The source domains provide frameworks for target domains. For example in the conceptual metaphor </span><span class="font2">ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IS WAR</span><span class="font4">, the concepts of the source domain </span><span class="font2">WARFARE </span><span class="font4">are transferred into the target domain, because physical conflict is ubiquitous in human life and therefore quite well-structured and more readily understandable. It coherently structures the relations between the various factors in economic activity: business is war; the economic is a battlefield; competitors are warriors or even armies fighting each other, and economic activities are conceptualized in terms of attack and defense as a result of the crisis, the Asians will strike back; they will launch an export offensive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The ontological metaphor (Lakoff and Johnson,2003:25) is “a figure that provides ways of viewing events, activities, emotions, ideas, etc, as entities and substances”. These involve the projection of entity or substance status on something that does not have that status inherently. For examples: conceptual metaphor </span><span class="font2">THE MIND IS A MACHINE </span><span class="font4">“ My mind just isn’t operating today”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">The Application of Conceptual Metaphor Japanese Poetry</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark72"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark73"></a>Tegashiroku</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katsudainariki</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hibonnaruhito to iwaruruotokoniaishini (p.80)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Te ga shiroku</span><span class="font4"> is representative of good and wise behavior. The conceptual metaphor that underlines or motivates the application of the linguistic exspression or metaphor </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shiroku</span><span class="font4"> is </span><span class="font3">VIRTUE IS WHITE, </span><span class="font4">because virtue is mental domain in the terms of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroku</span><span class="font4"> ‘white’. Other expressions</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">with the same concept in Japanese, are: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shiroi koibito</span><span class="font4"> ‘white love’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichigan to shiroi chinmoku o kōchikushi ‘</span><span class="font4">united and to build a white silence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sakinjite</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nagashisa </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o shirishi ware nari sakinjiteoyu (p.152)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Koi no amasa to nagashisa</span><span class="font4"> ‘sweetness and bitterness of love’ is indicates that the love is like food or drink because food and drink have a taste (sweet ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4">’ and bitter ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4">’). The conceptual metaphor that underlines the application of the linguistic exspression or metaphor is </span><span class="font3">LOVE IS FOOD OR DRINK. The </span><span class="font4">love is mental domain in terms of sweet ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">amasa</span><span class="font4">’ and bitter ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nagashisa</span><span class="font4">’ as representative of food or drink. Other expression in Japanese are; </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ai wa oishii</span><span class="font4"> ‘love is delicious’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Supaishīna ai</span><span class="font4"> ‘love is spicy’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ai no inryō</span><span class="font4"> ‘beverage of love’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aonisuku</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kanashimi no tama</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nimakura shite</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Matsu no hibiki o yomosugarakiku (p.186)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kanashimi</span><span class="font4"> is sadness, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> ‘ball’ is representative of instability. The conceptual metaphor that motivates the application of the linguistic exspression or metaphor </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashimi no tama</span><span class="font4"> is </span><span class="font3">SAD IS INSTABILITY</span><span class="font4">, because sad is the mental domain in the terms of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tama</span><span class="font4"> ‘ball’ as representative of instability. This conceptual metaphor are supported by other linguistic expressions in Japanese, they are </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kanashii wa tamago no gotoku</span><span class="font4"> ‘sadness as a egg’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kokoro ga fuantei desu</span><span class="font4"> ‘unpredicteble feeling’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the discussion in the previous section it can be concluded that the method of metaphor identification procedure (MIP) should be applied because MIP is provides a explicit, reliable, and flexible instrument for identifying linguistic metaphor. The linguistic metaphors identified in the data are: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">koi no amasa to nagashisa, kanashimi no tama,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">te ga shirokukatsu dainariki.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The conceptual metaphor theory (CMT) should be applied because provides a systematic tool to identify the concepts behind the linguistic metaphors. The conceptual metaphors that are found to underlie the linguistic metaphors are: </span><span class="font2">VIRTUE IS WHITE, LOVE IS FOOD OR DRINK, </span><span class="font4">and </span><span class="font2">SAD IS INSTABILITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">REFERENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Crisp, P. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">‘Metaphorical propositions: A rationale’ in Language and Literature.</span><span class="font4">11(7): 7–16. (cited</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2015 October 25). Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://lal.sagepub.com"><span class="font4">http://lal.sagepub.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Djajasudarma. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik-Rancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian.</span><span class="font4"> Bandung: Eresco.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Edizal. 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Takuboku Ishikawa dan Segenggam Pasir</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">石川啄木と『一握の砂』</span><span class="font4">Padang: Penerbit Kayu Pasak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Foley, William, A. 1997. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropological Linguistics.An Introduction.</span><span class="font4"> UK Blackwell Publisher Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Heywood, John and friends. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Metaphor Identification in Two Extracts from Novel</span><span class="font4">. Vol.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">11 No. 1 35-54 (cited 2015 November 20). Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://lal.sagepub.com"><span class="font4">http://lal.sagepub.com</span></a><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kovecses, Zoltan. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor: A Practical Introduction</span><span class="font4">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lakoff, G. 1993. The contemporary theory of metaphor. In A. Ortony (Ed.), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor and thought</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2<sup>nd</sup>.ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson. 2003. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphors We Live By</span><span class="font4">. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nelson, Cory. 2006. Gazoku Dictionary. Australia: Monash University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font4">. New York: Prentice-Hall International.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pragglejaz Group. 2007. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">MIP: A Method for Identifying Metaphorically Used Words in Discourse. Metaphor and Symbol</span><span class="font4">. Vol. 22(1), 1-39. (cited 2015 January 2). Available from: URL: </span><a href="https://www.academia.edu/"><span class="font4">https://www.academia.edu.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Steen, G.J. 2007.</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Finding Metaphor in Grammar and Usage</span><span class="font4">. Amsterdam/ Philadelphia: John Benjamins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font4"> Jakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Warren, Beatrice, 1999. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aspects of referential metonymy</span><span class="font4">. In Panther, K.-U., Radden, G. (Eds.), Metonymy inLanguage and Thought. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 121–138.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Zhang Xianrong and Xingliang Gao. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Conceptual Metaphor in Western Commercial Advertisements</span><span class="font4">: Vol 5, No. 12. (cited 2015 November 10). Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://www.ccsenet.org/journal.html"><span class="font4">www.ccsenet.org/journal.html.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">157</span></p>