---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Code Switching in COSMOGIRL! INDONESIA Magazine"
author: "Putu Agus Darmawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 194-199</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Code Switching in COSMOGIRL! INDONESIA Magazine</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Putu Agus Darmawan</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:putu.agusdrm93@gmail.com"><span class="font0">putu.agusdrm93@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font0">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;The Analisisof Code Switching in &quot;Cosmo GIRL! Indonesia Magazine&quot;. Permasalahan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis jenis dan fungsi dari Code Switching yang ditemukan di &quot;CosmoGIRL! Indonesia Magazine&quot;. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis masalah tersebut dan sekaligus penerapannya di masyarakat. Sumber data dalam penelitian ini adalah &quot;CosmoGIRL! Indonesia Magazine&quot; yang dikumpulkan secara kualitatif. Pertama, data dikategorikan berdasarkan jenis, yang dianalisis secara bersamaan sesuai dengan fungsi code switching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam penelitian ini diterapkan beberapa teori mengenai jenis dan fungsi dari code switching. Teori mengenai jenis code switching dikemukakan oleh Poplack, dan mengenai fungsi dari code switching dikemukakan oleh Appel &amp;&nbsp;Muysken. Berdasarkan teori yang diterapkan dalam penelitian ini ditemukan tiga jenis code switching; Seperti Tag switching, Inter sentential switching, dan Intra sentential switching yang ditemukan mendominasi. Berdasarkan fungsi code switching yang diaplikasikan hanya ada lima fungsi code switching yang terdapat di dalam majalah, yaitu: Metalinguistic function, referential function, expressive function, Phatic fungtion dan Directive fungtion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Code Switching, Analisis, tipe, fungsi, majalah</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Nowadays, several Indonesian magazines have been created in variety ways. Then that makes magazines look more interesting and colourful. Inside them we can see code switching phenomena, code switching can possibly be found in some conversations and code switching itself can be seen in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">example such as: conversation between two close friends when they meet each other who come from different countries, they will exchange their words and that can be called as code switching. That fact shows how important code switching in communicative events. Code switching is not only found in spoken language, but it can also be found in written text or</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">literary work such as magazine, newspaper, short stories and poems.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">For certain functions, language plays an important role in mass media. Mass-media is the media from which we can get any kind information. This study focuses on the printing media especially a magazine. In a magazine the use of language certainly has an important role to make the readers interested in reading it. The writer of the magazine sometimes mixes languages in the magazine for particular purposes. In the COSMOGIRL! Indonesia Magazine thereare many switching from English into Bahasa Indonesia. This phenomenon or trend occurs in many articles of this magazine. This phenomenon is called code switching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Code switching is a term in linguistics referring to the alternative language between two or more languages, dialects, or language registers in a single conversation, stretch of discourse, or utterance between people who have more than one language in common.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to the phenomenon above there are some problems raised in this study such as the functions of code</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">switching used in the magazine and the types of code switching used in the magazine analyzed in this study. Based on the fact above the phenomenon of code switching is a very interesting subject to study. There are some theories applied in this study and they are the theories proposed by Poplack (in Romaine 1995) about the types of code switching, and the theory of the code switching function by Appel&amp;Muysken (1978).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The aim of this study is to discover variety of language specifically words called code switching, and this phenomena usually appears in magazines, newspaper, speeches and etc. This study focuses on analyzing code switching that appears in COSMOGIRL! Indonesia magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background stated above, this study is concerned with the following problems:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of code switching used in the COSMOGIRL! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">magazine?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of code switching used in the COSMOGIRL! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">magazine?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of code switching used in the COSMOGIRL! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the functions of code switching used in the COSMOGIRL! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data of this study were taken from the COSMOGIRL! Indonesia magazine edition May, 2014. This magazine was published in May, 2014, printed by PT Media Rahayu Citra and the address of office at Jl. MH Thamrin No 53, Jakarta 10350. This magazine contains interesting articles of our daily life such as fashion, entertainment, and food. This magazine was chosen as the data source because there are many code switching, so it is easier to collect the data</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">about code switching. The data are displayed in the form of sentences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Tag switching occurs when a tag of an entirely different language inserts an utterance in another language. It may involve a tag, an exclamation or parenthesis. A tag is a word or phrase that is added to a sentence for emphasis. Exclamation is a short sound, word, or phrase expressing sudden surprise. Parenthesis is a word, phrase or sentence, which is inserted as an extra explanation or idea into a passage, which would be complete without it. The type of Tag switching found in the magazine is formulated and analyzed as follows: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Girls</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font0"> gimanahasilujiankamu? (CosmoGIRL! 2014, pg.8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the example above the tag switching occurs in the beginning of the sentence, which is separated by the comma from the next word. The word “girls” in this sentence is classified as an exclamation which shows that the writer would like to express feeling and emphasize differences of something. “Girls” is a word which means female</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">person. This word is colloquially used by the teenagers in informal situation even in our country when they speak with their friend to express their solidarity between each other especially attended to male person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to the functions of the code switching this switching serves a Referential Function, where the tag above is more appropriate if expressed using English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Inter Sentential switching is a type of code switching where the switching occurs between the sentences or clauses, where the sentence of another language is inserted into the main language which is being used in an utterance or the topic being discussed. The type of inter sentential switching found in the magazine is formulated and analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cuma yang dicari adalah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">the next Golden Boy of boxing</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Cosmo GIRL! 2014, pg.18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The type of code switching in the data above is classified as Inter sentential switching because the writer switches the code from Indonesian into English and occurs in the end of the sentence. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">writer just comments directly the statement, which is being discussed. The meaning of switches in this word is who will be the next king of boxing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Due to the function of this switching, this switching serves a phatic function because the writer indicates to change the clause with the other language. On the other hand, it also serves as referential functions with the skill of linguistic, the writer impresses the reader and shows his ability using two languages in the same discourse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Intra sentential switching is a type of code switching where the switching occurs within a sentence or a clause where the phrase or a word of another language is inserted into the language being used in the discussion. The intra sentential switching found in the magazine is formulated as follows: Kalau kamu perhatikan, sinetron cerita SMA banyak menampilkan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">newcomer </span><span class="font0">yang rata-rata baru muncul pertama di layar kaca.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(COSMO GIRL! 2014, pg.43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This Intra sentential switching occurs in the middle of the sentence as a noun phrase, which is arranged correctly</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">according to English syntactical rule. The phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“newcomer”</span><span class="font0"> is translated as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“pendatang baru”</span><span class="font0"> in Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the function of code switching, this switching serves a function as Metalinguistic function where the writer expressed a result of a monitoring that most of series story on TV presented newcomer. It shows that the speaker would like to impress the readers by the writer’s own language skill and switch a phrase for the topic of the utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This study analyses the code switching in COSMOGIRL! Indonesia magazine. The analysis of this study was found in the magazine in which all types of the code switching were applied; they are Tag switching, Inter sentential switching, and Intra sentential switching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The functions of code switching in this study were analyzed based on the six functions; they are; Metalinguistic function, Referential function, Directive function, Expressive function, Phatic Function, and Poetic function. Based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">those functions, most of the code switching occurring has a Metalinguistic function and Referential function because there were many phrases, which were better expressed in English and the journalist showed an impressive expression to the reader in order to make an interesting magazine. Then there was only one directive function and there was no Poetic function, because it was a public magazine which most of the readers certainly have knowledge of those languages. Therefore, there werenot many code switching occurring have a directive function. Regarding the poetic function, there was no code switching occurring involving switches of puns and joke.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Grosjean, Joshua A. 1972. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics a Brief Introduction</span><span class="font0">. Massachussets: Newbury House Publisher, INC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Grosjean, Francois. 1982, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Life With Two Languages, an Introduction to Bilingualism</span><span class="font0">, London: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wardraugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to sociolinguistics</span><span class="font0">. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Magazine.</span><span class="font0">(Skripsi)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">Appel, Rene and Muysken, p. 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language Contact and Bilingualism</span><span class="font0">, London: Hodder and Stoughton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Journal. Available from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;URL:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.proquest.com/pqdweb/code-switching"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.proquest.com/pqdweb/code-</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.proquest.com/pqdweb/code-switching"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">switching</span><span class="font0">.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Romaine, Suzanne. 1995</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Bilingualism, second Edition Oxford</span><span class="font0">: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wicitra, N. W. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Code Switching in Novel Drama Mereka by Monty Tiwa.</span><span class="font0">(Skripsi). Denpasar: Fakultas Satra Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sugianti, Desak. N.S.R. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Indonesian English Code Switching in Indonesian Song Lyrics.</span><span class="font0">(Skripsi)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Denpasar:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">FakultasSastraUniversitasUdayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Darsika, I Made. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Code Switching in The Articles Of Teen Magazine.</span><span class="font0"> (Skripsi).Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Putra, Rai. A. M. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching Used In The Article Of Music</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">199</span></p>