---
layout: full_article
title: "The Translation Procedures Used to Translate the Novel “Catching Fire” Into “The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Tersulut”"
author: "Kadek Dwi Maharatna"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 20.1 Agustus 2017: 261-268</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Translation Procedures Used to Translate the Novel “Catching Fire” Into “The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Tersulut”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Kadek Dwi Maharatna</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Faculty Of Arts – Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:maharatnadwi@gmail.com"><span class="font1">[maharatnadwi@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “The Translation Procedures Used To Translate The Novel “Catching Fire” Into “The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Tersulut”. Penelitian ini difokuskan untuk mengklafikasikan jenis-jenis prosedur penerjemahan dan menganalisis persamaan-persamaan pada prosedur penerjemahan dalam novel “Catching Fire”. Dalam penelitian ini data diambil dari novel “Catching Fire” oleh Suzanne Collins dan terjemahannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia “The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Tersulut” oleh HetihRusli. Data dikumpulkan melalui beberapa langkah. Langkah pertama mengumpulkan data adalah membaca data asli dan terjemahannya dibaca kalimat demi kalimat,langkah kedua adalah mencatat, setelah membaca dan mencatat data tersebutdibandingkanantarabahasasumberdanbahasasasaran, langkah ketiga adalah mengambil data dan langkah terakhir adalah memasukan data kedalam komputer. Hasil analisi smenunjukkan bahwa ada 6 jenis yang ditemukan dalam penelitian ini seperti literal translation, borrowing, calque, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata Kunci </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">: Translation, Method, Catching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> Background of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is very important in our daily life. Language is one of the important tools of communication. Language is also often used to interact or communicate with other people. Through language, people can express their feeling and emotion. In this world, there are many languages such as, Indonesian, English, Japanese, French, German, etc. And usually people from</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">different social, community, nation, and geographical background use different kinds of languages and it is called dialects. Dialect is a form of a language that is spoken in a particular area and uses some of its own words, grammar, and pronunciations. And language can also be used to convey information. Now, in this modern era we can get information from electronic media such as internet and television. Sometimes,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the language is also used to express feeling in writing. There are some people who cannot express their feelings directly and prefer to express their feelings through writing, such as writing poetry and novel. Novel is a narrative prose that is usually long and complex and deals especially with human experience through connected sequence of events. Now, there are a lot of genres novel, such as romance, horror, comedy, mystery, and inspirational novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition, language can also be used to transfer the message from someone to another, and deliver it into different languages and it can be referred to as translation.Translation is transferring the meaning from one form of language to another language. Translations keep the meaning of the SL into the form of TL. (Larson, 1984:3) Translation is a change of form and describes translation as transferring the meaning of SL into receptor language which is done by going from the form of the first language to the form of a second language by way of semantic Translation using many procedures or methods. The translator may use procedures that differ</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">according to contextual factors of both of the source language and target language. Newmark (1988: &nbsp;&nbsp;81)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">mentions the differences between translation method and translation procedures. He writes that, while translation methods related to whole texts and translation procedures are used for sentences and the smaller units of language. There are two types of translation procedures based on Vinay and Dalbernet in venuti (2000: 84-93) they are direct translation which includes borrowing, calque, and literal translation and indirect translation which includes oblique translation, transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background, there are two problems which are related to this study to be analyzed;they are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of procedures of translation found in “Catching Fire” novel?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Are there the similarities from each kind of procedure in “Catching Fire” novel?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems above, there two aims which are related to this study.They are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out and classify the kinds of procedures of translation found in “Catching Fire” novel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the similarities from each kind of procedures in “Catching Fire” novel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study the data were taken from the novel entitled “Catching Fire”. This is the second book of The Hunger Games published in 2009 by Scholastic Inc. and its translation in Indonesian “Tersulut” by HetihRuslipublishws in 2010 and published by PT GramediaPustakaUtama. The data were collected through some steps. The first step of collecting data was reading the original data and its translation; the second step of collecting data was note taking. After reading the data, the data were compared between the source language and target language; the third</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">step of collecting data was picking up the data and the last step of collecting data was recording the data on the computer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinds of Translation Procedures</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL :</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">We always celebrate the Harvest Festival on the final day of the Victory Tour </span><span class="font1">(p.86)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kami selalumerayakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Festival Panen pada hari terakhir Tur Kemenangan</span><span class="font1">(p.101)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL text “we always celebrate the Harvest Festival on the final day of the Victory Tour”is translated into TL text “Kami selalumerayakan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Festival</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PanenpadahariterakhirTurKemenang an”. The SL text is translated word for word and the translator conveyed the message to the reader directly by transferring &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;text</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">grammatically and idiomatically to the TL text. Both the SL text and TL text have the same meaning, namely Katniss and all the participants of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hunger Games always celebrate the Harvest Festival on the final day of the Victory Tour. Therefore, it can be said that the translator used literal translation procedure.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>b.Borrowing</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">SL : After our families and friends has greeted Peeta and me at the train station, there were a few questions allowed from </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">repoter</span><span class="font1">s (p. 32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL : Setelah keluarga dan teman-teman menyambut kepulanganku dan Peeta di stasiun kereta api, sejumlah </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">reporter </span><span class="font1">diizinkan mengajukan beberapa pertanyaan (p.41)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL text ‘reporter’is translated into TL text ‘reporter’. The word or expression is taken from the source language using direct borrowing called pure borrowing to conform to the rule of grammar and pronunciation of the target language which is caused by cultural aspect, language and custom.The source Language and Target Language text have the same meaning and ‘reporter’ is a common</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">word which refers to a job, especially in broadcasting program and people are familiar with the word ‘reporter’ and in Indonesian ‘reporter’ is ‘sebuahpekerjaan yang dalam program siaran’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Calques</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL : On the fiftieth </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">anniversary </span><span class="font1">the President continues as a reminder that two rebels died for each capitol citizen every district was required to send twice as many tributes (p.172)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL : Pada </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">perayaan </span><span class="font1">kelimapuluh tahun lanjut Sang Presiden sebagai pengingat bahwa dua pembrontak mati demi satu penduduk capitol masing-masing distrik diminta untuk mengirim peserta dua kali lebih banyak (p.190)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL text ‘anniversary’ is translated into TL text‘perayaan’. The source language borrows an expression form of the target language and is translated literally. It preserves the syntactic structure of the SL while introducing a new mode of expression</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">to the TL. ‘Anniversary’ is the date on which an event took place in previous year and in Indonesian ‘tanggaldimanasuatuperistiwaterjadi di tahunsebelumnya’. ‘Anniversary’ is commonly used by to celebrate the wedding and birthday anniversary.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL : The audience gives </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a big laugh </span><span class="font1">and the president puts his around me (p.76)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL :Penonton</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">tertawaterbahak-bahak</span><span class="font1">ketikaPresiden Snow merangkulku (p. 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL ‘text a big laugh’ is translated into the TL text ‘tertawa terbahak-bahak’ but it is literally translated into‘ tertawa besar’. ‘A big laugh’ means that laughing loudly when seeing something very funny and In Indonesian ‘big laugh’ means ‘tertawa terbahak-bahak atau tertawa dengan keras karena melihat sesuatu yang sangat lucu’. One technique is that the SL text and the TL text convey the same idea or message through different</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">way and also change the point of view in SL text and TL text, namely the audience gives a big laugh and the president puts his around me. ‘Me’ refers to Katniss. Therefore, it can be said that the translator used the modulation procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Equivalence</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL : And here I am with </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">buckets of money</span><span class="font1">, far more than enough to feed both our families now (p.5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL : Aku sekarang punya </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">uang berlimpah </span><span class="font1">yang jumlahnya lebih dari cukup untuk memberi makan dua keluarga kami (p.12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL text ‘buckets of money’ is translated TL text into ‘uang berlimpah’. ‘Buckets of money’ when it is literally translated into ‘ember-ember uang’ but ‘buckets of money’ here means having a lot of money and in Indonesian ‘buckets of money’ means ‘punya uang banyak atau berlimpah’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This term of SL text and TL text refer to the cases where languages describe the same situation using different stylistic or structural means. Both the SL text and TL text have the same situation, that is Katniss said to herself and here ‘I am with buckets of money which is far more than enough to feed both our families now’. Both our families here refer to Katniss’s family and Gale’s family. Therefore, it can be said that the translator used the equivalent procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">We sit there, almost peacefully sipping our broth and watching the sunset through his living room window </span><span class="font1">(p.181)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kami duduk disana, menghirup kuah daging kami nyaris dalam suasana damai dan memandangi matahari terbenam melalui jendela ruang tamunya </span><span class="font1">(p.200)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The SL text ‘We sit there, almost peacefully sipping our broth and watching the sunset through his living room window’ is translated into TL text‘ Kami duduk disana, menghirup kuah daging kami nyaris dalam suasana damai dan memandangi matahari terbenam melalui jendela ruang tamunya’. The situation of Source Language above is where Katniss and Haymitch are sitting together sipping the broth and watching the sunset in the living room. This situation takes place in the living room. The type of situationreferred to by the SL message is unknown in the TL culture.In this case, the translator created a new situation that can be considered equivalent. Therefore, it is can be said that the translator used the adaptation procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis in the previous discussion ,the procedures found in The Translation Procedures used to Translate The Novel Catching Fire into The Hunger Games: Tersulut are 6 procedures; they are direct translation which includes literal translation, borrowing and calque and three indirect translation which includes equivalent, modulation and adaptation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7.Bibliography</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Collins,Suzanne.2009.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font1">, USA: Scholastic Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Catford,J.C 1965. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font1">, London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Huang, Chen Yan Jingjing.2014. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Culture Turn in Translation Studies. </span><span class="font1">International journal.volume 1.Retrivedfrom :</span></p>
<p><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ojml.2014.4404"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ojml.2014.440</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ojml.2014.4404"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">4</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kaha, MedilinySeptyanti. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Transposition and Modulation Technique in The Translation of Sidney</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sheldon's master of the game.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar: English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Larson, Mildred L.1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation</span><span class="font0">: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence. University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter.1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font1">, USA: Practice –Hall International.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, Eugene and Charles R. Taber. 1982. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Practice of Translation</span><span class="font1">. Leiden: Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nofiawati, Ni Made.2012.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Shift in Danielle Steel's No Greater Love and Their Translation in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yang Terkasih.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar: English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.2005. Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rusli, Hetih. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Tersulut</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT GramediaPustakaUtama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Susana, Kadek Yogi.2013.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Shift in Translation of Locative Prepositional Phrases with Reference to Steve Job Biography</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: English</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinay, Jean-Paul.Dalbernet, Jean. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Comparative Stylistic of French and English</span><span class="font1">. John Benjamins Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinay, Paul and Jean Dalbernet.2000.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Methodologhy for Translating in The TranslationStudios Reader</span><span class="font1">. Routledge: London and New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">268</span></p>