---
layout: full_article
title: "The Constitutionality of Castration Sanction"
author: "Yohanes Usfunan, Jimmy Z. Usfunan, IPR. Arsha Putra"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33378 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-33378"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-33378"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">IRCS UNUD Journals, Vol. 1 No. 1, February 2017</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">121</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF CASTRATION SANCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Yohanes Usfunan<sup>1</sup>, Jimmy. Z. Usfunan<sup>2</sup>, I Pt R. Arsha Putra<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>Faculty of Law University of Udayana</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Jl Pulau Bali No.1 Denpasar, 80114</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup>Faculty of Law University of Udayana Jl Pulau Bali No.1 Denpasar, 80114 Bali, Indonesia </span><a href="mailto:j.usfunan@gmail.com"><span class="font3">j.usfunan@gmail.com</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup>Faculty of Law University of Udayana</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Jl Pulau Bali No.1 Denpasar, 80114</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font3">The research was conducted to asses Article 81 and Article 81A of Government Regulation In Lieu of Law No. 1 of 2016 on the Second Amendment of Law No. 23 of 2002 on Children Protection which includes imposition of castration sanction in its substance materials. Such policy is based on many rapes and murders case of minors that happen cruelly nowadays. Based on three points of view, chemical castration is the effort of reducing sexual arousal addressed to the perpetrator in order not to reiterate the same action and to reduce crimes such as rape and other sexual offenses. Although this regulation has good aim in terms of the deterrent effect, but there is a human rights character code which is a non-derogable human rights stipulated in Article 28 paragraph (1) The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, one of which is so called right not to be tortured. The conclusion of this research is that the sanction of chemical castration violates human rights therefore constitutes an unconstitutional policy or in contrary to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The results of this study is also expected to provide a view on constitutional law in doing the judicial review before the Constitutional Court.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: castration sanction, human rights</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>19</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In 2016 people were surprised by the tragic news related to sexual abuse of children accompanied by murder. For instance, is the case of Yuyun in Bengkulu who was raped and killed by 14 perpetratirs namely Dedi Indra Muda (19), Tomi Wijaya (19), DA (17), Suket (19), Bobi (20), Faisal Edo (19) Zainal (23), Febriansyah Syahputra (18), Sulaiman (18), AI (18), EK (16) and SU (16). Later on, the Eno case in Tangerang shows minors as the victims of rape and murder by many people. In addition to that we can also see another example of children sexual abuse based on data collected by the Indonesian Child Protection Commission (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">KPAI</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The incidence of children sexual abuse raises deep hatred of the public against the perpetrators of the cruel rape and murder on minors. Therefore, the legal discourse on castration sentence is raised. Immediately after such issues, the Government Regulation in Lieu of Law No. 1 of 2016 on the Second Amendment of Law No. 23 of 2002 on Children Protection (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perppu No.1 of 2016</span><span class="font3">) enacted. This regulation includes the castration sanction in its substance materials.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Article 81 of Perppu </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">No.1 of 2016</span><span class="font3"> stipulates that: a. In addition to the perpetrator as referred to in paragraph (3), additional punishment of 1/3 (one-third) of criminal sanction will also be applied to the perpetrator who previously have been convicted of criminal offence as referred to in Article 76D.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the event where criminal offence referred to in Article 76D causing casualties more that one person,resulting major injuries, mental disorders, infectious diseases, or loss of impairment of reproductive function,and/or the death of the victim, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to death, lifetime or at minimum 10 years ofimprisonment and maximum 20 years of imprisonment.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In addition to criminal sanction referred to in paragraph (1), (3), (4), and (5), the perpetrator can also be subject to additional punishment in form of public announcement of the perpetrator identity.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To the perpetrator referred to in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">paragraph (4) and (5)can also be subject to punishment of chemical castration </span><span class="font3">and installment of an electronic detection device.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The punishment referred to in paragraph (7) decided together with the core criminal sanction with information on the period of the punishment.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The additional punishment and measures are excluded for perpetrators who are still a child.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Such castration sanction is directed against the perpetrator who has ever been convicted the same offense (recidivists), causing more than 1 (one) victim, resulting in serious injuries, mental disorders, infectious diseases, impaired or loss of reproductive function, and/or the death of the victim. Furthermore, Article 81A of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perppu No.1 of 2016</span><span class="font3"> regulates as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Measures referred to in Article 81 paragraph (7) shall be imposed for a maximum period of 2 (two) years and implemented after the convict undergo the core criminal sanction.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The implementation of the measures referred to in paragraph (1) is under the periodically supervision of the Ministry which held government affairs in the field of legal, social, and health.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The implementation of chemical castration accompanied by rehabilitation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Further provisions on the procedures for the execution of measures and rehabilitation are regulated by Government Regulation.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Thus, the castration sanction is executed after a convict undergo the core criminal sanction. In other words, if the perpetrator subject to imprisonment of 10 years, then when he is free, he supposed to be sanctioned with the chemical castration for maximum period of 2 years and the installation of electronic detection devices, based on the previous verdict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the above explanation, there are two questions raised in this research, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whether the policy determination on chemical castration sanction in Perppu No.1 of 2016 violates the human rights which constitutionally guaranteed?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the constitutionality of Perppu No.1 of 2016?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">II. </span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Research Methodology</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study is using normative legal research which employs several approaches as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Statute Approach</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conceptual Approach</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Historical approach.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sources of legal research can be divided into primary and secondary legal materials.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Primary legal materials: some laws are used in this research.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Secondary legal materials: books literature, the results of dissertation and scientific speech, legal dictionaries and language dictionaries, as well as the materials from the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">internet. These materials are listed on the reading list.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">III.</span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chemical Castration Concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Historically the concept of castration has been known long time ago in the state of civilization. In the writing of Zachary Edmonds Oswald, he explained that a state can implement castration in two ways, namely surgical castration and chemical castration. Both have different goals in the physical and psychological. There are several definitions of &quot;chemical castration&quot;, including:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mukesh Yadav stated that: Chemical castration is the administration of medication designed to reduce libido and sexual activity, usually in the hope of Preventing rapists, child molesters and other sex offenders from repeating Reviews their crimes, unlike surgical castration, where the testes or ovaries are removed through an incision in the body.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ika Puspita Sari said that castration is an attempt to lower the sex drive which is usually done to perpetrators of sexual abuse by decreasing the levels of androgen hormones, namely testosterone (T) in men. Testosterone is the primary hormone that is necessary for libido/sexual desire and sexual function (sexual behavior).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Samantha Vaillancourt said that: Chemical castration is a colloquial term used to refer to the treatment of certain sex offenders with anti-androgenic drugs in order to reduce recidivism. The use of this treatment began in the United States in 1966, at which time the nation favored a rehabilitative approach to criminal justice. In its first thirty years of use, chemical castration proved effective at reducing recidivism rates among one subset of offenders by about fifty percent.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the above point of views, it is understood that chemical castration constitutes effort to reduce the sexual arousal aimed at the perpetrators in order not to repeat the same action and reduce crimes such as acts of rape and other sexual offenses.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Castration Policy in the States around the World The existence of chemical castration sanction is not</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">only known in Indonesia, but other several states in the world are also familiar with this kind of punishment. Several states as mentioned above include: Poland, Russia, Estonia, and even up to several states in the United States. In 2011, South Korea became the first Asian country to apply chemical castration sentence. Not only that, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">castration sentence is still implemented in various states, such as the Czech Republic, Germany, Moldova, Estonia, Argentina, Australia, Israel, New Zealand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the 20th century, several European states have passed Laws allowing surgical castration to be used as a treatment for sex offenders. These countries are: Denmark (1929, 1935 and 1967), Germany (1933, 1935 and 1969), Norway (1934 and 1977), Finland (1935 and 1950), Estonia (1937), Iceland (1938), Latvia (1938), Sweden (1944), and the Czech Republic (1966). In the Czech Republic, castration sanction is stipulated in the Act on Human Health Care No. 20/1966 Coll., as amended (hereinafter &quot;Act No. 20/1966 Coll.&quot;). Furthermore, Stojanovski argued that the imposition of castration sanction in Czech Republic is based on voluntary demand of the perpetrators. It is also well enforced in the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary and Italy. In addition to that, in America there are a few states that impose laws relating to castration sanction. Around 1996 to 2005, there were 9 states that enforce such matter on their Laws, among others were California, Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Louisiana, Montana, Oregon, Texas, and Wisconsin. Such Laws addressed the conditions that allowed or required sex offenders to undergo castration. However, since 2005, two decrees have been revoked. Georgia revoked the Castration Law in 2006 through legislative session (Georgia General Assembly, 2006). Meanwhile, Oregon did the same thing in 2011 (Oregon Legislative Assembly, 2011).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conditions of the reduced number of states that eliminate the policy on castration sanction show their thinking on the humanity nuances.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Idea of Regulating Castration Sanction in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Perppu No. 1 of 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The provisions set out in Perppu No.1 of 2016 are based on philosophical, sociological and juridical reasons, including:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;State guarantees the right of children to live, grow, and develop as well as the right to protection from abuse and discrimination as stipulated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. This is in line with Article 28B paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Children sexual abuse has increased significantly which threaten and endanger the lives of children, damaging private life and child development as well as disrupt the sense of comfort, tranquility, security and public order.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The imposed criminal sanctions for the perpetrators of children sexual abuse have not been</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">able to provide a deterrent effect and comprehensively prevent sexual abuse against children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the consideration part of Perppu No. 1 of 2016, the idea of such castration sanction is aimed at:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the deterrent effect</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a comprehensive prevention-related sexual abuse against children, as well as</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphasis on the retaliation paradigm.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effectiveness of the Castration Sanction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are some negative impacts in relation to the existence of castration sanction. Those are as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Castration sanction is only applied to the perpetrators for only two years which still open possibility of the perpetrators to commit the same abuse. Whereas the legal politics of this castration sanction is to provide deterrent effect.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The injection of chemical castration to a free man whose has been sentenced to imprisonment constitutes a violation of human rights since such way is inhumane. This proves that coaching in prison does not have significant mental change for the perpetrators.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The additional penalty in the form of castration sanction given to the perpetrators after they completed imprisonment will lead to the rebel actions of such perpetrators. That is even more dangerous as it will invite more frontal action against the other potential victims.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;According to Perppu No. 1 of 2016, the one who performs castrate the patient is a doctor. From the view of medical ethics such action is contradictive. Therefore the rules of this medical ethics will obstruct the implementation of this sanction by considering affection and respect for human dignity and to obtain patient consent.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Castration Sanction From the Perspective of Human Rights</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">When someone is released form the prison then his right specifically the right to bear children as part of Human Rights is needed to be taken into account since it is protected by the State under Article 28B of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The problem arises when someone cannot bear children after being imprisoned due to the implementation of chemical castration for two years after he was free. The implementation of chemical castration sanction potentially leads to a more tragic action of the perpetrators since this type of sanction may influence the condition of the perpetrators for example for the next ten years when they undergo the correction</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">institution. Given the concept that correction institution is a shift concept of imprisonment that emphasizes the element of revenge and deterrence into a sense of security, equality of treatment and services; education; guardianship; respect for human dignity; loss of independence is the only suffering; and ensuring the right to stay in touch with family and certain people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The aegis principle that provides treatment of inmates in the correction institution in terms of public protection from the possibility of repeated criminal acts committed by such inmates actually also provides life investment therefore their existence is useful in the society. Thus, the development pattern in the correction institution has no positive impacts if such chemical castration sanction is given its inmates.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">With such an arrangement, castration sanction could potentially abuse human rights which protected under Article 28B paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of The Republic of Indonesia, since such sanction is implemented in a way that is inhumane. There are two character of human rights regulated under the 1945 Constitution of The Republic of Indonesia namely the non derogable human rights (the rights which cannot be reduced under any circumstances) and the derogable human rights (rights which can be limited).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The non derogable human rights are regulated under Article 28I paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which one of them is the right not to be tortured. The exercise of chemical castration sanction constitutes a form of psychological and physical torture, when a person is already experienced human rights implementation through imprisonment. Thus, the policy of castration sanction is in contrary to the absolute human rights guaranteed by the Constitution. Likewise with Article 7 of Law No. 12 of 2005 on Ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. While the derogable human rights can be found in Article 28B paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 10 paragraph (1) of Law No. 39 of 1999 on Human Rights where everyone has the right to marry legally, to found a family and to bear children.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Impacts of the Chemical Castration</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are some thoughts on the impacts of chemical castration from the medical and legal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">perspectives. Negative impacts on the medical side are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chemical castration is not permanent. That means if the injection of anti-androgen is stopped then the effect will stop therefore the rapists will get back their sexual function both sexual desire and erectile ability.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The male secondary hormone will be lost. The perpetrator will perform like a female usually accompanied with the appeared natures of female for instance enlargement of the breast and the bone is easily porous. Thus such things will indirectly weaken the male immune. It is the same as slowly killing the perpetrators.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chemical castration actually hurts someone because it will create the perpetrator’s hormonal condition become unbalanced. The perpetrator will potentially be more aggressive. Such castration is also triggering depression. The impacts of hormonal changes are the senses of nervous, heat, pain, nausea, and dizziness.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The chemical castration will bring up anger, revenge, hatred. Therefore it is worried that the sexual perpetrators will use more brutal ways to paralyze their victims.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Constitutionality of Perppu No. 1 of 2016</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the hierarchy, Government Regulation in Lieu of Law shall be sourced from the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which consists of preamble and Articles. The preamble shows the existence of the ideal of law &quot;rechtsidee&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rechtsidee as mentioned above in the context of the state of Indonesia is Pancasila (Five basic principles of the Republic of Indonesia). Therefore, from the perspective of Pancasila, the existence of Perppu No. 1 of 2016 which regulates castration sanction is violating the second principle of Pancasila that is just and civilized humanity considering the lack of civilized treatment. In addition to that such sanction violates Article 28I paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, Article 28B paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and Article 28I paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is not appropriate to establish Government Regulation in Lieu of Law (Perppu) which allow a person to be tortured. One of the principles of the substance materials of Article 6 of Law No. 12 of 2011 on the Establishment of Laws and Regulations is humanity principle as the manifestation of Pancasila’s second principle. On that basis, Perppu No. 1 of 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">does not reflect this principle. Thus, Perppu No. 1 of 2016 is unconstitutionality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">IV.</span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the above explanations, it can be concluded that the castration sanction violates human rights (HAM) hence constitutes an unconstitutional policy or contrary to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on such conclusion, it is suggested that the parties who feel their constitutional right is aggrieved then they can look for judicial review before the Constitutional Court to examine </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perppu No. 1 of 2016</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">We would like to express our gratitude to University of Udayana specifically LPPM of University of Udayana for the funding of this research. For those who have helped us to complete this research on time, we would also like to say thank you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">References</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A.V Dicey, 1987, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to The Study of The Law of The Constitution</span><span class="font1">, Fifth edition, London, Macmillan And Co., Limited New York: The Macmillan Company</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A.W Bradley and K D Ewing, 2007, Constitutional and Administrative Law, Fourteenth edition, Pearson Education Limited, England</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alex Carrol, 2009, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Constitutional and Administrative Law</span><span class="font1">, Manchester Metropolitan University, Fifth Edition</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bernard Arief Sidharta, 1999</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Refleksi Tentang Struktur Ilmu Hukum-Sebuah Penelitian Tentang Fundasi Kefilsafatan dan Sifat Keilmuan Ilmu Hukum Sebagai Landasan Pengembangan Ilmu Hukum Nasional Indonesia,</span><span class="font1"> Citra Aditya Bakti.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bernard Arief Sidharta, 2000, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Refleksi Tentang Struktur Ilmu Hukum Sebuah Penelitian tentang fundasi kefilsafatan dan sifat keilmuan ilmu hukum sebagai landasan pengembangan ilmu hukum nasional Indonsesia</span><span class="font1">, CV Mandar Maju, Bandung</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[23] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bryan A Garner</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> 2009, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Black Law Dictionary,</span><span class="font1"> Ninth Edition</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> (USA: West Publishing Co, 2009)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[24] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bryan A Garner, 2009, Black Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition, West</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[25] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chemical Castration Sentences, Michigan Journal of Gender and Law, 2013, Volume 19 | Issue 2, p.474</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[26] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H. Rosjidi Ranggawidjaja, 1998, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Ilmu Perundang-Undangan Indonesia</span><span class="font1">, Penerbit CV Mandar Maju, Bandung</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[27] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hamid Attamimi, 1990, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Peranan Keputusan Presiden Republik Indonesia Dalam Penyelenggaraan Pemerintahan Negara (Suatu Studi Analis: Keputusan Presiden Yang Berfungsi Peraturan Dalam Kurun Waktu Pelita I – Pelita V</span><span class="font1">, Disertasi PPS Universitas Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[28] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jimly Asshidiqqie, 2010, Konstitusi dan Konstitusionalisme, Sinar Grafika, Jakarta.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[29] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;M. Solly Lubis, 2014, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Hukum dan Kebijakan Publik</span><span class="font1">, CV.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mandar Maju, Bandung, 2014</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[30] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maria Farida Indrati Soeprapto, 1998, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ilmu Perundang-undangan</span><span class="font1">, Penerbit Kanisius, Jogjakarta</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[31]</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mukesh Yadav,</span><span class="font1"> Child Sexual Abuse in India, Is Chemical Castration an alternative punishment?, Editorial, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">J Indian Acad Forensic Med. July-September 2011, Vol. 33, No.3</span><span class="font1"> ISSN 0971-0973</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[32] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PH. Collin, 2004, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of Law</span><span class="font1">, Fourth Edition, Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, London</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[33] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philipus M. Hadjon</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> 1987, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perlindungan Hukum Bagi Masyarakat di Indonesia</span><span class="font1">, PT Bina Ilmu, Surabaya</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[34] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philipus M. Hadjon, 1997, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Hukum Dogmatik (Normatif)</span><span class="font1">, Fakultas Hukum Universitas Airlangga</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[35] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Samantha Vaillancourt, 2012, Chemical Castration: How A Medical Therapy Became Punishment and The Bioethical Imperative to Return</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">to A Rehabilitative Model for Sex Offenders, A Thesis Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of Wake Forest University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, December 2012, Winston-Salem, North Carolina</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[36] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suri Ratnapala dalam Titon Slamet Kurnia, 2015, Interpretasi Hak-Hak Asasi Manusia oleh Mahkamah Konstitusi, CV Mandar Maju.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[37]</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Voislav Stojanovski,</span><span class="font1"> tanpa tahun</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> Surgical Castration of Sex Offenders and its Legality: The Case of the Czech Republic, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Faculty of Law, Masaryk University, PrF D-TPV4</span><span class="font1"> Theoretical Legal Sciences, Doctoral Degree ProgramDepartment of Criminal Law VI.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[38] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Winarno Surakhmad, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Penelitian Ilmiah</span><span class="font1">, Dasar Metode dan Tekhnik</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[39] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zachary Edmonds Oswald, &quot;Off with His __&quot;: Analyzing the Sex Disparity inChemical Castration Sentences, Michigan Journal of Gender and Law, 2013, Volume 19 | Issue 2, p.474</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[40] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Detik.com, Melihat Negara yang Terapkan Hukuman Kebiri ke Paedofil, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Minggu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;25 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oct &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2015,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://news.detik.com/berita/3052555/melihat-negara-yang-terapkan-hukuman-kebiri-ke-paedofil"><span class="font1">http://news.detik.com/berita/3052555/melihat-negara-yang-terapkan-hukuman-kebiri-ke-paedofil</span></a><span class="font1">, diakses pada tanggal 26 Mei 2016.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[41] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eva Setyaningrum, Politik Indonesia, 2016, Sandra Moniaga: Langgar HAM dan sulit menerapkan sanksi kebiri, akses: </span><a href="http://www.politikindonesia.com/m/index.php?ctn=1&amp;k=wawancara"><span class="font1">http://www.politikindonesia.com/m/index.php?ctn=1&amp;k=wawancara</span></a><span class="font1"> &amp;i=75657-Sandra-Moniaga:-Langgar-HAM,-Sulit-menerapkan-Sanksi-Kebiri</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[42] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fitri Syarifah, Liputan 6, 2016, Efek Samping Hukum Kebiri, akses: </span><a href="http://health.liputan6.com/read/2504974/efek-samping-hukuman-kebiri"><span class="font1">http://health.liputan6.com/read/2504974/efek-samping-hukuman-kebiri</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[43] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hasanul Rizqa, Republika Online, 2016, Pakar Medis Keberatan dengan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hukuman &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kebiri, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;akses:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/hukum/16/05/26/o7rxzw"><span class="font1">http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/hukum/16/05/26/o7rxzw</span></a><span class="font1"> 361-pakar-medis-keberatan-dengan-hukuman-kebiri</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[44] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ida Nurcahyani, Antara News, 2016, Hukuman kebiri bagi paedofil tidak efektif menurut ahli medis, akses: </span><a href="http://www.antaranews.com/berita/524802/hukuman-kebiri-bagi-paedofil-tidak-efektif-menurut-ahli-medis"><span class="font1">http://www.antaranews.com/berita/524802/hukuman-kebiri-bagi-paedofil-tidak-efektif-menurut-ahli-medis</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[45] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ika Puspita Sari, Apa Itu Kebiri Secara Kimiawi, Tribun Jogja, Minggu, 29 Mei 2016</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[46] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kbbi.web.id</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[47] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Liputan6.com, 4 Mei 2016, Kronologi Kasus Kematian Yuyun di Tangan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ABG</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bengkuluhttp://regional.liputan6.com/read/2499720/kronologi-kasus-kematian-yuyun-di-tangan-14-abg-bengkulu, diakses pada tanggal 12 September 2016.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[48]</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rezki Alvionitasari, Tempo, 2016, Ahli Saraf: Hukuman Kebiri Membuat Orang Lebih Agresif, akses: </span><a href="https://m.tempo.co/read/news/2016/05/27/063774577/ahli-saraf-hukuman-kebiri-membuat-orang-lebih-agresif"><span class="font1">https://m.tempo.co/read/news/2016/05/27/063774577/ahli-saraf-hukuman-kebiri-membuat-orang-lebih-agresif</span></a></p></li></ul>