---
layout: full_article
title: "The Use of Modal Must and Have to in the Corpus of Contemporary American English"
author: "Komang Adi Maendra, I Nengah Sudipa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i01.p35</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.1 Pebruari 2018: 236-241</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Use of Modal </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Must</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Have to</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> in the Corpus of Contemporary American English</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Komang Adi Maendra<sup>1</sup>*, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Putu Weddha Savitri<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:adi.maendra@gmail.com"><span class="font3">adi.maendra@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font3">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font3">] </span><span class="font0">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font3">] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The title of this study is The Use of Modal “Must” and “Have to” in the Corpus of Contemporary American English. It aimed at finding structures and identifying meanings of the modals in the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA). COCA was used as the data source on </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Documentation method was applied in collecting the data in this study. The data were identified, classified, and analyzed about structures and meanings of modal “must” and “have to” by the main theory of Quirk. The results show that the structure of modal “must” followed by verb classes is the most frequently used, second is verb phrases, third is adverbs, and fourth is indefinite pronouns and quantifier positions. The structure of modal “have to” that is followed by verb classes is also the most frequently used, furthermore is verb phrases. Meanwhile, the meaning of modal “must” expresses more messages than the meaning of modal “have to”. Modal “must” expresses a condition cannot be changed or unavoidable obligation, the obligation or necessity from inside the speaker, the idea of necessity, the logically necessary, and the wishes or intentions of the person one is speaking to. Modal “have to” expresses the obligation from outside the speaker, the idea of obligation or repetition, and the unavoidable obligation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: modality, corpus, and structures</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Judul studi ini adalah The Use of Modal “Must” and “Have to” in the Corpus of Contemporary American English. Studi ini bertujuan untuk menemukan struktur dan menganalisa arti dari kedua modal tersebut dalam Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA). COCA dipakai sebagai sumber data yang dapat diakses melalui website </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Metode dokumentasi digunakan dalam pengumpulan data pada studi ini. Data yang telah didapat kemudian diidentifikasi, diklasifikasi, dan dianalisa untuk mencari struktur dan arti dari modal “must” dan “have to” menggunakan teori utama dari Quirk. Hasil dari studi ini menunjukan bahwa struktur dari modal “must” yang diikuti oleh kelas kata kerja merupakan yang paling sering digunakan, kedua adalah frasa kata kerja, ketiga adalah kelas kata keterangan, dan keempat adalah kelas kata ganti yang tidak tentu dan kelas kata posisi pembilang. Struktur dari modal “have to” yang diikuti oleh kelas kata kerja juga merupakan yang paling sering digunakan, setelahnya adalah frasa kata kerja. Sementara itu, arti dari modal “must” mengekspresikan lebih banyak pesan daripada arti dari modal “have</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to”. Modal “must” mengekspresikan sebuah keadaan yang tidak bisa diubah atau dihindarkan, keharusan dari dalam pembicara, ide tentang keperluan, logika yang diperlukan, dan harapan atau maksud seseorang terhadap orang lain yang diajak bicara. Modal “have to” mengekspresikan keharusan dari luar pembicara, ide tentang keperluan atau pengulangan, dan kewajiban yang tidak bisa dihindarkan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: modality, corpus, dan struktur</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">An auxiliary verb is a verb that helps another verb for making a complete structural sentence. The modal verb cannot stand alone without another verb or we know as a full verb in a sentence. (Hornby, 1987: 558)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Modal “must” and “have to” have the same grammatical meaning where “must” comes from the internal speakers’ point of view and “have to” comes from the external speaker’ point of view. (Kreidler, 1998: 241).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The reason for choosing corpus texts as the object of analysis is because they usually consist of thousands or millions of words and they are not made up of the linguist’s or native speaker’s invented examples but on authentic or naturally occurring spoken and written language. (Davies, 1990).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the background, the problems of this study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the structures of modal “must” and “have to” in the Corpus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contemporary</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">American English?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of modal “must” and “have to” in the Corpus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contemporary</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">American English?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the formulation of the above problems, this study is investigated in order to find the following purpose:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the structures of modal “must” and “have to” in the Corpus of Contemporary American English.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the meanings of modal “must” and “have to” in the Corpus of Contemporary American English.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Research method describes how the research is done. It can be defined as the procedures on the method used in writing a scientific paper which in this case includes the data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were taken from the Corpus of Contemporary American English on </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font3">. It was chosen as a data source because it is the largest freely-available corpus of English and the only large and balanced corpus of American English. It is probably the most widely-used corpus of English which contains more than 520 millions word texts (20 million words each year 19902015). The data on the corpus is divided among spoken, fiction, magazine, newspaper, and academic texts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Documentation method was applied in conducting the data in this study. The data were taken from the Corpus of Contemporary American English on </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font3">. First, an account must be created to signing to the website. Second, click “SEARCH” menu and type the modal “must” and “have to” one by one in POST LIST with these patterns</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">; </span><span class="font3">In the [nn*], On the [nn*], and At the [nn*]. Third, click “SECTION” and choose “fiction”. Fourth, click the “OPTION” and choose 50 data for each modal on #HITS and #KWIC of corpus texts that would be displayed; the data of modal “must” and “have to” would be limited to 100. Fifth, press “ENTER” on the keyboard to show the data. Sixth, the data were input into Microsoft Word of a computer program. Finally, the collecting data were classified and analyzed to find their structures and meanings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Analyzing Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, the data were identified. Second, the data were classified into some groups and each of them was classified based on word classes followed. Third, the data were analyzed descriptively and quantitatively based on the main theory of Quirk (1985) and the supporting theory of Kreidler (1998).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Presenting Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study are presented descriptively. They are presented by giving some descriptions to convey the structures and meanings of modal “must” and “have to” in the sentences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This chapter answers the problems formulated in the previous chapter to find out the structures and to identify the meanings of modal “must” and “have to” with reference to The Corpus of Contemporary American English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structures and Meanings of Modal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">“Must”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part discusses the structures of modal “must” by checking what word classes follow after the modal “must”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Must” Is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Followed by Verb Phrases</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">So each ship </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must end up </span><span class="font3">with at least one person aboard.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the phrase “end up”, it consists of verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">end </span><span class="font3">+ adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">up</span><span class="font3">. It expresses a condition which cannot be changed. There must be one person at least to control the ship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">So that as he hangs there he </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must force down </span><span class="font3">thin wedges of breath into painful congestion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the phrase “force down”, it consists of verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">force </span><span class="font3">+ adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">down. </span><span class="font3">It expresses the obligation from inside the speaker. He makes an activity where he hangs on somewhere, it makes him must force down his power and controls the breath.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Must” Is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Followed by Verb Classes</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Data 12 </span><span class="font3">I’ve never considered myself a petty sort, but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must admit </span><span class="font3">it gave me a great deal of satisfaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the full verb “admit”. It expresses a condition which cannot be changed. The speaker (I) is the petty person, so he gives the obligation from inside of himself to admit this situation because it gives the speaker deal of satisfaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 13</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hell for old men arrives at that exact moment when we </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must admit </span><span class="font3">we can no longer protect our kids and our families.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the full verb “admit”. It expresses unavoidable obligation or a condition which cannot be changed. Where everyone was born into the world exactly will die one day. So they must admit that they cannot always protect their kids and families forever.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Must” Is Followed by Adverbs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 46</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The nearby gang of two-legged Christmas tree ornaments </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must also </span><span class="font3">be children in disguise, for they were spooking the horses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the simple adverb “also”. It expresses the logically necessary. It can be used to say that we are sure about something. For spooking the horses, the children must also disguise themselves into the gang of twolegged Christmas tree ornaments.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 47</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Way of defining taste. If so, then that taste </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must also </span><span class="font3">function with new plays.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the simple adverb “also”. It expresses the obligation from</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">inside the process. The above sentence discusses the way of defining taste, so there is a command to require that way of taste must also function with new plays.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Must” Is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Followed by Indefinite Pronouns</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 49</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Must everybody </span><span class="font3">get on my case?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the indefinite pronoun “everybody”. It expresses the wishes or intentions of the person one is speaking to. The speaker (I) is speaking to everybody, he asks about his case. Must he give his case to everybody?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Must” Is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Followed by Quantifier Positions</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 50</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He groaned as he thought that it </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">must all </span><span class="font3">be gone through again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “must” in the above sentence is followed by the quantifier position “all”. It expresses the idea of necessity in reported speech. He places himself in the complicated situation of life and he imagines all that he is owned must be gone through again.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structures and Meanings of Modal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">“Have to”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part discusses the structures of modal “have to” by checking what word classes follow after the modal “have to”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Have to” Is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Followed by Verb Phrases</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 51</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Odo would </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">have to climb down </span><span class="font3">into the cesspool and carry Wulfrith out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “have to” in the above sentence is followed by the phrase “climb down”, it consists of verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">climb </span><span class="font3">+ adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">down</span><span class="font3">. It expresses the obligation from outside the speaker. Odo has to climb down into the cesspool to save Wulfrith because Wulfrith needs Odo’s help to go out from the cesspool.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 52</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">She and Tom would </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">have to figure out </span><span class="font3">more child care for the boys.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “have to” in the above sentence is followed by the phrase “figure out”, it consists of verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">figure </span><span class="font3">+ adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">out</span><span class="font3">. It expresses the idea of obligation. Child care is one of the best ways to keep the child from something is not wanted such as disease. So, she and Tom have to figure out about the child care especially for the boys.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of Modal “Have to” Is</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Followed by Verb Classes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 57</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Want to go to heaven when he did, but you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">have to accept </span><span class="font3">he’s gone, son.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “have to” in the above sentence is followed by the full verb “accept”. It expresses the idea of obligation. The son has to accept the reality that someone he loves so much has gone forever and he would not be back again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 58</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The natives will </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">have to accept </span><span class="font3">it. Better we offend them than the Thtresh.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The modal “have to” in the above sentence is followed by the full verb “accept”. It expresses the idea of obligation. There are two choices which we can do. We offend the natives or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thtresh. We have to do it to the natives because they will accept it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The structures of modal “must” in the sentences which were found in the Corpus of Contemporary American English can be classified into five groups. They are modal “must” is followed by verb phrases, verb classes, adverbs, indefinite pronouns, and quantifier positions. The most frequently used after the modal “must” is the verb classes. On the other hand, the structures of modal “have to” can be classified into two groups. They are modal “have to” is followed by verb phrases and verb classes. The most frequently used after the modal “have to” is the verb classes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The meanings of modal “must” in the sentences found in the Corpus of Contemporary American English express some messages. They are expression of a condition which cannot be changed or unavoidable obligation, expression of the obligation or necessity from inside the speaker, expression of the idea of necessity, expression of the logically necessary, and expression of the wishes or intentions of the person one is speaking to. On the other hand, the meanings of modal “have to” express some messages such as expression of the obligation from outside the speaker, expression of the idea of obligation or repetition, and expression of the unavoidable obligation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Brown, H. Douglas. (1987). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Language &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Learning &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching</span><span class="font3">. Prentice-Hall Inc, New Jersey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Davies, M. (1990). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)</span><span class="font3"> [Internet]. Available from: </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font3">[Accessed 28 July 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kreidler, Charles W.(1998). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing English Semantics</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;Routledge,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk, Randolph et al. &nbsp;(1985). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language</span><span class="font3">. Longman Ltd, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">241</span></p>