---
layout: full_article
title: "THE PLIGHT OF ROHINGYA MUSLIMS: THE PROTECTION OFWORLD’S MOST PERSECUTED MINORITIES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW"
author: "Alia Yofira Karunian, Ida Bagus Wyasa Putra"
categories: kerthanegara
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kerthanegara/full-38791 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kerthanegara/id-38791"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kerthanegara/full-38791"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE PLIGHT OF ROHINGYA MUSLIMS: THE PROTECTION OF WORLD’S MOST PERSECUTED MINORITIES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Alia Yofira Karunian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ida Bagus Wyasa Putra</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Specialization Program of International Law and International Business Law Faculty of Law Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tulisan ini membahas mengenai krisis kemanusiaan Muslim Rohingya, sebuah kelompok minoritas yang mengalami pelanggaran hak asasi manusia di Negara mereka sendiri, Myanmar. Kedatangan Muslim Rohingya secara massal telah mengalami penolakan bahkan dari Negara mayoritas Muslim seperti Malaysia, Indonesia dan Bangladesh yang mengklaim ‘ketakutan terhadap kedatangan Muslim Rohingya yang tidak dapat terkontrol’ sebagai alasan pembenar mereka. Tulisan ini mengaplikasikan metode penelitian normatif dipadukan dengan pendekatan perbandingan, perundang-undangan, kasus, dan analisis konsep hukum. Kesimpulannya, masyarakat internasional dapat menuntut tanggung jawab dari Myanmar atas krisis Muslim Rohingya, yang diakibatkan atas tindakan Myanmar yang salah berdasarkan hukum internasional.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Muslim Rohingya, Hak Asasi Manusia, Perlindungan Pengungsi, Tanggung Jawab Negara</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This writing discusses the Rohingya Muslims humanitarian crisis, a minorities group which faced abuse of human rights in their own country, Burma. The mass-influx of the Rohingya Muslims to Asia countries have faced rejection even from the Muslim-majority countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Bangladesh which claim ‘fear of uncontrolled influx of the Rohingya Muslim’ as their justification. This writing applies normative legal research combined with comparative, statutory, case, analytical and conceptual approaches. In conclusion, international community may invoke the responsibility of Burma to be held responsible for the Rohingya Muslims crisis, as the result of Burma’s wrongful conduct under international law.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: Rohingya Muslim, Human Rights, Protection of Refugee, Responsibility of State</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The mass-influx of persons across international borders seems worsening</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">nowadays. Those people are what international law calls refugees: people fleeing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">persecution in their home countries.<sup>1</sup> The Rohingya Muslim [“The Rohingya”] is a minorities group resided in predominantly Buddhist country, Burma. The Burmese Government did not acknowledge the Rohingya as their nationals, it referred them as “Bengali Migrants”.<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It was all started in 2012, when religious and ethnic tensions between the Rohingya and the Rakhine Buddhists escalated into widespread and deadly rioting.<sup>3</sup> The Rohingyas are forced to leave their homes ever since. Unfortunately, the mass-influx of the Rohingya Muslims to Asia countries have faced rejection even from the Muslim-majority countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Bangladesh which claim ‘fear of uncontrolled influx of the Rohingya Muslim’ as their justification.<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Objective</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The objective of this writing is to analyze and describe the discrimination suffered by the Rohingya and to further elaborate on how and why the international community’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">erga omnes</span><span class="font1"> obligation can be invoked as the ground to protect the Rohingya.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONTENT</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method applied within this writing shall be normative legal research<sup>5 </sup>combined with comparative, statutory as well as analytical and conceptual approach<sup>6</sup> using both primary as well as secondary sources which aims to examine relevant law regarding the protection of the Rohingya under international law.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>2.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Gross-violations of Rohingyas’ Human Rights</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The racial discrimination<sup>7</sup> suffered by the Rohingya is contrary to customary international law.<sup>8</sup> It is shown by the enactment of 1982 Burma Citizenship Law which effectively denies the possibility of Rohingya to acquire a nationality.<sup>9</sup> Moreover, the Burmese government violates the Rohingya’s right to freedom of movement<sup>10</sup> by restricting them from traveling within Burma and abroad.<sup>11</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore, the Burmese government violates the Rohingya right to secondary education<sup>12</sup> as it only reserves secondary education for citizens.<sup>13</sup> The local government authorities also requires the Rohingya to perform forced labor, those who refuse or complain are physically threatened, sometimes with death, and that children as young as seven years old have been seen on forced labor groups.<sup>14</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>2.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Erga Omnes</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> Obligation of International Community to Protect the Rohingya’s Rights by Invoking Burma’s Responsibility</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">States shall ensure the realization<sup>15</sup> of higher standard of living and selfdetermination of peoples and universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race or religion.<sup>16</sup> The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">erga omnes</span><span class="font1"> is obligation owed to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">international community as a whole which is derived from the violations of the basic human rights, including protection from slavery and racial discrimination.<sup>17</sup> The abuse of rights conducted by the organs of Burmese government<sup>18</sup> is attributable to Burma<sup>19</sup> and constitute breach of Burma’s international obligation.<sup>20</sup> Presently, as the Rohingya suffered from the violations of human rights as the result of Burma’s internationally wrongful conduct, thus, international community may invoke Burma’s responsibility for the reason that the obligation breached is owed to the international community as a whole.<sup>21</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Rohingyas have suffered the gross-violations of their fundamental and basic human rights such as the freedom of movement, freedom from slavery. Therefore, Burma has conducted internationally wrongful conduct which constitutes breach of its international obligation to respect the enforcement of the Rohingya’s human rights. In conclusion, on the basis of its </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">erga omnes</span><span class="font1"> obligation to protect the basic human rights, international community is obligated to bring the Rohingya Muslim humanitarian crisis to the attention of the United Nations Security Council<sup>22</sup> to investigate any situation which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.<sup>23</sup></span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>INDEX OF AUTHORITIES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">LEGAL INSTRUMENTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts</span><span class="font1">, 2001, UN Doc. A/56/83.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Charter of the United Nations</span><span class="font1">, 1945, 1 UNTS 16.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination</span><span class="font1">, 1965, 660 UNTS 195.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights</span><span class="font1">, 1966, 999 UNTS 171.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights</span><span class="font1">, 1966, 993 UNTS 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Universal Declaration of Human Rights</span><span class="font1">, 1948, UN Doc. A/810.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">CASE LAW</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain),</span><span class="font1"> 1970, ICJ Reports p.3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">BOOKS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Joseph, Sarah </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et.al.</span><span class="font1">, 2004, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Cases, Materials, and Commentary</span><span class="font1">, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Marzuki, Peter Mahmud, 2009, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Hukum</span><span class="font1">, Kencana Prenada Media Group, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shaw, Malcolm N., 2003, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Law,</span><span class="font1"> 5<sup>th</sup> ed., Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Soekanto, Soerjono dan Sri Mamudji, 2007, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Hukum Normatif, Suatu Tinjauan Singkat</span><span class="font1">, Raja Grafindo Persada, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">LAW REVIEW AND DIGESTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Human Rights Watch Report, 2000, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Burma/Bangladesh: Burmese Refugees in Bangladesh: Still No Durable Solution</span><span class="font1">, Vol.12, Issue 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Joseph Blocher and Mitu Gulati, 2016, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Competing for Refugees: a Market-Based Solution to a Humanitarian Crisis</span><span class="font1">, Columbia H.R.L. Rev.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Asia’s Worst Refugee Crisis in Recent Years Could Happen Again”, (</span><a href="http://edition.cnn"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://edition.cnn</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">. com/2016/ 06/19/asia/myanmar-rohingya-refugees/</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Who are the Rohingya Refugees”, (</span><a href="https://www.amnesty.org.au/who-are-the-rohingyarefu"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.amnesty.org.au/who-are-the-rohingyarefu</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> gees/</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Why No One Wants the Rohingyas”, (</span><a href="http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/05/1"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/05/1</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> 5/40704 8785/why-no-one-wants-the-rohingyas</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5</span></p>