---
layout: full_article
title: "The English Prefixes Analysis with Reference to Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s"
author: "Ni Luh Radnyani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p25</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.2 Mei 2018: 453-460</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The English Prefixes Analysis with Reference to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Luh Radnyani<sup>1*</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:ni_luhradnyani@ymail.com"><span class="font3">ni_luhradnyani@ymail.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prefix is a bound morpheme which is added to the initial of the base word. This study is concerned with the types, meanings and functions of the English Prefixes found in a scientific book entitled “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s” by Nawiyanto. This study applied two theories in order to analyze the data. The first is the theory of type and meaning of the English prefixes proposed by Quirk (1973). The second is the theory of functions of the English prefixes proposed by Bauer (1983). The data of this study were taken directly from the scientific book itself. The data were collected using the contentanalysis method and note-taking technique. The collected data were analyzed using the descriptive and qualitative method. Then, all of the analyses were presented using both formal and informal methods. The analyses show that almost all types of the English prefixes found in the book. However, most of them belong to the class-maintaining English prefixes and the attachment of those prefixes give a new meaning to the base words after its attachment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">morphology, prefixes, scientific book</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata imbuhan berupa awalan biasanya terletak di depan sebuah kata dasar. Penelitian ini berfokus untuk menganalisis tipe, makna, dan fungsi dari kata imbuhan berupa awalan yang ada dalam bahasa Inggris. Awalan tersebut di cari dalam sebuah buku ilmiah yang berjudul “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s” yang di karang oleh Nawiyanto. Penelitian ini menggunakan dua buah teori. Teori yang pertama adalah teori tipe dan makna dari kata imbuhan berupa awalan dalam bahasa Inggris yang dikemukakan oleh Quirk dan teori yang kedua adalah teori fungsi dari kata imbuhan berupa awalan dalam bahasa Inggris oleh Bauer. Data dalam penelitian ini data diambil langsung dari teks yang terdapat dalam buku ilmiah tersebut. Data tersebut dikumpulkan melalui metode analisis-konten dan teknik mencatat. Data yang terkumpul di analisis menggunakan metode deskriptif dan kualitatif. Seluruh data yang telah di analisis ditampilkan melalui metode formal dan informal. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa hampir seluruh tipe dari kata imbuhan berupa awalan dalam bahasa Inggris dapat ditemukan dalam buku tersebut. Sebagian besar kata dasar yang mengandung kata imbuhan tegolong ke dalam kelas kata yang tetap dan hampir seluruh maknanya berubah setelah mendapat kata imbuhan berupa awalan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">morfologi, kata imbuhan, buku ilmiah</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Morphology is a branch of linguistics which studies how words are structured and how they are put together from</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">smaller parts. Morphology is also called the study of morphemes and their different forms (allomorphs) and the way they combine in word formation. The word-formation process or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">morphological process is the process of forming new words with the rules of morphology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In morphology, there are so many word-formation processes and one of them is affixation. Affixation is the adding of bound morphemes to the base to form a word. Affixation consists of prefixes, suffixes, and infixes</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The bound morphemes added initially to the base are called prefixes</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> those inserted into the base are called infixes</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> and those added to the end of the base are called suffixes. However, this research focuses only on the English prefixes. Based on a general theory proposed by Quirk (1973: 431) prefixes do not generally alter the wordclass of the base. Productive prefixes normally have a light stress on their first syllable. He also stated that there are some types of prefixes in English. They included negative prefixes, reversative or privative prefixes, pejorative prefixes, prefixes of degree or size, prefixes of attitude, locative prefixes, prefixes of time and order, number prefixes, other prefixes and conversion prefixes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In order to make the study becomes more specific, it is necessary to use a certain reference. Thus, a scientific book entitled “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s” becomes the object of this study. A scientific book is a work of nonfiction, usually written by a scientist, researcher, or professor. That book is chosen because it contains so many types of the English prefixes so that it can support this analysis to be more complete.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are many previous studies that have analyzed the affixation in English. However, most of them only described specifically about the English suffixes. Therefore, this current research is different than others because it is concerned with the types, meanings and functions of the English prefixes found in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a scientific book. The two main theories proposed by Quirk (1973) and Bauer (1983) were applied to make this analysis becomes more accurate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of English prefixes found in a scientific book entitled “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings and functions of those prefixes?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of English prefixes in the scientific book.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the meanings and functions of those English prefixes.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The research method of this study includes the data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data and method and technique of presenting data. Each part of research method is explained as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data used in this discussion were obtained from a scientific book. A scientific book is a work of nonfiction, usually written by a scientist, researcher, or professor. The book entitled “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s”. It is written by Nawiyanto. It was published on June 2013 by Galang Press, Yogyakarta. The data were chosen because it contains so many types of the English prefixes which could support this analysis to be more detailed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method used in this study was content-analysis. According to Kothari</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2004: 110), content-analysis consists of analyzing the contents of documentary materials such as books, magazines, newspapers and the contents of all other verbal materials which can be either spoken or printed. The technique used in order to collect the data was note-taking. Note-taking is the practice of writing down key points of information in a systematic way. Moreover, there were some steps to be done in order to collect the data perfectly. It was conducted by reading the scientific book comprehensively. Then, the next step was by highlighting some words which contain English prefixes. After that, grouping the English prefixes into some types.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this study were analyzed using the descriptive and qualitative method. It means that the data were analyzed using a deep explanation or description without involving measurement or statistics. Moreover, the data of this study were described in detail based on the relevant theories to the topic of discussion. All the data found in the scientific book entitled “Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s” were processed through some steps. First, the collected data were classified into some types and meanings of the English prefixes using a theory proposed by Quirk (1973: 431). Then, to identify the functions of the prefixes in English, the theory proposed by Bauer (1983: 217) was applied.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of presenting analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were presented and described in sentences through several steps. First, the collected data were classified into several types of the English prefixes. Next, all types of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English prefixes found in the scientific book were described in the form of paragraph in order to analyze the meanings and functions of those English prefixes. The last step was the classification of its types, meanings and functions were presented in the form of tables. Moreover, this research applied both informal and formal methods in order to present the analysis. Informal method means that this study was explained by giving some deeper description using words. On the other hand, formal method means that this study was being presented using a form of table.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Prefixes consist of ten types namely negative prefixes, reversative prefixes, pejorative prefixes, prefixes of degree or size, prefixes of time and order, prefixes of attitude, locative prefixes, number prefixes, other prefixes, and conversion prefixes. Every prefix has their own meanings. The functions of the English prefixes were divided into two parts. There were class-changing and classmaintaining prefixes. The analyses of English prefixes are explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Negative prefixes are attached to the base word and have a function to form a new negative word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">For a long time the region was relatively </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">unstable</span><span class="font3"> due to the warfare between the Javanese kingdoms of Majapahit, Demak, and later also Mataram and the Blambangan supported by Balinese kingdoms. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 07)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The underlined word above contains a negative prefix</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The word ‘unstable’ in the sentence above is derived from the base word ‘stable’. The base form</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">attached by a negative prefix un </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font3">becomes ‘unstable’</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Un</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font3"> means ‘the opposite of or not’. It is usually added to the adjective word class adjective and participles. The base word ‘stable’ belongs to adjective. Even after it is attached by a negative prefix un</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font3"> and becomes ‘unstable’</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> it remains an adjective. The new lexeme ‘unstable’ can be determined as an adjective because of its function in the sentence is modifying the noun “region”. The attachment of the negative prefix un</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font3"> does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the adjective word class. Thus, it belongs to class-maintaining prefixes. However, it has changed the meaning of the base word. ‘Stable’ means “being resistant to change of condition or situation”. Then, the negative prefix un</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font3"> changes the meaning into “not stable”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. New Lexeme in Negative Prefixes</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">prefix de- and becomes ‘depopulation’, it remains a noun. The new lexeme ‘depopulation’ can be determined as a noun because of its function in the sentence modifies the phrase “Besuki region”. The attachment of the reversative prefix de- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the word class verb. Thus, it belongs to classmaintaining prefixes. However, it has changed the meaning of the base word. ‘Population’ means “all the inhabitants of a particular place”. Then, the reversative prefix de- becomes deform modifies the meaning into “to reverse action of population”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 2. New Lexeme in Reversative Prefixes</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Popula</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">De-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">De- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Reverse</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintaini</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">tion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">populat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">action of</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ng the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">ion =</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">populati</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Depop ulation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">on</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">class noun</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Stable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Un-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Un- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Not</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintaini</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">stable =</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">stable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ng the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Unstabl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">e</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">class</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">adjective</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reversative Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Reversative or Privative Prefixes describe actions being reversed or of antonymic character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In short, the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">depopulation</span><span class="font3"> of the Besuki region was primarily caused by political factors. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘depopulation’ in the sentence above is derived from the base word ‘population’. The base form is attached by the reversative prefix debecomes ‘depopulation’. De- means ‘reversing the action’. It is generally combined with the verb word class and abstract nouns. The base word ‘population’ is an abstract noun. Even after it is attached by the reversative</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pejorative Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The function of pejorative prefixes is to show something in negative sense. Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conflict was more often associated with extortion, </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">maltreatment</span><span class="font3">, and land ownership issues, and was sometimes mixed with religious issues. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘maltreatment’ in the sentence above is derived from the base ‘treatment’. The base form is attached by a pejorative prefix mal- becoming ‘maltreatment’. Mal- means ‘bad’ or ‘badly’. It is generally attached to the verb word class, adjective word class, participles and abstract nouns. The base word ‘treatment’ is a noun. Even after it is attached by the pejorative prefix mal-becoming ‘maltreatment’, it remains a noun. The new lexeme ‘maltreatment’ can be seen as a noun because of its function in the sentence modifies the subject “conflict”. The attachment of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">pejorative prefix mal- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains a noun. Thus, it belongs to classmaintaining prefixes. However, it shifts the meaning of the base word. ‘Treatment’ means “the process of treating something or someone”. Then, the pejorative prefix mal- forms ‘maltreatment’ which modifies the meaning into “the bad treatment”.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Table 3. New Lexeme in Prefixes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Reversative</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Base &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Treat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mal-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Mal- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Bad</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintaini</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">ment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">treatme nt = Maltrea tment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">treatmen t</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">ng the word class</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">noun</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefixes of Degree or Size</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">These prefixes can be used to measure something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is followed by a discussion of transport problem facing the region and measures taken to </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">overcome</span><span class="font3"> these after the 1930s both in terms of infrastructure facilities and means of transport. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 48)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘overcome’ in the sentence above is derived from the base ‘come’. The base form is attached by a prefix of degree over- becoming ‘overcome’. Over- means ‘too much’. It is commonly added to the verb word class, participles and adjectives. The base word ‘come’ belongs to verb. Even after it is attached by the prefix of degree over- to form ‘overcome’, it remains a verb . The new lexeme ‘overcome’ can be seen as an adjective because its function in the sentence is modifying the subject “region and measures taken”. The addition of the prefix of degree over- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the word class verb. Thus, it belongs to the class-maintaining prefixes. However,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">it has changed the meaning of the base word. ‘Come’ means “to approach to a particular person or something”. Then, the prefix of degree over- forming ‘overcome’ shifts the meaning to “too much come”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 4. New Lexeme in Prefixes of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Degre</span><span class="font3">e or Size</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Come</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Over-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Over- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Too</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintain</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">come =</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">much</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ing the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Overco</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">come</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">me</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">class</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">verb</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefixes of Attitude</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">These prefixes show the attitude and manner of human beings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This view assumed that farmers were basically </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">anti-market</span><span class="font3"> and tended to idealise traditional society depicted as a harmonious world without conflict. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘anti-market’ in the sentence is derived from the base market. The base form is added the prefix of attitude anti- to make ‘anti-market’. Antimeans ‘against’. It is generally combined with the noun word class, denominal adjectives, and adverbs. The base word market is an adjective. Even after it is attached by a prefix of attitude anti- to make ‘anti-market’, it is still an adjective. The new lexeme ‘anti-market’ can be determined as an adjective because its function in the sentence modifies the subject “farmers”. The addition of the prefix of attitude anti- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the adjective word class. Thus, it belongs to class-maintaining prefixes. However, it changes the meaning of the base word. Market means “relating to a place of selling and buying something”. Then, the prefix of attitude anti- forms ‘anti-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">market’, shifting the meaning to “against the market”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 5. New Lexeme in Prefixes of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Attitude</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Mark</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Anti-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Anti- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Against</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintain</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">et</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">market</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">market</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ing the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">= Anti-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">market</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">class</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">adjective</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Locative Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Locative prefixes determine the place or relative place or direction of actions or objects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 6</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Unlike the Madurese, the Using people were regarded as </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">sub-ethnic</span><span class="font3"> Javanese. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 42)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘sub-ethnic’ in the sentence above is derived from the base ‘ethnic’. The base form is attached by the locative prefix sub- to make ‘sub-ethnic’. Submeans ‘beneath’ or ‘lesser in rank’. It is commonly added to the noun word class, adjective word class and verb word class. The base word ‘ethnic’ is an adjective. Even after it is attached by the locative prefix sub- and becomes ‘sub-ethnic’, it remains an adjective. The new lexeme ‘sub-ethnic’ can be determined as an adjective because of its function in the sentence modifies the noun “Javanese”. The attachment of the locative prefix sub- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the adjective word class. Thus, it belongs to classmaintaining prefixes. However, it changes the meaning of the base word. ‘Ethnic’ means “relating to a group of people having a common national or cultural tradition”. Then, the locative prefix sub- becomes ‘sub-ethnic’, shifting the meaning to “beneath the ethnic”.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="4" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Table 6. New Lexeme in Prefixes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Locative</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Ethnic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Sub-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Sub- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Beneath</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintaini</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ethnic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">of ethnic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ng the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">= Sub-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ethnic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">class</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">adjective</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefixes of Time and Order</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The prefixes of time and order determine the time when the event happens.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 7</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Governor General </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Raffles</span><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">repurchased </span><span class="font3">the areas in 1814, after they were sold to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Han Tjan Pit</span><span class="font3"> during the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Daendels’ </span><span class="font3">administration. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 27)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘repurchased’ in the sentence above is derived from the base ‘purchased’. The base form is attached by the prefix of time re- to make ‘repurchased’. Re- means ‘again’ or ‘back’. It is commonly added to the word verb class and abstract nouns. The base word ‘purchased’ is a verb. Even after it is combined with the prefix of time re- it becomes ‘repurchased’; it remains a verb. The new lexeme ‘repurchased’ can be determined as a verb because of its function in the sentence modifies the noun “areas”. The attachment of the prefix of time re- does not change the word class of the base. It maintains the word class verb. Thus, it belongs to classmaintaining prefixes. However, it changes the meaning of the base word. ‘Purchased’ means “to be bought”. Then, the prefix of time re- becomes ‘repurchased’, shifting the meaning to “to be purchased again”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 7. New Lexeme in Prefixes of Time and Order</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Base</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Purch</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Re-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Re- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Purchase</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Maintain</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ased</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">purchas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">d again</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ing the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">ed =</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Repurch</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">class</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ased</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">adjective</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>5.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Number Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">These prefixes determine the amount, quantity, or scope of something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 8</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In smaller acreages, soybean cultivation on </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tegalan</span><span class="font3"> (dry lands) is also found, particularly in Bondowoso where soybean is grown either as a </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">monocrop </span><span class="font3">planted from February to April or an intercrop planted in combination with other </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palawija</span><span class="font3"> such as maize and cassava between October and November. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 117).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘monocrop’ is derived from the base ‘crop’. The base form is attached by the number prefix mono- to make ‘monocrop’. Mono- means ‘one’. It is commonly added to the noun word class and adjective word class. The base word ‘crop’ is a noun. Even after it is attached by the number prefix mono- to make ‘monocrop’, it is still a noun. The new lexeme ‘monocrop’ can be seen as a noun because of its function in the sentence is modifying the adjective “planted”. The attachment of the number prefix monodoes not change the word class of the base. It maintains the noun word class. Thus, it belongs to class-maintaining prefixes. However, it has changed the meaning of the base word. ‘Crop’ means “a cultivated plant”. Then, the number prefix mono- becomes ‘monocrop’, changing the meaning into “one crop’”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Table 8. New lexeme in Number Prefi</span><span class="font3">xes</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Base &nbsp;&nbsp;Prefix &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Process &nbsp;&nbsp;Meaning &nbsp;&nbsp;Function</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Crop &nbsp;&nbsp;Mono- &nbsp;&nbsp;Mono- + &nbsp;One crop &nbsp;&nbsp;Maintain</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">crop= &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ing the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Monocro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;word</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">p &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;class</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">noun</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conversion Prefixes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The conversion prefixes have the primary effect to change the class or type of words or to convert.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The best way to broaden the tax base was therefore to </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">encourage</span><span class="font3"> new settlers to open up new land. (Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 – Early 1990s: 142)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The underlined word ‘encourage’ is derived from the base ‘courage’. The base form is attached by the conversion prefix en- to form ‘encourage’. En-means ‘to make’ if it is added to adjectives and ‘to put into’ if it is combined with a noun. It is commonly added to the noun word class and adjective word class. The base word ‘courage’ is a noun. After it is attached by the conversion prefix en- to form ‘encourage’, it changes into a verb. The new lexeme ‘encourage’ can be determined as a verb because of its function in the sentence modifies the phrase “new settlers”. The attachment of the conversion prefix en- has changed the word class of the base. Thus, it belongs to class-changing prefixes. It also shifts the meaning of the base word. ‘Courage’ means “strength in the face of pain or grief”. Then, the conversion prefix en-becomes ‘encourage’, changing the meaning into “to put into ‘courage”.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="4" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Table 9. New Lexeme Conversion</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Prefixes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Base &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefix</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Meaning</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Courage &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;En-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">En- +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">To put</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Changing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">courage</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">courage</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">the word</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">=</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">class from</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Encoura</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">noun to</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ge</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">verb</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data analyzed, it can be concluded that almost all types of the English prefixes can be found from the scientific book. Those prefixes include negative prefixes, reversative or privative prefixes, pejorative prefixes, prefixes of degree or size, prefixes of attitude, locative prefixes, prefixes of time and order, number prefixes, and conversion prefixes. There was only one type of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English prefixes which could not be found namely other prefixes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The total data analyzed is thirty five words. About thirty four words contained English prefixes which belonged to the class maintaining and only one word found as class-changing. Most types of the English prefixes found were attached to noun, adjective, participle, and verb bases. The whole of the adjective, participle, verb and even noun words change into their meanings because of the English prefix attachment. However, not all types of the English prefixes change the grammatical class of the base word after their attachment.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Bauer, L. (1983). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">English WordFormation.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge University Press, UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kothari, C. R. (2004). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methodology.</span><span class="font3"> New Age International (P) Ltd, Publishers. New Delhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nawiyanto, S. (2003). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Agricultural Development in a Frontier Region of Java: Besuki, 1870 - Early 1990s. </span><span class="font3">Galang Press, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk, R. (1973)</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. A University Grammar of English.</span><span class="font3"> Longman, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words’ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Definition,</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resource:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.dictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.dictionary.com/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Accessed 18 October 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">460</span></p>