---
layout: full_article
title: "Figurative Language Used by Characters in the Sherlock Holmes 1 Movie Script “The Study in Pink”"
author: "I Gusti Ngurah Agung Yustina, Putu Lirishati Soethama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p27</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.2 Mei 2018: 467-473</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Figurative Language Used by Characters in the Sherlock Holmes 1 Movie Script “The Study in Pink”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Gusti Ngurah Agung Yustina<sup>1*</sup>, Putu Lirishati Soethama<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department Faculty of Arts - Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:Gunkguzk@gmail.com"><span class="font3">Gunkguzk@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">], <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:lirishatinya@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">lirishatinya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The title of this study is Figurative Language Used By Characters in the Sherlock Holmes 1 Movie Script “The Study in Pink”. The aims of this study are to discover the types of figurative languages and their meanings used in the movie. The data source was taken from the internet website and this movie script was purely from the Sherlock movie in season one. In collecting data, the method used for this study was documentary method. In analyzing the data, the study used qualitative method. The major theory used is the theory of figurative language proposed by Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963), and the supporting theory about the meaning proposed by Leech (1974). The result shows that there are four types from ten types of figurative language appearing in the movie. In addition, there are three types that are used from seven types of meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Key words: Figurative language, Meaning, Character</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Skripsi ini berjudul Bahasa Kiasan yang digunakan oleh Karakter dalam skrip film Sherlock Holmes 1 “The Study in Pink”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menemukan bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan di film ini dan juga menganalisa makna bahasa kiasan yang digunakan. Data ini diambil dari film asli Sherlock Holmes di musim pertama berjudul “The Study in Pink”. Dalam pengumpulan data penelitian ini menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan untuk menganalisis data menggunakan metode kualitatif. Teori utama yang digunakan adalah teori bahasa kiasan yang diajukan oleh </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963)</span><span class="font3"> dan teori yang mendukung penelitian ini adalah teori makna yang diajukan oleh </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Leech (1974).</span><span class="font3"> Hasil penelitian ini membuktikan bahwa ada empat jenis tipe bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan dari sepuluh tipe yang dikemukakan dan ada tiga tipe makna yang digunakan dari tujuh tipe yang dikemukakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Kiasan, Makna, Karakter</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Semantics is the branch of linguistics, it is about study of the meaning. Meaning can be described as expression, feeling, and attitude which can be shown by people. They use it to write short story, novel, or poetry, and express their feeling and expression within their literary work. Meaning has wide variation of explanation, because</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">people have different interpretations of the object of the meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bordwell and Thompson (2008: 3)</span><span class="font3"> movie is an art form with a language and an aesthetic all its own</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font3">In the movie, language is very important. Language is one of the human basic needs and it cannot be separated from their life. As social creature, people need language to communicate and interact with others to fulfill their needs,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">whether verbal or non-verbal. As part of intrinsic element, character is an important aspect because it carries the author’s message that can bring various values in human life for instance morality and education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The movie script “the study in pink” consists of figurative language and meaning. This movie script was purely from the Sherlock movie in season one. It was chosen as the study because it has many figurative expressions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;What types of figurative language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">are found in the movie script “The Study in Pink”?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meaning of figurative language is used in the movie script “The Study in Pink”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To discover what types of figurative language are found in the movie script “The Study in Pink”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning of figurative language used in the movie script “The Study in Pink”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this study there are data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data source refers to the object from which the data were taken. The data used in this writing were taken from the Sherlock Holmes 1 movie script, entitled “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Study in Pink</span><span class="font3">” by Amended. The data source was taken from internet website.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In order to get the data from the movie script, the method used for this study was the documentary method. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">working procedure consists of several steps. The first step: reading the movie script frequently and intensively to understand the movie script. The second step: identifying and classifying the data from the script to find out the relevant statement in order to find Sherlock Holmes expression. The process was conducted by taking notes from the data related to the study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In analyzing the data, the study used the qualitative method, in which data were presented and explained based on the theoretical basic figurative language proposed by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963)</span><span class="font3"> and supporting theory about the meaning proposed by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Leech (1974).</span><span class="font3"> The data taken from the movie script were presented in descriptive way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Figurative Language</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this section, the study is divided into parts. Every single part presents the analysis of the data beginning with the definition about types of figurative expression which is applied by the characters. Various literary concepts concerning the figurative language have been described. Based on the result of this analysis, it is found four types of figurative language in the movie script “The Study in Pink”. They are simile, hyperbole, irony, and allusion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Simile compares two essentially different objects, actions, or attributes that share some aspects of similarity. Even though simile and metaphor are both forms of comparison, simile allows two ideas to remain distinct in spite of their similarities, whereas metaphor seeks to equate two ideas despite their difference. Simile is introduced by the word ‘like’ or ‘as’. Some examples of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">simile found in the movie script are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1: The Description of Data, Type of Figurative Language (Scene 69)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">What do you mean, how? Rachel, don’t you see? Rachel!! Oh, look at you lot, you’re all so </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">vacant!</span><span class="font3"> What’s it </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font3">not being me, it must be so relaxing. Rachel is not a name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Then what is it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sherlock has grabbed his computer, opens his browser. (This is a little laptop - like a notebook, you could shove in a coat pocket.) </span><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">John, the luggage label, it had an email address on it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John is straight to the luggage tag. </span><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jennie dot pink at mephone dot org dot uk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you’re all so vacant! What’s it like, not being me, it must be so relaxing</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into simile as the type of figurative language. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting character. It categorizes into simile because there found a word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font3">. Simile is a stated of comparison introduced by the words -like or -as. It means that sentence has function as a comparison between the sentences: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you’re so vacant</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sherlock was so relaxing</span><span class="font3">. From the sentence: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you’re so vacant</span><span class="font3"> it means describing the people who are so stupid and they cannot do anything by comparing Sherlock. In this case, Sherlock so relaxes knowing what happen with the killer and the victim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Hyperbole is a figure of an exaggeration used for special effect. It is a figurative language in which statement is exaggerated. It may be used to evoke strong feeling or to create strong impression. It says something which seems large, better, worse or more important than what really is. Some examples are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2: The Description of Data, Type of Figurative Language (Scene 31)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I’d say you were a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">private</span><span class="font3"> detective but SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">But?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The police don’t go to private detectives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I’m a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">consulting</span><span class="font3"> detective. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Only one</span><span class="font3"> in the world, I invented the job</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">only one</span><span class="font3"> in the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">only one in the world, I invented the job</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into hyperbole as the type of figurative language. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting character. The scene was happen in the cab, when they went the crime scene. In the cab they talked about what the Sherlock’s job. From the data above categorize as hyperbole because it gives more effect to the readers and to his friend, John. It means that Sherlock’s expression is an overstatement to impress John and make him pays attention to what Sherlock had said. The bold type above is a hyperbole because it can be seen from the supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Who are you? What do you do?</span><span class="font3"> means John asked Sherlock about his job. And another supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I’d say you were a private</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">detective but--</span><span class="font3"> means John does not believe Sherlock is a private detective. The bold type above means he wanted to assert that he was the only one who had such a job. In this script there was just ordinary detective is named Lestrade. But in this case Sherlock said he is only one invented this job. The bold type above can be supporting from the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">in the world</span><span class="font3"> means only he did the job in the world. But in real life there were many person invented that job, not only one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Irony</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Irony is the recognition of the incongruity, or differences between reality and appearance. It is also a form of sarcasm, which is the opposite of the literal meaning of the word or phrase intended.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3: The Description of Data, Type of Figurative Language (Scene 53)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It had to be pink. Obviously.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Why didn’t I think of that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because you’re an </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">idiot</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">On John: stung by this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Don’t look like that - practically everyone is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">idiot</span><span class="font3"> in the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">because you are an idiot</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into irony as the type of figurative language. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting character. According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary’ the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">idiot</span><span class="font3"> literally means a very foolish person. It is an irony because it can be seen from the supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Why didn’t I think of that</span><span class="font3">? that means</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">John’s statement looks to be different from Sherlock about color of the pink of the suitcase. And another supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t look like that - practically everyone is</span><span class="font3">.” means Sherlock’s expression is sarcastic to John by humiliating John. But the word idiot meaning very stupid is apposite to the real or literal meaning. In fact John was not idiot. He is a clever person because in the story he is a doctor from military service in Afghanistan. So, that’s why Sherlock’s expression to John, his friend, is considered to be irony.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Allusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Allusion is a reference to some well-known place, event, or person. Not a comparison in the exact sense, but a figure in the sense that it implies more than its narrow meaning. Some examples of allusion are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4: The Description of Data, Type of Figurative Language (Scene 17)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I think I got shot.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">As they settle at a table...</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">You’re still at Barts then?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MIKE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Teaching now - bright young things, like we used to be. God, I hate them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">What about you? Staying in town till you get yourself sorted?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Shakes head)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Can’t afford </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">London</span><span class="font3"> on an army pension.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MIKE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">And you couldn’t bear to be anywhere else. Not the John Watson I know!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">London</span><span class="font3"> in the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can’t afford London on an army pension</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into allusion as the type of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">figurative language, because it mention the name of a well-known as city. That word is spoken by John as the participant of the story and his friend named Mike as the supporting character. London is the capital and the most populous city of the United States. London is a leading global city in the commerce, art, finance, fashion, tourist, and many more. London is the world’s largest financial centre and cultural capital; it is the world’s most visited city as measured by international arrivals. It means that is quite makes sense that sentence is include as allusion. In addition, there is supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can’t afford London on an army pension </span><span class="font3">in this script. It means life in the London must be have a job or more money to live in the capital of England. In this case, the John wants to express his problem to his friend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Meaning of Figurative Language</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The theory used to analyze the meaning of figurative language in the movie script “The Study In Pink” is proposed by Leech (1974). There are three types of meaning in figurative expression used in this movie script. They are social meaning, affective meaning, and reflected meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Meaning</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Social meaning is the meaning conveyed by the piece of language about the social context of its use. It is related to the situation in which an utterance is used. The illocutionary force of an utterance can also have social meaning. According to the social situation, a sentence may be uttered as request, an apology, a warning or a threat. Some examples of social meaning are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5: The Meaning of Figurative Language (Scene 28)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">They look at each other. Oh!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">That’s a skull SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Friend of mine. Well I say </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">friend</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">... Mrs. Hudson comes bustling in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MRS. HUDSON</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">What do you think, Dr. Watson -there’s another bedroom upstairs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Knowing look)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">If you’ll be needing two bedrooms </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John looks at her, a little affronted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">friend</span><span class="font3"> in the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Friend of mine. Well I say </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">friend</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into social meaning as the type of meaning. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting character. The scene was happen in the Sherlock’s room. When John went to Sherlock’s house to be a flat mate, he got attraction to the skull in front of him. So, he asked Sherlock about that skull. The bold type above categorizes into social meaning in the illocutionary force, it is about assertion. Assertion means to reflect the personal feeling of the Sherlock and to give statement. When John as him about the skull in his house, Sherlock said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Well I say friend...</span><span class="font3">, it has deep meaning addressed to John that is about requesting a friend, because Sherlock does not have friend in his house. It is not about the real skull, but it is about the friendship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Affective Meaning</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Affective meaning is a sort of meaning which can reflect the personal feeling of the speaker, including his attitude to the listener, or his attitude to something he is talking about. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">meaning can be clearly conveyed simply by the choice of the right words as many emotive contents in themselves. The next paragraph exemplifies the use of affective meaning:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 6: The Meaning of Figurative Language (Scene 56)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">How do you feel about the violin?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I’m sorry, what?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I play the violin when I’m thinking, and sometimes I don’ talk for days on </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">end </span><span class="font3">-would that bother you? Potential flat mates should know the worst about each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">John, flummoxed - looks to Mike. JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oh! You told him about me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mike has been watching this with a knowing air. Enjoying the routine</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">end</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I play the violin when I’m thinking, and sometimes I don’ talk for days on end - would that bother you</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into affective meaning as the type of meaning. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting character. According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">end</span><span class="font3"> literally means an extreme point of thing; the furthest or last part of things. It is an irony because it can be seen from the supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">would that bother you? Potential flat mates should know the worst about each other </span><span class="font3">means Sherlock wants to John accept his worst to be flat mate and become his friend. And another supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sometimes I don’ talk for days on end </span><span class="font3">means Sherlock cannot talk in a day. In fact Sherlock wants to express his</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">emotion to John. It likes Sherlock did not want someone bothering him when he was focused on his case and when he was thinking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reflected Meaning</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Reflected meaning involves an interconnection on the lexical level of language; it is the meaning, which arises in case of multiple conceptual meaning, when one sense of word forms part of our response to another sense. The reason why the sentence is included as having reflected meaning as the sentence contains two words that always compares one sense with a different point of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 7: The Meaning of Figurative Language (Scene 36)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>Description of Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(A whisper - can’t hear)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">What am I doing here?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Also a whisper)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Helping me make a point.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">He flicks his eyes at Lestrade.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I’m supposed to be helping you pay the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rent</span><span class="font3">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yeah, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this is more </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">JOHN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fun??</span><span class="font3"> There is a woman lying </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dead</span><span class="font3">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SHERLOCK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Perfectly sound analysis, but I was hoping you’d go deeper. On John: stung! Then he gets to work. Bends over her, sniffs her mouth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the word in bold type </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fun</span><span class="font3"> in the clause </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this is more fun</span><span class="font3"> is categorized into reflected meaning as the type of meaning. That word is spoken by Sherlock as the participant of the story or the main character to his friend named John as the supporting</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">character. According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fun</span><span class="font3"> literally means amusing; providing pleasure or enjoyable activities. It is a reflected because it can be seen from the supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Fun?? There is a woman lying dead</span><span class="font3"> means in John’s point of view, he is not expected about what Sherlock said about the dead woman, it is fun to Sherlock. John likes paying attention with the dead woman. And another supporting sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this is more fun</span><span class="font3"> means in the Sherlock’s point of view, the dead woman is so fun. In this case John did not want to playing game with the victim. However, Sherlock was happy with the victim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The result shows that there are four types used from ten types of figurative language which appear in the movie. Those types are simile, hyperbole, irony, and allusion. In addition, there are three types used from seven types of meaning. Those types are social meaning, affective meaning, and reflected meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark53"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark54"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Amended, G. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Study in Pink Shooting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Script</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Resource:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/writersroom/scripts/Sherlock-A-Study-in-Pink-final-shooting-script.pdf"><span class="font3">http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/writersr</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/writersroom/scripts/Sherlock-A-Study-in-Pink-final-shooting-script.pdf"><span class="font3">oom/scripts/Sherlock-A-Study-in-</span></a><span class="font3"></span><a href="http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/writersroom/scripts/Sherlock-A-Study-in-Pink-final-shooting-script.pdf"><span class="font3">Pink-final-shooting-script.pdf.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bordwell and Thompson. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction Film and Art</span><span class="font3">. New York: University of Wisconsin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Knickerbocker, K. L. and W. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York : Holt, Rinehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G. N. 1974. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics; Study of Meaning</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(second &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;edition).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Auxland: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nusawan. P. 2017. Figurative Language in Roth’s “Allegiant”. Denpasar: Undergraduate Thesis, English Department, Faculty of Art, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">_____. 1995. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Leaner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font3"> (Fifth Edition). Great Britain: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">473</span></p>