---
layout: full_article
title: "English Compound Nouns in Short Story “The Star-Child” by Oscar Wilde"
author: "Made Dwi Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p21</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.2 </span><span class="font2">Mei </span><span class="font1">2018: 425-432</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>English Compound Nouns in Short Story “The Star-Child” by Oscar Wilde</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Made Dwi Pratiwi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:mddwipratiwi@gmail.com"><span class="font3">mddwipratiwi@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Compound noun can appear in various types and the meaning may not be determined by its components. This study aims to find out the types and analyze the meanings of compound nouns found in the short story “The Star-Child”. There are two theories used in this study. The first is the theory of types of compound noun proposed by Katamba and the second is the theory of meanings of compound noun by Palmer. The data in this study were directly taken from the full text of a short story entitled “The Star-Child” written by Oscar Wilde. They were collected by documentation method and note taking technique. The collected data were analyzed by using qualitative and descriptive method. This study applied formal and informal method to present the analysis. The analysis shows that the types of compound noun used are; endocentric, exocentric and copulative types. Besides, in relation to meanings, there are transparent and opaque meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">morphology, compound, noun</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata benda majemuk dapat muncul dalam tipe yang bervariasi dan memiliki makna yang barangkali tidak dapat ditentukan dari makna komponennya. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui tipe dan menganalisis makna dari kata benda majemuk yang terdapat dalam cerita pendek “The Star-Child”. Penelitian ini menggunakan dua buah teori. Teori yang pertama adalah teori tipe dari kata benda majemuk yang dikemukakan oleh Katamba dan teori yang kedua adalah teori makna dari kata benda majemuk oleh Palmer. Data dalam penelitian ini diambil langsung dari teks lengkap sebuah cerita pendek berjudul “The Star-Child” oleh Oscar Wilde. Data tersebut dikumpulkan melalui metode dokumentasi dan teknik mencatat. Data yang terkumpul dianalisis menggunakan metode kualitatif dan deskriptif. Penelitian ini mengaplikasikan metode formal dan informal untuk menampilkan analisis. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa tipe kata benda majemuk yang digunakan adalah tipe endosentrik, eksosentrik dan kopulatif. Selain itu, makna yang digunakan adalah makna transparan dan buram.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">morfologi, kata majemuk, kata benda</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Morphology is a branch of linguistics which studies the categories and rules in word formation of a language (O’Grady and Guzman, 1996). It is concerned with</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the study of the internal structure of how words are formed in a language and the way forms of words are varied depending on how they are used in the sentences. There are various processes of word</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">formation such as affixation, blending, conversion, clipping and compounding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In morphology, compounding is the most common way of forming words in English. According to Matthews (1974: 82) compounding is a process by which a compound lexeme is derived from two or more simpler lexemes. The result of compounding will be called compound word. In English, there are many different sub-classifications of compound word, such as compound verb, adjective, adverb and noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Compound noun is word made up of two or more words joined together functioning as a noun and has one meaning. Sometimes, the type of words produced by compounding process differs from one another. As stated by Katamba (1993), compound nouns can appear in different types. It is varied, depending on the role of each component, whether as the head or the modifier. A head sometimes can determine the meaning of the construction as a whole. Likewise, compounding noun is the process of bringing words together into a single noun that has one meaning. However, the original meaning of each root may be lost in compound and formed a new meaning. All of the compounding processes do not only focus on forming words, but also forming new meaning. As Palmer (1981) said that the meaning of a compound noun sometimes can and cannot be determined by the meaning of its component. Since the two aspects are interrelated, in order to define the meaning of a compound noun, to know the types is also important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Among the others, compound noun is more interesting since it is the most prominent one. Compound noun can be productively used both in utterance or text. Automatically, it appears intensely in any form of language more than the others. Short story is fictional work of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">prose that is shorter in length and deals with only one theme and a few characters. It is one of a form in written language where compound nouns regularly appear. The writer of a short story tends to use various kinds of word including compound nouns to elaborate the story. In contrast, the related works of this topic done by some other researchers mostly talk about compound words and only a few who discuss about compound nouns especially which uses short story as a data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the above explanation, it is interesting and beneficial to discuss about the English compound word forming nouns. This study focused on analyzing the types and meanings of compound nouns found in a short story entitled “The Star-Child” written by a famous Irish writer, Oscar Wilde.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of English compound nouns are found in short story entitled “The Star-Child”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meanings of English compound nouns are found in short story entitled “The StarChild”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of English compound nouns found in short story entitled “The Star-Child”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meanings of English compound nouns found in short story entitled “The StarChild”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The research method of this study includes the data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data and method and technique of presenting data. Each part of research method is explained as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were taken from a written text of a short story entitled “The Star-Child” by Oscar Wilde. The short story was taken from Oscar Wilde’s collection of short stories, “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Star-Child : Short Story</span><span class="font3">” which was republished in 2014 by Harper Collins Publisher. The reason of choosing this story was that it contains compound words especially nouns which were sufficient and relevant to be used as the data source in this analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were collected from the full text of a short story entitled “The StarChild” through documentation method. Documentation method was used to obtain the data from written material. The technique of collecting data was taking note in order to sort and classify them into the types of compound noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Several steps were used in order to collect the data. First, the pages of the book which contains the story were copied into paper. Then, the data were read carefully in order to find out the compound nouns. Third, the words in the story indicating compound nouns were highlighted and then took a note of compound noun that had been marked.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The collected data were analyzed by qualitative and descriptive method. It means that the data were analyzed by using deep explanation or description without involving measurement or statistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were several steps taken. The first step was determining the component, construction and form of words that have been highlighted. The next was identifying the head and the modifier of the compound nouns and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">compound nouns were categorized according to the theory of types proposed by Katamba (1993: 305). Then, the compound nouns were analyzed to find the meaning using the theory of meanings of compound nouns proposed by Palmer (1981: 35).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of presenting analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study applied formal and informal method to present the analysis. Formal method is a method in which the findings are presented by using symbol, diagrams, figures, and tables, while informal method refers to the method of presenting the analyzed data by using words; it means the findings can be described by using words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In presenting the data, several steps were taken. First, the analysis was divided according to the types of compound nouns. The following step was listing the number and presenting the compound noun, components, construction, and form into table. Below the table, the number, the compound noun, the sentence where the compound noun were found and data code were given. Lastly, the discussion and result were elaborated in the form of paragraph.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Compound nouns may be subdivided into three types based on the semantic head of a compound sign. They are endocentric, exocentric and copulative compound nouns. The explanation is also followed by the analysis of meanings contained in the compound nouns which are classified into transparent and opaque meanings. The analysis of English compound nouns is explained as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endocentric compound nouns</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The endocentric compound noun expresses a semantic relationship between a head noun and a modifying element.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. Endocentric</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">compound noun</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Compound Noun</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Components</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Pattern</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Form</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Woodcutter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Wood &nbsp;&nbsp;+</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">cutter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">N+N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Solid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Pine-forest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Pine + forest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">N+N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Hyphenated</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Red Gold</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Red + gold</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Adj+N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Open</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>[5-1] Woodcutter</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Once upon a time two poor </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Woodcutters</span><span class="font3"> were making their way home through a great pine-forest. (Wilde, 2014:1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The simplest form of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutters</span><span class="font3"> is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3">. Morphologically, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter </span><span class="font3">consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wood</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cutter</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and both words formed a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Noun + Noun’ pattern.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Noun+ Noun’ turns out to be the pattern which appears the most in this analysis. Likewise, Katamba (1993 : 305) also stated that this pattern is considered to be the largest sub-grouping of compound component and a great number of compound nouns are included in this pattern, therefore ‘Noun+ Noun’ nouns are easily found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on its form, compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as a solid compound noun because the first element of the compound is followed by another without a pause.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the endocentric compound because it expresses a semantic relationship between a head noun and a modifying element. This word has the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cutter </span><span class="font3">functioning as the head and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wood</span><span class="font3"> as the modifier. Therefore, based on the semantic relationship between the head noun and the modifier, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3"> is a kind of cutter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wood</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cutter</span><span class="font3"> have different lexical meaning. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wood</span><span class="font3"> has the lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the hard material that the trunk and branches of a tree are made of</span><span class="font3">’ while the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cutter</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a person or thing that cuts</span><span class="font3">’. After joining together and forming a new word, it has one meaning which can be identified by the meaning of its parts. Since the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3"> can be determined from the meaning of its parts </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wood</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cutter</span><span class="font3">; it belongs to transparent meaning. The compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woodcutter</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a person whose job is cutting down trees</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>[5-2] Pine-forest</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through a great </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3">. (Wilde, 2014:1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">forest</span><span class="font3"> (Noun). Both words are joined together and form a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Noun + Noun’ pattern. According to Plag (2003) in Turangan (2017), nounnoun compounds are the most common type of compound in English. The statement is appropriate since most compound nouns in this analysis are categorized in this pattern. Based on its form, compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as a hyphenated compound noun because it has a short stroke (-) which is used to join parts of word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the endocentric compound because it expresses a semantic relationship between a head noun and a modifying element. This word has the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">forest </span><span class="font3">functioning as the head and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine</span><span class="font3"> as the modifier. Therefore, based on the semantic relationship between the head noun and the modifier, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> is a kind of forest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">forest</span><span class="font3"> have different lexical meanings. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine</span><span class="font3"> has lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an evergreen forest tree with leaves like needles</span><span class="font3">’ while the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">forest</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a large area of land that is thickly covered</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">with trees</span><span class="font3">’. After joining together and forming a new word, it has one meaning which can be identified by the meaning of its parts. Since the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> can be determined from the meaning of its parts </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">forest</span><span class="font3">; it belongs to transparent meaning. The compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pine-forest</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">land that is covered with pine-trees</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>[5-3] Red gold</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">‘If to-day thou bringest me the piece of </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> I will set thee free, but if thou bringest it not I will surely slay thee.’ (Wilde, 2014:12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red</span><span class="font3"> (Adjective) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gold</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and both words form a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Adjective + Noun’ pattern. Based on its form, compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as an open compound noun because there is a space between the first element and the other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the endocentric compound because it expresses a semantic relationship between a head noun and a modifying element. Most compounds are categorized in this type; therefore, the chance of occurring in the data is higher than the exocentric and copulative types. Sidupa (2015) also found out that endocentric type is the most used compound words in her data. This word has the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gold</span><span class="font3"> functioning as the head and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red</span><span class="font3"> as the modifier. Therefore, based on the semantic relationship between the head noun and the modifier, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> is a kind of gold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gold</span><span class="font3"> have different lexical meaning. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red</span><span class="font3"> has lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">having the colour of blood or fire</span><span class="font3">’ while the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gold</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the color of gold, a chemical element or a yellow precious metal used for making coins, jewellery, decorative objects, etc’</span><span class="font3">. After joining together and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">forming a new word, it has one meaning which can be identified by the meaning of its parts. Since the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> can be determined from the meaning of its parts </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">gold</span><span class="font3">; it belongs to transparent meaning. The compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">red gold</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an alloy of gold and copper</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exocentric compound nouns</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Exocentric or bahuvrihi compound is headless compound which does not contain an element that functions as the semantic head which is modified by the non-head element.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 2. Exocentric compound noun </span><span class="font0">No &nbsp;Compound &nbsp;&nbsp;Components &nbsp;&nbsp;Pattern &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Form</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Noun</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ice-king &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ice + king &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N+N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyphenated</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2 &nbsp;&nbsp;Old Earth &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Old + Earth &nbsp;&nbsp;Adj+N &nbsp;&nbsp;Open</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>[5-4] Ice-king</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The snow lay thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the frost kept snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they passed: and when they came to the Mountain- Torrent she was hanging motionless in air, for the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Ice-King </span><span class="font3">had kissed her. (Wilde, 2014:1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">king</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and both words formed a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Noun + Noun’ pattern. Based on its form, the compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as a hyphenated compound noun because it has a short stroke (-) which is used to join parts of word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the exocentric compound because it does not contain an element that functions as the semantic head which is modified by the non head element. This word has no head to be modified and there is no semantic relationship between both components. It does not mean that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> is a kind of king or kind of ice or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">king that is cold like an ice or the king’s ice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">king </span><span class="font3">have different lexical meaning. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice</span><span class="font3"> has lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">water that has frozen and become solid</span><span class="font3">’ while the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">king</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a person, an animal or a thing that is thought to be the best or most important of a particular type</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the male ruler of an independent state that has a royal family’</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;After joining</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">together and forming a new word, the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> is not possible from the meaning of its parts; therefore, it belongs to opaque meaning. In comparison with the transparent, opaque meaning only appears in small number of compound nouns especially in exocentric type. This is also applied to the findings of Rumiyati (2015). It shows that the researcher only found 125 out of 798 data of compounds that can be categorized as opaque meaning with 15,66% in percentage. The compound noun &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ice-king</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;means &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">really</span><a href="https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=handsome"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> handsome </span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and intelligent</span><a href="https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=gentleman"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> gentleman </span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">who ladies love to always be around with</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>[5-5] Old earth</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">‘Weet!weet! weet!’ twittered the green Linnets, ‘the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">old Earth</span><span class="font3"> is dead and they have laid her out in her white shroud. (Wilde, 2014:1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old</span><span class="font3"> (Adjective) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">earth</span><span class="font3"> (Noun). Both words are joined together and formed a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Adjective + Noun’ pattern. Bennett (2002) argued that English does have a productive rule for forming noun compounds, consisting of relational adjective + noun and in this analysis this pattern appears quite often. Based on its form, the compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as an open compound</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">noun because there is a space between the first element and the other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the exocentric compound because it does not contain an element that functions as the semantic head which is modified by the non head element. This word has no head to be modified and there is no semantic relationship between both components. It does not mean that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> is a kind of earth or the earth that is old.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">earth</span><span class="font3"> have different lexical meanings. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old</span><span class="font3"> has the lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">having lived for a long time; no longer young</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">having existed or been used for a long time</span><span class="font3">’ while the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">earth</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the world; the planet that we live on</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">land; the hard surface of the world that is not the sea or the sky; the ground’</span><span class="font3">. After joined together and formed a new word, the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> is not possible from the meaning of its parts; therefore it belongs to opaque meaning. The compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">old earth</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the mother, a person's mother or the elder</span><a href="https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=wise"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> wise </span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woman of the family</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>5.3 Copulative compound nouns</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Copulative Compound Noun is one where it is not clear which element is the head and the compound is not a hyponym of either element. It has words which represent a coordinative relationship between the elements.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 3. Copulative compound noun </span><span class="font1">No Compou &nbsp;Compo &nbsp;Patter &nbsp;Form</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">nd Noun nents &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;n</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beggar- &nbsp;&nbsp;Beggar &nbsp;N+N &nbsp;&nbsp;Hyphe</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;woman + &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nated</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">woman</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-6] Beggar-woman</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">And the Star-Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God’s things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">beggarwoman</span><span class="font3">. (Wilde, 2014:8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> consists of two parts; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar</span><span class="font3"> (Noun) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woman </span><span class="font3">(Noun). Both words are joined together and formed a new word which belongs to a noun with ‘Noun + Noun’ pattern. Based on its form, compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> can be categorized as a hyphenated compound noun because it has a short stroke (-) which is used to join parts of word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> is classified into the copulative compound because it is not clear which element is the head and represents a coordinative relationship between two words. From semantic point of view; the coupled elements are equal status with neither element being regarded as the head that dominates the entire word. The compound noun indicates that the beggar is a woman and the woman is also a beggar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> is the only word of copulative compound noun that appears in the short story. It makes this type is the least to occur in this analysis. This finding is also supported by Rumiyati (2015). In her analysis, this type of compound appears in a small percentage compared to the endocentric and exocentric types.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semantically, the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woman</span><span class="font3"> have different lexical meaning. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar</span><span class="font3"> has lexical meaning ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a person who is typically homeless, lives by begging for money and food and often regarded as lucky, unlucky, lazy, etc.</span><span class="font3">’ while the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woman</span><span class="font3"> means ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an adult female human being</span><span class="font3">’. After joined together and formed a new word, it has one meaning which can be identified by the meaning of its parts. Since the meaning of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> can be determined from the meaning of its parts </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">woman</span><span class="font3">; therefore, it belongs to transparent meaning. The compound noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beggar-woman</span><span class="font3"> means</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an adult female person who is pitiful and lives by begging for money and food</span><span class="font3">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusions:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Three types of compound noun are found in the short story entitled “The Star-Child” by Oscar Wilde, they are endocentric, exocentric and copulative compound nouns. There are thirty-four words of endocentric compound nouns, five exocentric compound nouns and a copulative compound noun. It shows that endocentric compound noun is the most frequent type that appears in the story. Then, it is followed by exocentric compound noun and copulative compound noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, there are two meanings of compound noun found in the short story entitled “The Star-Child” by Oscar Wilde. They are transparent and opaque meaning. The analysis shows that this story contains thirty-five of compound nouns which belong to transparent meaning. Meanwhile, there are five words of compound noun analyzed as the opaque meaning. It shows that the transparent meaning appears more intense than the opaque one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Bennett, P., 2002, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">English Adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noun Compounds and Related Constructions, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;GEMA Online</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Language Studies,</span><span class="font3"> 2, 1-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S., 2010, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font3">, Oxford University Press Inc., New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Katamba, Francis., 1993, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font3">, Macmillan Press LTD, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mathews, P.H., &nbsp;1991, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Second &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;edition,</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University Press, Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Palmer, R., 1981, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font3">, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rumiyati, A., 2015, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Morphological</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of Compound Words used in novel “The Single Girl’s To-Do List” by Lindsey Kelk</span><span class="font3">, Undergraduate Thesis, Muhammadiyah University of Surakarta, Surakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sidupa, J.N., 2015, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Compound Word</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Formation in Matilda,</span><span class="font3"> Undergraduate Thesis, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Turangan, K. A., &nbsp;2017, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Compound</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words in BBC News Website</span><span class="font3">, Undergraduate Thesis, Udayana University, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wilde, Oscar., 2014, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Star-Child : Short Story,</span><span class="font3"> Harper Collins Publisher, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words’ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Definition,</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resource:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.dictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.dictionary.com/</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font3">[Accessed 18 October 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words’ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Definition</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resource:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.urbandictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.urbandictionary.com/</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font3">[Accessed 22 October 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">432</span></p>