---
layout: full_article
title: "The Ability of Students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in Recalling English Vocabularies"
author: "Gusti Ayu Putu Enno Ariestha"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i01.p36</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.1 Pebruari 2018: 242-246</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Ability of Students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in Recalling English Vocabularies</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Gusti Ayu Putu Enno Ariestha</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:ennoariestha@gmail.com"><span class="font3">[ennoariestha@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The demand of using English as a mean of communication caused Indonesian government has drawn up English as a foreign language that should be mastered by the students. To acquire a very good skill of English, the children were introduced English in a very young age by parents and teachers. The present study conducted to find out the ability of students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies and the significant factors influence them. The data in this study collected through observation, direct interview and questionnaire. The observation is aimed to know the students’ daily activities in the school. The direct interview used to find out the ability of students in recalling English vocabularies and the questionnaire used to identify the significant factors influence the students ability in recalling the English vocabularies. The questionnaire for the parents consisted of 18 questions about the significant factors affect the students’ vocabularies. Furthermore, the obtained data analyzed quantitatively and qualitatively. The data from direct interview was analyzed by using the evaluation from Amirono and Daryanto (2016) and the data from questionnaire was analyzed by using theory from Harmer (2001) about motivation. The result of the interview shows that the students’ average score in recalling English vocabulary is 3.31 %, indicating that the ability of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies is Excellent. The teacher, parents, teaching method and the school environment become significant factors which influence the ability of students in recalling English vocabularies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: recalling, vocabularies, motivation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penggunaan Bahasa Inggris sebagai bahasa internasional membuat pemerintah Indonesia menambahkan Bahasa Inggris menjadi mata pelajaran di sekolah. Pada umumnya, siswa mulai belajar Bahasa Inggris di tahun kedua atau ketiga sekolah dasar. Namun, sudah banyak Taman Kanak-Kanak yang menjadikan Bahasa Inggris menjadi salah satu mata pelajaran. Salah satunya di Taman Kanak-Kanak Dharma Putra, Kedonganan.Penelitian ini berfokus kepada kemampuan siswa-siswi Taman Kanak-Kanak Dharma Putra dalam mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris dan juga faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhinya. Data penelitian dikumpulkan melalui teknik observasi, interview and kuesioner. Observasi dilakukan untuk mengetahui aktifitas belajar mengajar di sekolah. Interview dilaksanakan untuk mengetahui kemampuan siswa-siswi dalam mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris. Kuesioner digunakan untuk mengetahui faktor-faktor signifikan yang mempengaruhi kemampuan siswa-siswa dalam mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris. Sebanyak 45 pertanyaan mengenai kosa-kata Bahasa Inggris diajukan kepada seluruh siswa. Seluruh pertanyaan berasal dari materi yang sudah dipelajari siswa. Kuesioner terdiri dari 18 pertanyaan mengenai faktor-faktor signifikan yang mempengaruhi kemampuan mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris siswa. Selanjutkan data yang diperoleh dianalisis secara kuantitatif dan kualitatif. Data hasil interview dianalisis dengan teori dan evaluasi dari Amirono and Daryanto (2016). Kemudian, data yang berasal dari kuesioner dianalisis dengan teori motivasi oleh Harmer (2001).Hasil dari interview</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menunjukan bahwa kempuan rata-rata siswa Taman Kanak-Kanak Dharma Putra dalam mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris adalah 3.31% (Sangat Baik). Guru, orang tua, metode pengajaran dan lingkungan sekolah menjadi faktor signifikan yang mempengaruhi kemampuan siswa dalam mengingat kosa kata Bahasa Inggris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: mengingat, kosa kata, motivasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Considering the importance of English as a means of communication in the world, Indonesian government has drawn up English as a foreign language that should be mastered by the students. Formally, the students learn English starting from the second or third grade in elementary school. In the capital city, some parents tend to introduce English to their children starting from the second or third years of life. Their parents start teachingthem simple English vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vocabulary knowledge is often viewed as a critical tool for second language learners because a limited vocabulary in a second language impedes successful communication (Alqahtani, 2015). Rivers and Nunan (1991), moreover, argue that the acquisition of an adequate vocabulary is essential for successful second language use because without &nbsp;&nbsp;extensive vocabulary, we will</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">beunable to use the structures and functions we may have learned for comprehensible communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is focused on the ability of recalling English vocabulary by kindergarten student in Dharma Putra Kindergarten, Kedonganan. This topic is chosen because it is interesting to find out their ability in recalling English vocabulary they often use in daily activities, especially in their school.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems in this research, which can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the ability of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are significant factors influencing the ability of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems above, the aims of this research are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the ability of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate significant factors influencing the ability of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabularies.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used are the quantitative and qualitative methods. The methodology can be specified as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Location</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The field research started from October 17<sup>th</sup>, 2016 to November 15<sup>th</sup>, 2016. The data source was taken from a class of students of Dharma Putra Kindergarten located in Jalan Pasir Putih, Kedonganan, Badung, Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Population and Sample</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, all of the students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten were used as the population. The number of the population involved all classes of students from the lower grade (TK Kecil) and higher grade (TK Besar). There wereeight classes in Dharma Putra Kindergarten, among others six higher grade classes and two lower grade classes. A class of students in higher grade only used as sample. The higher grade was chosen because the students learnt English longer than the lower grade students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten. Furthermore, the class chosen was B-3 class as the recommendation of the headmaster.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study were written and spoken data. The written data were obtained through observation and questionnaire. The spoken data wereobtained</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">by interviewing the students and teachers. The spoken datawere formulated as written data by writing it in the checklist and making note. The direct observation for a month was used to know in detailed process of learning English in Dharma Putra Kindergarten, especially English vocabulary. Checklists and questionnaires were prepared to be used by the teacher and parents in order to check and gain information about what kinds of vocabulary produced by the students. Then, the interview was set in ten minutes for each student in B-class to find out their ability in recalling English vocabulary orally. The respondents were taken from a class of higher grade students. They were chosen because they learnt English vocabulary longer than the student of the lower grade.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4 Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method of collecting data is the documentation method through field research, library research and internet research. The data were collected by doing observation, giving vocabulary checklist to the teachers, giving questionnaire to the parents, and doing direct interview to the students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Every student of B-class was interviewed for about 10 minutes.During each 10-minute recording session, the teacher mentionedvocabulary to the students in Bahasa Indonesia, then asked them to say the words in English. There were five classes of vocabulary asked to the students. Those wordshad all been taught to the students by their teachers, among others, “numbers”, “colors”, “things in classroom”, “fruits”, and “animals”. The total number of the questions was 45, in which 11 questions for “numbers”, 8 questions for “colors”, 12 questions for “things in classroom”, 3 questions for “fruits” and 11 questions for “animals”. Each class of vocabulary had different numbers of questions. It was because the students were only tested by the vocabulary that had been taught by the teacher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The teacher, then, used checklist of vocabulary that had been prepared to note which vocabularycould or could not be</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">recalled by the students. The example of the vocabulary checklist is as follows.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Indonesia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Check list</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Zero</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Nol</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">√</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">One</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Satu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">√</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Two</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Dua</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">√</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Three</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Tiga</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">X</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Four</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Empat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">X</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The (√) symbol indicates the students can recall the vocabulary of numbers in English. Meanwhile, the (X) indicates that the students cannot recall the vocabularies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first problem was analyzed by the data source obtained from direct interview to the students aided with vocabulary checklist. The second problem was analyzed by the data source from observation and questionnaire. Note-taking was the technique which was used to collect the data. The instruments used to collect the data were papers and stationery.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.5 Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result of this research was further analyzed by using quantitative and qualitative method and some theories and perspectives proposed by some linguists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data of first problem was obtained from thevocabulary checklist of direct interview of the students.The students were interviewed to find out their ability in recalling English vocabulary. The evaluation from Amirono and Daryanto in their book entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluasi &amp;&nbsp;Penilaian Pembelajaran Kurikulum 2013</span><span class="font2"> (2016:110) was used to find out the score as well as the level of student’s ability. Adopting the evaluation from Amirono and Daryanto (2016), the ways to analyze the data are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">First, the score of each student wascalculated by using the following formula:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. Every correct answer receives one point; while, every wrong answer receives zero point.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Number of Correct Answers</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Score: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;X 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Numbers of Questions</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After the score was found, then the level of student’s ability was presented based on Amirono and Daryanto (2016:110) criterion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 1. Scores of the Students’ Ability in English Vocabulary</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3.25 – 4.00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2.50 – 3.24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.75 – 2.49</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sufficient</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">1.00 – 1.74</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Poor</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">For example, if a student could answer 42 questions correctly, the final score was (42:45) x 4 = 3.73 (Excellent).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second problem was analyzed based on the data source from observation, vocabulary checklist and questionnaire. It was analyzed using the theory proposed by Harmer (2001) about the factors influencing the second language acquisition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Ability of Students at DharmaPutra Kindergarten in Recalling English Vocabulary and the Factors Influencing Them</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Ability of Students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in Recalling English Vocabulary</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Result</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Almina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Putri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Vera</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Angga</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">35</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3.10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Rasti</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Justin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">36</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">3.20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Anggie</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Eshal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Krisna</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">34</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">3.02</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Cantika</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.84</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Tantri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Nadjwa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Kaffa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Nita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Haikal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Fira</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Febio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">34</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">3.02</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Wika</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Ayu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Celsea</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.76</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Rian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">39</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">3.47</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Febri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Hasim</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2.58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Dany</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">TOTAL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">79.4 7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Goo d</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In order to know the average ability of all the students in recalling English vocabulary, the means should be counted as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">79.47</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Means:------------- X 100% = 3.31 % Excellent</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">24</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the data above, it can be concluded that the average ability of all students at Dharma Putra Kindergarten in recalling English vocabulary is Excellent.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors Influencingthe Students’Ability in Recalling English</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Vocabularies</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">St</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">S</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">T S O</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">TT</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">M/T</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Score</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">O S</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">IS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">T</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">T</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">T</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">P</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Nadjwa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Rian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">3.47</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Nita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tantri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Krisna</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">3.02</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Hasim</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Celsea</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.76</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Angga</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3.10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Anggie</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Fira</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Dany</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Eshal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Putri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Justin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3.20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Febio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3.02</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Cantika</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.84</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Rasti</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Febri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Vera</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Ayu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Haikal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Almina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kaffa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Wika</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">√</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">X</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2.58</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">St &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Students</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">S &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Society</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">OS &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Outside School</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">IS &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Inside School</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TSO &nbsp;&nbsp;: The Significant Others</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TT &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: The Teacher</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">M/T &nbsp;&nbsp;: Method/Technique</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TP &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: The Parents</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The (√) symbol indicates the students’ ability affected by the related factors. Meanwhile, the (X) indicates that the students’ ability was not affected by the related factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result of the test through interview shows that the average students’ score in recalling English vocabulary is 3.31 (Excellent). The significant factorthat influenced the students’ ability in recalling English vocabulary is motivation, which consists of society, significant others, teacher and method. The outer environment does not give any contribution to students’ learning process. However, the school environment has very big impact on the development of English language acquisition. This is supported by the teacher who firstly introduced English to the students. The teacher trained them English once a week for almost two hours by using Presentation, Practice and Production method and repetition technique. Their family also became the crucial factors affecting their ability in recalling English vocabulary. From 24 students, there were 15 students fully supported to learn English at home by their family.Their families had their own techniques to teach English. On the other hand, the rest 9 students did not acquire support from their family to learn English at home. In average, the students obtained fully support had better results in recalling English vocabulary than those who do not.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Alqahtani, Mofareh. 2015. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">TheImportance Of Vocabulary In Language Learning And How To Be Taught. International Journal of Teaching and Education, Vol. III(3), pp. 21-34.,10.20472/TE.2015.3.3.002</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.iises.net/international-journal-of-teaching-education/publication-detail-213"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.iises.net/international-journal-of-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.iises.net/international-journal-of-teaching-education/publication-detail-213"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">teaching-education/publication-detail-213</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">(Accessed on December, 14th 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Amirono and Daryanto. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluasi dan Penilian Pembelajaran Kurikulum 2013. </span><span class="font2">Penerbit Gava Media: Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonymous. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kurikulum Muatan Lokal Pendidikan Dasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;Bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar: Depdikbud.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">246</span></p>