---
layout: full_article
title: "Conflict Analysis in Stromberg’s Movie “Maleficent”"
author: "I Kadek Surya Adi Saputra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i04.p06</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.4 Nopember 2018: 874-881</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Conflict Analysis in Stromberg’s Movie “Maleficent”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Kadek Surya Adi Saputra</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department - Faculty of Arts - Udayana University </span><span class="font0">[</span><a href="mailto:suryaadisptra44@gmail.com"><span class="font3">suryaadisptra44@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The title of this paper is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict Analysis in Stromberg’s Movie “Maleficent”.</span><span class="font3"> It is aimed at finding out kinds of conflict faced by the main character and the sources of the main character’s conflict and analyzing the way the main characters solve the conflict. The data of this study were taken from a movie entitled “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent”</span><span class="font3">. This study focuses on describing external and internal conflicts. The conflict is analyzed based on the theory of conflict proposed by Kenney (1966) who divides conflicts into two types, external and internal conflicts. The description of the presentation of the characters is analyzed based on the theory proposed by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986) who divides it into two; they are the source of conflict and resolution of conflict. The result of this study shows that the main character faces two conflicts; external and internal conflicts. The sources of the main character are incompatible goals, and different opinions. In managing the conflict, the main character uses avoidance strategy, competition strategy and creative integration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Conflict, Internal Conflict, External Conflict, Source of Conflict, Resolution of Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul Conflict Analysis in Stromberg’s Movie “Maleficent” oleh Robert Stromberg. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah menemukan jenis konflik yang dihadapi oleh pemeran utama dan sumber dari konflik tersebut dan menganlisis bagaimana cara pemeran utama menyelesaikan konflik tersebut. Data penelitian ini di ambil dari film Maleficent. Penelitian ini focus menjelaskan konflik eksternal dan konflik internal. Analisis konflik berdasarkan teori Kenny (1996) yang membagi konflik menjadi dua jenis, diantaranya: eksternal konflik dan internal konflik. Deskripsi dan penyajian karakter dianalisis berdasarkan teori Deetz and Stevenson (1986) yang terdiri dari: sumber konflik dan solusi dari konflik tersebut. Kesimpulan dari penelitian ini menunjukan pemeran utama menghadapi dua konflik, diantaranya: eskternal konflik dan internal konflik. Sumber konflik dari pemeran utama adalah; perbedaan pendapat, tujuan yang tidak sesuai dan peran yang tidak sesuai. Solusi yang digunakan pemeran utama untuk menyelesaikan konflik tersebut adalah; strategi penghindaraan, startegi kompetisi, dan strategi kreatif integrasi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Konflik, konflik eksternal, konflik internal, sumber konflik dan solusi konflik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Literature is expression of human being derived from imagination of the writer. According to Rene Wellek and Austin Werren, literary work can be divided into three genres they are poetry, prose, and drama. Diyanni states (2001:7) that there are the major types of literary work such as poetry, drama, and fiction. Meanwhile fiction can also be divided into novel, short story etc. Literary work is fundamentally developed by two elements; they are intrinsic and extrinsic elements. Intrinsic elements include theme, character, point of view, setting, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conflict is a struggle between two or more forces that creates a tension that must be resolved (although in some stories, as in real life, it isn't). Conflict is important to literature because it provides the basic materials for the construction of the plot. Without conflict, nothing would happen. In addition, the conflict within a piece may be central to the author's view of life or the point he or she is trying to make.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, the discussion of conflict will be more deeply about the conflict in the movie with the reference movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent</span><span class="font3"> directed by Robert Stromberg (2014). The story of this movie is telling us about a young woman named Maleficent who is falling love with human peasant boy named Stefan, whose love for Maleficent, they get their first kiss when they were sixteen. Stefan’s ambitions are to become King. As they become older, the two grow apart, and Maleficent becomes protector of the Moors. When King Henry tries to conquer the Moors, a grown Maleficent forces him to retreat. Fatally wounded in battle, he declares that who over kills Maleficent will be named his successor and marry his only daughter, princess Laila. Stefan visits Maleficent in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moors, where he drugs her but cannot bring himself to kill her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of conflict are faced by the main character in the movie Maleficent?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the source of those conflicts? c. How does the main character in the movie Maleficent solve the conflict?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identity the kind of conflict faced by the main character of the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the source of conflict of the main character.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the way Maleficent solved the conflict.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are three points covering this section: &nbsp;data source, method and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data and method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data source of this study was taken from the movie entitled Maleficent directed by Robert Stromberg (2014). The point of movie, when the conflict started, Stefan’s ambitions is to become King. As they become older, the two grow apart, and Maleficent becomes protector of the Moors. When King Henry tries to conquer the Moors, a grown Maleficent force him to retreat. Fatally wounded in battle, he declares that who over kills Maleficent will be named his successor and marry his only daughter, princess Laila. Stefan visits Maleficent in the Moors, where he drugs her but cannot bring himself to kill her. The Maleficent wings were stealing by Stefan, making Maleficent very angry. The data source was chosen because they could provide much information related</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to the conflicts, which is very interesting to be analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were collected and selected using the documentation method. The process was by watching and understanding the content of the movie and relating them to the topic. It was followed by listening to dialogue and reading the movie script. Afterwards, finding out the statement that belongs to the intrinsic study, in this case, the elements of fiction especially about the conflicts selected using the note taking technique.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The collected data were analyzed qualitatively based on the theoretical basis for conflicts. All the data collected were classified into certain categories. To determine the data, first the data were copied from the movie and then categorized into internal and external conflicts. The data were analyzed based on the conflict theory of literature by Kenney (1966:5), source of conflict and conflict solution was analyzed using the theory &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;managing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;interpersonal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">communication by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were presented based on three questions from the problems of the study. Descriptive qualitative method was used in presenting data analysis. The result of data analysis of the first problem was shown through the types of conflict based on theory conflict by Kenney (1966). Both the second and third problems were presented descriptively to show the source of conflict and conflict solutions based on theory of managing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">interpersonal communication by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this movie, the analysis of external conflict of the main character is only in term of the conflict between main character and supporting character.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>A. Conflict between Maleficent and</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>King Henry</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The conflict between Maleficent and King Henry included external conflict, because the conflicts caused incompatible goals, which happened between people, in this case involving Maleficent and King Henry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conflict between Maleficent and King Henry is at front gate of the Moors. King Henry decided to conquer Moors; on the other hand Maleficent wants to live in peace, because of incompatible goals between them, the war cannot be avoided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent : Go no further!</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: A king, does not</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">take orders from a winged elf!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: You are no king to me!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Bring me her head! (King Henry talked to his soldier)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Arise and stand with me!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: Charge!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You will not have the Moors! Not now, nor ever!</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the quotation </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“You will not have the Moors! Not now, nor ever!” </span><span class="font3">that means that Maleficent will never let King Henry to conquer Moors. Maleficent was successful to send them out from the Moors. But this is not the end, King Henry declares that who over kills Maleficent will be named his successor and marry his only daughter, princess Laila.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflict</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Internal conflicts could happen between one idea and another idea or the conflicts of own mind. Internal conflict exists within him or herself. Personal conflict is struggle that takes place in the character’s mind. For example, a character may have to decide between right and wrong or between two solutions to a problem. For example, Maleficent begins to admit that her hatred for Stefan does not extend to Aurora. Emerging from the blind rage she felt when the princess was a baby, Maleficent now sees that Aurora is a good, innocent person undeserving of such a harsh fate. Feeling guilty, she puts a temporary sleeping spell on the girl and transports her into the Moors. When Aurora wakes, she is enchanted by the beautiful fairy kingdom and shows no fear when Maleficent makes her presence known. Aurora happily explains that she recognizes Maleficent from several incidents in her childhood and believes Maleficent is her fairy godmother. Without explaining the truth, Maleficent spends the evening getting to know the victim of her own curse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Maleficent : I revoke the curse, let it be no more. I revoke the curse! Let it be no more!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Whispering : This curse will last till the end of time. No power on earth can change it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“I revoke the curse, let it be no more. I revoke the curse! Let it be no more!”</span><span class="font3"> Following this quotation, Maleficent was disappointed with herself as she cursed someone innocent, in this case it was Aurora. Maleficent was so lost in hatred and revenge. After returning to her cottage Aurora sleeps. Maleficent attempts to retract the curse, but she had made it too powerful to be undone. Diaval reminds her that true love's kiss can still break the spell, but Maleficent admits she added it as a false hope because she believed it did not exist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As Aurora's birthday progresses and night begins to fall, she feels a strange sensation in her finger and hears an eerie voice calling her name. In a trancelike state, Aurora follows the disembodied voice through the palace until she discovers a hidden room containing piles of broken and burnt spinning wheels. She approaches a sharp spindle and touches it, drawing blood. A moment later, she sinks to the floor in a dead sleep.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Source of Conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Source of External Conflict</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Source of Conflict between Maleficent and King Henry is Incompatible Goals</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conflict here is conflict between man and man, in this case Maleficent and King Henry. This conflict occurs because of incompatible goals between them. King Henry is the king of human Kingdom that ruled by a power-hungry king and tries to conquer Moors,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and on the other hand, Maleficent wants to live in peace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry : </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">There they are, the mysterious Moors where no one dares to venture for fear of the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;magical</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">creatures that lurk within, Well, I say crush them!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent : Go no further!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">King Henry leads his army to conquer the Moors for the human world as per quotation above “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There they are, the mysterious Moors where no one dares to venture for fear of the magical creatures that lurk within, Well, I say crush them!”</span><span class="font3"> as Maleficent is a protector of the Moors, the war cannot be avoided. Maleficent victoriously counter-attacks with her band of magical creatures. King Henry is mortally wounded in the battle, and makes known his hatred for the winged woman who defends the Moors. Having only a daughter for an heir, King Henry promises her hand and the throne to whichever of his men brings proof of Maleficent's death. Stefan, despite his relationship with Maleficent, takes on the task in hope becoming a new king.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Source of Internal Conflict</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Incompatible goal conflicts arise in situations where, for example, two people want to do something together but each wants to do something different, where one person’s goal accomplishment is based on the other person’s doing something first, or where goal accomplishment is based on mutual effort.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The internal conflict started between Maleficent and Stefan because of Incompatible goals from them. As Stefan’s ambition becomes a king and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">conquers human kingdom and Moors, while Maleficent wants to live in peace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">When King Stefan tries to conquer Moors, he wounded on the battle and almost die because of Maleficent, he promises whoever can kill Maleficent will be chosen to be his successor and will marry his only daughter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry : Defeated in Battle! Is this to be my legacy? I see you waiting for me to die. It won’t be long. But what then? </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I will choose a successor, to take the throne and care for my daughter</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Who among you is worthy? Kill the winged creature &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Maleficent)!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Avenge me! And upon my death you will take the crown</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“I will choose a successor, to take the throne and care for my daughter” </span><span class="font3">according to this quotation, it makes everyone who heard King Henry’s words will be motivated to kill Maleficent especially Stefan. As Stefan’s ambition become a King and will do anything to ferment his purpose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stefan returns to the Moors at night and reconnects with Maleficent, who is happy and not at all suspicious to see her friend again. After giving her a drink to put her into a sound sleep, Stefan prepares to stab her to death. Unable to bring himself to kill the woman he once loved, he crudely removes her wings as she slumbers and then departs. When Maleficent awakens, weak with the pain from her severed wings and realizing she had been betrayed, she swears revenge against Stefan. On his deathbed, King Henry accepts the wings as proof of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Maleficent's demise and awards the crown and his daughter's hand to Stefan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Having lost her ability to fly, Maleficent frees a captured raven in a nearby field and gives him the power to transform into a man. She recruits this raven-man, Diaval to serve as her &quot;wings&quot; in exchange for having saved his life. She declares herself ruler of the Moors, infusing her surroundings with dark magic and pitting herself once and for all against Stefan, ruler of the human kingdom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">While spying on Stefan's palace, Diaval overhears the royal staff speak of the baby girl just born to the King and Queen. He hurries to relay the news to Maleficent, who sees an opportunity for revenge. She attends the child's christening ceremony uninvited and bestows a curse on the princess.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I have a gift for her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Stefan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No! We do not want</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">your gift!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Listen well, all of you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The princess shall indeed grow in grace and beauty, beloved by all who meet her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Stefan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t do this!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">But, before the sunset</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">on her 16<sup>th</sup> birthday, she will &nbsp;prick &nbsp;her</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">finger on the spindle of spinning &nbsp;wheel &nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fall into a sleep like death, a &nbsp;sleep &nbsp;like</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">death, a sleep from which she will never awaken.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“before the sunset on her 16<sup>th </sup>birthday, she will prick her finger on the spindle of spinning wheel and fall into a sleep like death, a sleep like death, a sleep from which she will never awaken”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The point of source Internal Conflict is based on this quotation. When Maleficent gives her curse to baby who didn’t know anything because of Maleficent’s hatred with her father. Aurora did not deserve for the curse. Maleficent begins to admit that her hatred for Stefan does not extend to Aurora. Emerging from the blind rage she felt when the princess was a baby, Maleficent now sees that Aurora is a good, innocent person undeserving of such a harsh fate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution to Conflict</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Deetz and Stevenson in their book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication </span><span class="font3">(1998:210-218) give their brief explanation about conflict management strategies and divide them into five, namely: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;avoidance, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pacification,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">competition, compromise, and creative integration.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of External Conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Resolution &nbsp;of Conflict between</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Maleficent &nbsp;and King Henry is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Competition</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Competition refers to instance where each individual in a conflict decides they wish to win, to get what they want. Conflict which is based on differences of opinion or differing information can be best worked out by argumentation. In this conflict, relationship is enhanced by good discussions and useful answer, but they are damaged when people lost sight of the issue and only want to win.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The resolution of external conflict between Maleficent and King Henry is competition. Because of different opinion and perceptions between them. King Henry was power-hungry king who wants to conquer human king and Moors. On the other side, Maleficent who grows to become protector of the Moors, the war cannot be avoided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At the end, King Henry is mortally wounded in the battle, and promises whoever can kill Maleficent will be chosen to be his successor and will be marry his only daughter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">King Henry: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">When I ascended to the throne, I promised the people, one day we would take the Moors and its treasures. Each of you swore allegiance to me and to that cause. Defeated in Battle! Is this to be my legacy? I see you waiting for me to die. It won’t be long. But what then? I will choose a successor, to take the throne and care for my daughter. Who among you is worthy? Kill the winged &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;creature</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(Maleficent)! Avenge me! And upon my death you will take the crown</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data 13, King Henry’s words motivated his soldier to kill Maleficent as whoever can kill her will be chosen to be his successor. Stefan, despite his relationship with Maleficent, takes on the task in hopes of becoming the new king.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of Internal Conflict </span><span class="font3">The resolution in this conflict is creative integration attempts to break the conflict context by demonstrating that the way a conflict is being perceived is not the only possible way to see it. One has a choice to see the conflict in another context rather than to examine it within the present one, actually subverts the conflict discussion.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Maleficent begins to admit that her hatred for Stefan does not extend to Aurora. When Aurora was a baby, she</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">didn’t know anything and not appropriate to get the curse. Maleficent was disappointed with herself, she was lost in hatred and revenge. She will do anything to break the curse, but no power on earth can change it except if Aurora can find her true love kiss.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The following quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maleficent: &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I will not ask your</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">forgiveness, because what I have done to you is unforgivable. I was so lost in hatred and revenge. Sweet Aurora, you stole what was left of my heart. And now I have lost you forever. I swear, no harm will come to you as long as I live. And not a day shall pass that I don’t miss your smile.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to data 15, Maleficent was very disappointed with herself, she put her curse to wrong person. Aurora didn’t know anything when she was a baby. Maleficent approaches Aurora's bed and apologizes for her actions, promising to protect her as she sleeps. Maleficent kisses Aurora on the forehead and is both shocked and elated to find that the spell had been broken through the power of her own maternal love for the princess. Aurora realizes how much Maleficent cares for her and begins to trust her again.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Some significant points in the analysis of the movie “Maleficent” can be summarized as the conclusion in this last chapter, as follows: based on the role of main character, it is determined that Maleficent is the main character in this movie. She was the most important figure at the center of the role story in movie. From the beginning to the end,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Maleficent dominantly plays an important role and determines the flow of the role story in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study Maleficent faced two types of conflict; they are external and internal conflicts. In external conflict, Maleficent faced three external conflicts; they are the conflict between herself and King Henry, the conflict between herself and Aurora, and the conflict between herself and Stefan. The source of external conflict of Maleficent and King Henry is Incompatible goals. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this was an approach competition conflict because in managing her conflict with King Henry she used competition strategy. The war can’t be avoided, King Henry decided to conquer Moors and on the other side Maleficent needs to protect the Moors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conflict between Maleficent and Aurora was limited resources. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this was an approach avoidance conflict, because in managing her conflict with Aurora she used avoidance strategy. She did not deal with this conflict, she wanted to stay with Maleficent, but Aurora was already disappointed with Maleficent of the curse and leave Maleficent and back to human kingdom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conflict between Maleficent and Stefan was incompatible goals. This was interpersonal conflict and from the situation of conflict, this was an approach competition conflict, because in managing her conflict between Stefan she used competition strategy. The conflict started when Stefan become a king. King Henry lost in a battle with Maleficent and declares whoever can beat Maleficent will be chosen to be his successor and the war cannot be avoided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The source of internal conflict was incompatible goals, between Maleficent and Stefan and extend the conflict to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Aurora. As King Henry was wounded on the battle against Maleficent, he promises to whoever can kill Maleficent will be chosen to be his successor. The Maleficent’s internal conflict started when she put cursed on baby Aurora who didn’t know anything. Maleficent begins to admit that her hatred for Stefan does not extend to Aurora. Emerging from the blind rage she felt when the princess was a baby, Maleficent now sees that Aurora is a good, innocent person undeserving of such a harsh fate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Diyanni, Robert, 2001. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading, Fiction</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Poetry, and Drama.</span><span class="font3"> McGraw-Hill International Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kenny, William. 1966. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">K. L. Knickbocker and H.W. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Holt Renehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harcout, Brace and World, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1966. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1967. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harvest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">881</span></p>