---
layout: full_article
title: "Positive Politeness Strategies in James Corden’s Interview on Recode Decode Talkshow"
author: "Ni Wayan Ika Mahayani, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i03.p31 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.3 Agustus 2018: 781-785</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Positive Politeness Strategies in James Corden’s Interview on Recode Decode Talkshow</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Ika Mahayani<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni<sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>[12]</sup>English Department - Faculty of Arts - Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ikamhyn@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">ikamhyn@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ketutsrirahayuni@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This undergraduate thesis entitled “Positive Politeness Strategies in James Cordenʼs Interview on Recode Decode Talk-showˮ is interesting to be discussed as an object analysis due to the application of positive politeness strategies used in a communication. The study aims to analyze the types of positive politeness strategies used in James Cordenʼs Interview on Recode Decode Talk-show and to identify the language function of the applications of those positive politeness strategies. The data were taken from the transcript of the conversation in the talk-show. The statements which were used as the data source were the statements of the conversation which were applied the positive politeness strategy. The data that have been collected were classified according to the theory of Brown and Levinson (1978) about politeness strategy to analyze the positive politeness strategies in the conversation of the talk-showʼs transcripts. Furthermore, the language functions proposed by Tillit and Bruder (1985) is also used to identify the functions of the choice of those positive politeness strategies. Based on the theory mentioned above, there were seven strategies of positive politeness strategies found in this talk-show, those are: Notice, attend to H (his interest, wants, needs, goods), Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H), Seek agreement, Avoid disagreement, Joke, Include both S and H in the activity, and Give (or ask for) reasons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: politeness, positive politeness, talk-show</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi yang berjudul “Positive Politeness Strategies in James Cordenʼs Interview on Recode Decode Talk-showˮ menarik untuk didiskusikan sebagai objek analisis karena penggunaan dari strategi kesopanan positif yang digunakan dalam komunikasi. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis tipe – tipe dari strategi kesopanan positif yang digunakan pada saat mewawancara James Corden di acara Recode Decode Talkshow dan untuk mengindentifikasi fungsi bahasa dari penggunaan strategi kesopanan positif tersebut. Data dalam penelitian ini diperoleh dari transkripsi percakapan talkshow tersebut. Pernyataan – pernyataan yang digunakan sebagai sumber data adalah pernyataan – pernyataan didalam percakapan yang menggunakan strategi kesopanan positif. Data – data yang telah dikoleksi tersebut diklasifikan menurut teori dari Brown dan Levinson (1987) tentang strategi kesopanan untuk menganalisis strategi kesopanan positif dalam transkripsi talk-show tersebut. Berdasarkan teori yang telah disebutkan diatas, ada tujuh strategi kesopanan positif yang ditemukan dalam talk-show ini, antara lain: Notice, attend to H (his interest, wants, needs, goods), Exaggerate (interest,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">approval, sympathy with H), Seek agreement, Avoid disagreement, Joke, Include both S and H in the activity, and Give (or ask for) reasons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kesopanan, kesopanan positif, talk-show</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Communication is considered important to everyday life as a part of social life. In doing a communication, one thing that cannot be forgotten is how to maintain a good relationship to others in order not to emerge a sort of conflicts, offensiveness, etc. Hence, in order to do a good and proper communication, the answer is politeness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is the best way to express good manners and show our social values to others to make a conversation run well and go smoothly. As Brown and Levinson (1987) stated, politeness strategy is a strategy used to formulate messages in order to save the hearer’s positive face when there are facethreatening acts. Moreover, everyone wants to be understood and not to be disturbed by others. They do not want to lose their “face” during a communication. Loosing face means the assessment of being embarrassed, humiliated or disappointed. “Face” means something that is emotionally invested, and that can be lost, maintained, enhanced, and constantly attended in a communication. It is a kind of respect that individual has for their face-maintaining. Thus, it is necessary to identify the use of politeness strategies and their functions in social communication because considering which is polite or not can help us to understand which communications are considered polite or not to be able to speak politely.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of politeness strategy is in any area of communication such as: a real life conversation, movies, interview, talk-show, etc. A talk-show is selected as the data of this study</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">because the use of politeness strategies applied in the talk-show. Based on the theory of politeness strategy stated by Brown and Levinson (1987), there are four main types of politeness strategy, such as: bald on-record, negative politeness, positive politeness, and off-record.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moreover, this study would analyze the positive politeness strategies in James Corden’s interview on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talk-show’s transcription episode October 20<sup>th</sup> 2016, when the host, Kara Swisher was interviewing a famous television presenter, James Corden and identify the language functions based on the theory proposed by Tillit and Bruder (1985) about language functions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of positive politeness strategies applied in the James Corden’s Interview on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talk-show’s transcription?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the language functions of the positive politeness strategies used in the James Corden’s Interview on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talk-show’s transcription?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of positive politeness strategies applied in the James Corden’s Interview on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talk-show’s transcription.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the language functions of positive politeness strategies used in the James Corden’s Interview on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talkshow’s transcription.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this writing, the research method consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Both of the spoken data (the podcast of the talk-show) and the written data (the transcription of the talk-show) are available in the official website of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2"> talk-show, </span><a href="http://www.recode.net/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.recode.net</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> However, only the transcription is used as the data. The data that would be analyzed is a talkshow episode October 20<sup>th</sup> 2016 when the host of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Recode Decode</span><span class="font2">, Kara Swisher was interviewing a famous television presenter, James Corden.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The talk-show is selected as the data in this study in order to see the types of positive politeness strategies used in interaction between the host and the guest.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Observation method is applied in collecting the data of this study. The data were collected by observing the transcription of the talk-show through note-taking technique in order to collect the data by finding and note which utterances were applied positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data that have been collected would be analyzed using qualitative method because it deals with explanations. The data that have been collected must express positive politeness strategies uttered by the host and also the guest. The analysis would be started by categorizing the data based</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">on the fifteen positive politeness strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Then, the data would be analyzed descriptively. The next step is identifying the functions of the use those positive politeness strategies based on the theory of language functions stated by Tillit and Bruder (1985).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the following section, the analysis of this study is given.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Positive Politeness Strategies in James Corden’s Interview on Recode Decode</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1 – Notice, attend to H (his interest, wants, needs, goods)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“You have a hugely varied background in theater and on the BBC and TV shows and things like that.ˮ</span><span class="font2"> shows that Kara Swisher wants to take notice of aspects of James Corden’s condition (noticeable changes, remarkable possessions, anything which looks as though H would want S to notice and approve of it). In this case, Kara’s utterance shows the manner of maintaining and satisfying James’s wants or interests. Therefore, James will feel comfortable to talk to Kara.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2 – Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement which said by the host, Kara Swisher </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Iʼm so thrilled to have you!ˮ</span><span class="font2"> is using exaggerate strategy (interest, approval, sympathy with H). In this case, Kara applies this strategy to intensify her interest to James because their relation when saying that statement is not too close yet, so she tries to make James feels more comfortable to talk to her and the talkshow would run well.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 5 – Seek agreement</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement which applies seek agreement is the statement said by the host, Kara Swisher “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Great musical — Zero Mostel was in the original.ˮ</span><span class="font2"> On the statement above, Kara claims common ground with James to seek ways in which James is possible to agree with her. In this case, Kara asks for approval to James through the raising tone of ‘safe topic’ that shows Kara allows James to give his agreement about what she has said previously.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 6 – Avoid disagreement</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The host, Kara Swisher and the guest, James Corden are talking about the number of countries in Amazon. James argues that it is less than 20, but Kara disagrees to James’s opinion by saying “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I donʼt know. I donʼt actually know. Itʼs probably more than 20.ˮ</span><span class="font2"> She disagrees to James’s opinion by applying avoid disagreement on Hedging Opinion. Kara gently refuses James’s statement. She chooses to be vague about her own opinion, so as not to be seen that she disagrees James’s statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>E. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 8 – Joke</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement that has been said by the host, Kara Swisher “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I called it Kara-oke because my name is Kara</span><span class="font2">.” is applied joke to put the guest, James Corden at ‘ease’. In the statement above, Kara tries to joke with James.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>F. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 12 – Include both S and H in the activity</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the statement which said by the host, Kara Swisher above “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">So weʼre going to talk tech in a minute</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">but letʼs talk a little bit about you.</span><span class="font2">” is applied include both S and H in the activity which shown by the form “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">letʼsˮ</span><span class="font2"> and “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">weʼre going toˮ.</span><span class="font2"> Those forms are actually an inclusive ‘we’ form that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">actually means ‘you’ and call upon the cooperative assumptions and thereby redress FTAs to soften her request.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>G. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 13 – Give (or ask for) reasons</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the statement which said by the host, Kara Swisher “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Why are you worried about delivery drones?ˮ,</span><span class="font2"> it can be seen that Kara applies give (or ask for) reasons strategy. It is indicated by the use of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“whyˮ</span><span class="font2"> on the statement. Kara tries to include the guest, James Corden in an activity for Kara to give reason as to why she wants what she wants.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. 1 Analysis of Language Functions in James Corden’s Interview on Record Decode Talk-show</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introductions and Address System</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement said by the host, Kara Swisher “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You have a hugely varied background in theater and on the BBC and TV shows and things like that.ˮ</span><span class="font2"> has a function to introduce and as an address system that consists of giving information about the person being introduced.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Giving Compliments and Replying to Compliments</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the statement “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Whatʼs interesting.</span><span class="font2">” said by Kara means that what has been said by James is interesting according to Kara. In this case, Kara shows her interest to James by giving James a compliment. The statement indicates that Kara likes some aspect of James.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agreeing and Disagreeing</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statement said by the host, Kara Swisher “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Right, but theyʼre starting to.ˮ</span><span class="font2"> has purpose to disagree in indirect way to the guest. In this case, Kara gently refuses James’s statement by pretending to agree, although she actually does not agree to James’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">statement by taking an agreement to minimize the threat of James’s positive face.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Getting and Giving Information</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the statement which said by the host, Kara Swisher above “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">So weʼre going to talk tech in a minute</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">but letʼs talk a little bit about you.</span><span class="font2">”, is an indirect way in getting information from the guest, James Corden. It is indicated by the form </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“letʼsˮ</span><span class="font2"> which actually an inclusive ‘we’ form that is really means ‘you’ and call upon the cooperative assumptions and thereby redress FTAs to soften her request. In this case, Kara actually makes a request and asks for information to James about tech and to talk a little bit about himself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the talk-show there were seven strategies of positive politeness strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978) and four language functions of the use of those strategies that can be found in the talk-show are four language functions according to Tillit and Bruder (1985) are used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From what has been mentioned above, it can be concluded that Positive Politeness Strategies are applied in talkshow to make the relation of the guest and host become closer, so they would be more convenient and comfortable in talking and sharing information.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Dillano. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">What is Politeness and Why Should We be Polite?. Master Polite English Course. </span><span class="font2">Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://britishenglishcoach.com/what-is-politeness-and-why-should-we-be-polite"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://britishenglishcoach.com/w</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://britishenglishcoach.com/what-is-politeness-and-why-should-we-be-polite"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">hat-is-politeness-and-why-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://britishenglishcoach.com/what-is-politeness-and-why-should-we-be-polite"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">should-we-be-polite</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font2">[accessed</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">April 5<sup>th</sup> 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goody, Esther N. 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Questions and Politeness; Strategies in Social</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interaction.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Johnson, Eric. (2016). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Full Transcript: ʻThe Late Late Showʼ host James Corden on Record Decode</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://recode.net/2016/10/20/13339848/james-corden-carpool-karaoke-late-show-recode-decode-podcast-transcript"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://recode.net/2016/10/20/13</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://recode.net/2016/10/20/13339848/james-corden-carpool-karaoke-late-show-recode-decode-podcast-transcript"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">339848/james-corden-carpool-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="https://recode.net/2016/10/20/13339848/james-corden-carpool-karaoke-late-show-recode-decode-podcast-transcript"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">karaoke-late-show-recode-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="https://recode.net/2016/10/20/13339848/james-corden-carpool-karaoke-late-show-recode-decode-podcast-transcript"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">decode-podcast-transcript</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">[accessed April 5<sup>th</sup> 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Swift, Sue. (2013). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An ELT Glossary: Transactional and Interactional Functions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of Language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://eltnotebook.blogspot.co.id/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://eltnotebook.blogspot.co.id</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">[accessed April 17<sup>th</sup> 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tillit, Bruce and Bruder, Marry Newton. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speaking</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naturally: Communication Skills in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;American &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">785</span></p>