---
layout: full_article
title: "Referential Cohesion in Donald Trump`s Speech Transcript"
author: "I Wayan Gede Agus Wirawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p16</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.2 </span><span class="font1">Mei </span><span class="font0">2018: 388-394</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Referential Cohesion in Donald Trump`s Speech Transcript</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Wayan Gede Agus Wirawan</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:agus8wirawan@gmail.com"><span class="font2">agus8wirawan@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion establishes the text or sentences and gives their meaning by the grammatical and lexical linking. Halliday and Hasan (1976) In Cohesion in English, identify five general categories of cohesive devices that are possibly implemented in texts: reference, ellipsis, substitution, lexical cohesion and conjunction. One of the cohesion meanings is reference. Reference is one of cohesive devices, and it contains the specific nature of the information needed to be retrieved for the comprehensive information. The problems discussed in this study are the type of reference applied in the speech transcripts and referential meaning presented in the speech transcripts of Donald Trump`s Speech. The aims of the study were to find out the reference applied in the speech transcripts and referential meaning of the reference presented in the speech transcripts. The main theory used was Theory of Cohesion proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976). The data in this study were taken from the website of Washington Post in form of transcripts. The data were collected using observation method and analyzed using qualitative method. There were two kinds of reference found in the speech; which were personal reference and demonstrative reference. The personal reference that occurred in the speech transcript included I, you, we, he, she, they, and it. Meanwhile, the demonstrative references that appeared in the speech transcript were this, these, there, here, now and the. These references were presented as endophoric, whether anaphoric or cataphoric. The comparative reference was absent. From this study, it can be concluded that referential cohesion takes an important role in a text or in this case speech transcripts, since the function of reference is to hold a text together and give its meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keyword: cohesion, referential cohesion, references, anaphoric, cataphoric</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kohesi membentuk teks atau kalimat dan memberi makna melalui penafsiran gramatikal dan leksikal. Halliday dan Hasan (1976) dalam “Cohesion in English” mengidentifikasi lima kategori umum perangkat kohesif yang mungkin diterapkan dalam teks: referensi, elipsis, substitusi, kohesi leksikal dan konjungsi. Salah satu makna kohesi adalah referensi. Referensi adalah salah satu perangkat kohesif, dan berisi sifat spesifik berdasar pada informasi yang perlu diambil untuk mendapatkan informasi yang komprehensif. Masalah yang dibahas dalam penelitian ini adalah jenis referensi dan makna referensial yang disajikan dalam transkrip pidato oleh Donald Trump. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui jenis referensi yang diterapkan dalam transkrip pidato dan makna referensial yang disajikan dalam transkrip pidato. Teori utama yang digunakan adalah Teori Kohesi oleh Halliday dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasan (1976). Data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari situs Washington Post dalam bentuk transkrip. Data dikumpulkan dengan metode observasi dan dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Ada dua jenis referensi yang ditemukan dalam pidato tersebut; yaitu referensi personal dan referensi demonstratif. Referensi personal yang muncul dalam transkrip pidato adalah I, you, we, he, she, they, dan it. Sementara itu, referensi demonstratif yang muncul dalam transkrip pidato adalah this, these, there, here, now dan the. Referensi tersebut dikategorikan sebagai endoforis referensi, baik anaforis atau kataforis. Referensi komparatif tidak ada di dalam transcript. Dari penelitian ini, dapat disimpulkan bahwa kohesi referensial berperan penting dalam teks atau dalam hal ini transkrip pidato, karena fungsi rujukan adalah membuat teks saling berkaitan dan memberi maknanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kohesi, kohesi referensial, referensi, anaforis, kataforis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Linguistics is the scientific study of language and its components. The components of language are form, meaning, and context. Text analysis is one of language elements that can be analyzed. In linguistics, a text is used to refer to any passage, written or spoken. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976: 1–2), a text is best regarded as a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">semantic</span><span class="font2"> unit; a unit not of form but of meaning. In other words, according to Eggins (1994: 11), semantics is the basic purpose of language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cohesion establishes the text or sentences and gives their meaning by the grammatical and lexical linking. +</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday and Hasan (1976) In </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2"> identify five general categories of cohesive devices that are possibly implemented in texts: reference, ellipsis, substitution, lexical cohesion and conjunction. One of the cohesion meanings is reference. Reference is one of cohesive devices, and it contains the specific nature of the information needed to be retrieved for the comprehensive information. Halliday and Hassan (1976) describe that there are three types of reference; personal reference, demonstrative reference and comparative reference. Personal reference keeps track of function through the speech situation using pronouns (he,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">him, she, her, etc.) and possessive determiners (mine, yours, his, hers, etc.), demonstrative reference (this, that, those, these), comparative reference (general and specific comparison).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on “Cohesion in English” by Halliday and Hassan (1976), reference has two referential devices that can create cohesion, endophoric that is related to textual relation in which the source of the identification lies in the text and exophoric that is related to the contextual relation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is concerned with the analysis of the reference in the Donald Trump`s speech transcripts and more focuses on the types of reference. Since sentences are connected to each other, this study analyzed referential cohesion that refers to the semantic theory, because it is interesting to analyze what kind of relation found in the sentences and how they are connected to each other. Donald Trump speech transcript is an object that fits with this study because there is some phenomenon related to the use of reference in his speech.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) What types &nbsp;of &nbsp;reference &nbsp;are</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">applied in &nbsp;the &nbsp;transcripts &nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donald Trump`s speech?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) What referential meanings &nbsp;are</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">presented in the transcripts of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donald Trump`s speech?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify types of the reference applied in the transcripts of Donald Trump`s speech.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the referential meaning presented in the transcripts of Donald Trump`s speech.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study must be followed by certain academic procedures to establish a scientific writing. The Research methodology is the way to solve problems of this study. The research methodology that were used in this writing consists of four steps; they are data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were 2 Donald Trump`s speech transcripts used as sources of the data in this study. The first data were taken from Donald Trump inauguration speech transcript, and it was downloaded from The Washington Post website. The Washington Post is an American daily newspaper located in the capital city of the United States of America. The data sources were taken from the official website of The Washington Post and the newspaper has particular emphasis on national politics. The second data were taken from Donald Trump`s victory speech transcript and downloaded from The New York Times website . The New York Times is a well-known American daily newspaper and most of its contents emphasize on politics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected from the transcript of Donald Trump speech transcripts. The method used to collect</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the data was observation method. Observation method is collecting the data by reading the transcripts carefully. After observing the transcripts, the data were collected by identifying and note taking of the words that were relevant to the research from the speech transcripts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed based on the adopted theories. The results of analysis were delivered qualitatively (determination of non-numerical information) and descriptively (describing the features of the data). The relevant data were analyzed based on reference theory of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English </span><span class="font2">by Halliday and Hasan (1976). Firstly, the data were read in order to find out the sentences containing reference items in the text. Second, the data or sentences containing reference items were classified in terms of the referential cohesion as to where it belongs to personal, demonstrative and comparative references. Third, the data were described to find out the referential meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of presenting analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of this study was presented in informal methods. In the informal method, the analysis was presented narratively based on theory of cohesion proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two types of referential cohesion found on Donald Trump`s speech transcript. The types of reference are categorized according to the theory of Cohesion in English by Halliday and Hasan (1976). The analysis of referential cohesion and its meaning are explained as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Personal Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The personal references applied in the text are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I, you, she, he, we, they</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it. </span><span class="font2">For further information, below is each of personal references analysis exposed in detail.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-1] </span><span class="font2">The oath of office </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">I</span><span class="font2"> take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (speech 11)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From data observed, the reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I </span><span class="font2">belongs to first person and always takes the position as subject. It is classified as anaphoric reference because the source identification of information can be found by examining the content of the speech transcript. By examining the textual content, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donald Trump`s Inauguration Speech</span><span class="font2"> as the title of the speech, this transcript is about the speech of Donald Trump in the Inauguration event. It can be identified that the personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I</span><span class="font2"> refers to Donald Trump because this speech was delivered by the president of the United States of America, Donald Trump, in the inauguration event.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-2] </span><span class="font2">we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving it back to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">you</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> the people. (speech 4)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the example above there is a personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you</span><span class="font2"> and taking the position as a subject. The personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you</span><span class="font2"> refers to the addressee of Donald Trump`s speech at the moment the speech was being delivered by him. Specifically, it cataphorically refers to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the people.</span><span class="font2"> The addressee in this case can be classified as the citizen of America which is related to the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Washington, D.C. </span><span class="font2">as the capital city of the United States of America.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">We</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-3] </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">We</span><span class="font2">, the citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and restore its promise for all of our people</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (speech 1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this example, sentence (2) of speech 1, the personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font2"> can only refer to speaker and addressee. In this case, the personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font2"> refers to Donald Trump as the speaker or the person who delivers the speech and the citizen of America as the addressee. Donald Trump identifies the addressee by clearly mentioning it on the first sentence in speech 1; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">We</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">the citizens of America</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">This is classified as cataphoric reference because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font2"> refer to the items mentioned after the reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">He</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-4] </span><span class="font2">But I’ll tell you, </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Reince</span><span class="font2"> is really a star. And </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">he</span><span class="font2"> is the hardest-working guy. And in a certain way, I did this — Reince, come up here</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (speech 48)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There In the example above, the personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">he</span><span class="font2"> takes the position as a subject with a determinative tendency to a specific person. Personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">he</span><span class="font2"> in the example refers back to a specific person whose name is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reince</span><span class="font2">. This reference is classified as anaphoric reference, since its function refers to preceding text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">She</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-5] </span><span class="font2">I’ve just received a call from Secretary Clinton. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">She</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">congratulated us — it’s about us — on our victory (speech 30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">she</span><span class="font2"> here takes the position as a subject and refers to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Secretary Clinton</span><span class="font2"> mentioned by the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">speaker in the first sentence. The personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">she</span><span class="font2"> in the example above is classified as anaphoric reference because it refers back to the information mentioned before.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">They</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-6] </span><span class="font2">we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">their</span><span class="font2"> gracious aid throughout this transition. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">They</span><span class="font2"> have been magnificent. (speech 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is a personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">they</span><span class="font2"> that is transformed into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font2"> in the first sentence, and there is a personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">they</span><span class="font2"> in the second sentence. Both are classified as anaphoric reference (to preceding the text) because personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">they</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font2"> refer to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama </span><span class="font2">mentioned by the speaker before.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">It</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-7] </span><span class="font2">Today's ceremony, however,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">has very special meaning because today, we are not merely transferring power from one administration to another or from one party to another, but we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">it</span><span class="font2"> back to you, the people. (speech 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The speaker or Donald Trump talks about transition or transferring power, he explains that transferring power is not merely from one party to another but from Washington D.C. to the people. In this part of speech there is one personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font2"> and can be concluded that it represents the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">power</span><span class="font2"> mentioned two times in the same sentence</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> The personal reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font2"> here is classified as anaphoric reference (preceding text).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Demonstrative Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The items of demonstrative reference that occur are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this, these, that, there, now, here</span><span class="font2"> and the neutral </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the.</span><span class="font2"> Below is each demonstrative reference analysis exposed in detail.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Demonstrative Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">This</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-1] </span><span class="font2">Every four years, we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power, and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">this </span><span class="font2">transition</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (speech 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transition</span><span class="font2"> can be correlated with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transfer of power,</span><span class="font2"> because the meanings of these words are relevant. In this case, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this transition</span><span class="font2"> can be interpreted as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">orderly and peaceful transfer of power.</span><span class="font2"> The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this</span><span class="font2"> here refers to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">orderly and peaceful</span><span class="font2"> in the same sentence. This reference is classified as anaphoric reference because it refers to the items that has already mentioned.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Demonstrative Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">That</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-2] </span><span class="font2">The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed all across the world. But </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">that</span><span class="font2"> is the past. And now, we are looking only to the future. (speech 14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that</span><span class="font2"> in the example above refers back to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed all across the world.</span><span class="font2"> The reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that</span><span class="font2"> in this part of speech was used by Donald Trump to refer to a circumstance and in this case, demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that</span><span class="font2"> is classified as anaphoric reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Demonstrative Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-3] </span><span class="font2">We, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">the</span><span class="font2"> citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and restore its promise for all of our people. (speech 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the example above, there is a demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the.</span><span class="font2"> The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2"> is used for identifying </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">citizen of America</span><span class="font2"> and is classified as a cataphoric reference (to following text).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">d.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Selective Circumstantial Demonstrative Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">There, Here, Now</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-4] </span><span class="font2">I said, Reince — and I know it, I know. Look at all those people over </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">there</span><span class="font2"> (speech 48)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-5] </span><span class="font2">This American carnage stops right </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">here</span><span class="font2"> and stops right </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">now</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">(speech 10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The referential meaning of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">there</span><span class="font2"> refers to a place far from the speaker</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">there</span><span class="font2"> in the example above can be interpreted as a location on which people gathered or it can be the addressee of the speaker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">here </span><span class="font2">refers to the place where the speaker delivered the speech and the demonstrative reference </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">now</span><span class="font2"> refers to the time when the speaker delivered his speech. The sentence in the example above can be interpreted into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this American carnage stops right “at this place” and stops right “at this time.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the previous analysis and discussion about reference, the following points can be stated as conclusions:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The referential cohesion that occurred in the Donald Trump`s speech transcripts were Personal Reference and Demonstrative Reference. The items of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">personal reference that appeared were </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I, you, we, he, she, they</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font2">. The items of demonstrative reference that occurred are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">this, these, that, there, now, here</span><span class="font2"> and the neutral </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the.</span><span class="font2"> Meanwhile, the comparative referential was absent in the speech transcripts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Most of personal referential cohesion that appeared in the speech transcripts was presented as anaphoric reference which referred to the preceding text. Only few of them were classified as cataphoric references. Most of demonstrative references that occurred were categorized as cataphoric in which they referred to the following text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most presented type of reference was personal reference and it definitely gave significant influence on the speech transcripts. Reference played an essential role in order to form and build a good text and it could be concluded as the important component in the speech, to create cohesion within the speech.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Ari Karunia, I. A. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reference Used in the Article of Travel Trade Gazette Asia</span><span class="font2"> (Sarjana thesis)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Beaugradne, Robert De and Dressler, Wolfgang U. 1981</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Introduction to Text Linguistics.</span><span class="font2"> Longman Group Ltd, London</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Eggins, Suzane. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Systemic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Functional &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistic</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bloomsbury Publishing, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hassan, R.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1976.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cohesion in &nbsp;English</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Longman Group Ltd, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday M.A.K and Hasan, R. 1985</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Language, Context, and Text: Aspect of Language in a Social. Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font2">. Deakin University, Victoria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Iqra, J., Assad, M. and Mudassar, I. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ellipsis, Reference &amp;&nbsp;Subtitution as Cohesive Devices The Bear by Anton Chekhov. </span><span class="font2">ISSN-L: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2223-9553,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ISSN:C2223-994 Vol. 4. No. 6. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.savap.org.pk&gt;2013(4.6-15) </span><span class="font2">[Accessed 15 June 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Michael, Angelina Subryan. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in News Articles: A Discourse Analysis &nbsp;Approach</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 200-3452 Vol. 2 No. 3. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.journals.aiac.org.au/index.php/IJALEL/article/view/864"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.journals.aiac.org.au/in</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.journals.aiac.org.au/index.php/IJALEL/article/view/864"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">dex.php/IJALEL/article/view/864</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">[Accessed 12 December 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pebriyanti Widana. Kadek. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Referential Cohesion in Crane`s The Bridge to Yellow Sky </span><span class="font2">(Sarjana thesis). Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Riemer, Nick. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Semantics.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University Press. Available from: </span><a href="https://archive.org/details/IntroducingSemantics"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://archive.org/details/Introd</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://archive.org/details/IntroducingSemantics"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ucingSemantics</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed 8 May 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ruri Sofyaniek, Ayu. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Reference Items Used in Article of Bali and Beyond Magazine</span><span class="font2"> (Sarjana thesis). Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Blake, Aaron. 2017. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donald Trump’s Full &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inaguration &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Transcript, Annoted</span><span class="font2">. Washington Post Website. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/donald-trumps-full-inaguration-speech-transcipt-annotated/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.washingtonpost.com/news/t</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/donald-trumps-full-inaguration-speech-transcipt-annotated/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">he-fix/wp/2017/donald-trumps-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/donald-trumps-full-inaguration-speech-transcipt-annotated/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">full-inaguration-speech-transcipt-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/donald-trumps-full-inaguration-speech-transcipt-annotated/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">annotated/</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed 1 April 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Federal News Services. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Transcript: &nbsp;&nbsp;Donald Trump’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Victory Speech.</span><span class="font2"> The New York Times Website. Available from: </span><a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/us/politics/trump-speech-transcript.html"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/us/politics/trump-speech-transcript.html"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">/10/us/politics/trump-speech-</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/us/politics/trump-speech-transcript.html"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">transcript.html</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed 5 August].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">394</span></p>