---
layout: full_article
title: "APPLYING TEXT-BASED APPROACH USING ECOTEXT TO IMPROVE DESCRIPTIVE WRITING SKILL OF THE 7TH GRADERS OF SMP KRISTEN PAYETI, EAST SUMBA"
author: "Melkyanus Dju Rohi, I Wayan Simpen, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-50648 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-50648"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-50648"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2018</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">p-ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol. 25. No 49</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>APPLYING TEXT-BASED APPROACH USING ECOTEXT TO IMPROVE DESCRIPTIVE WRITING SKILL OF THE 7<sup>TH</sup> GRADERS OF SMP KRISTEN PAYETI, EAST SUMBA</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Melkianus Dju Rohi</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Dinas Pendidikan Kabupaten Sumba Timur-NTT </span><a href="mailto:anusrohi@gmail.com"><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">anusrohi@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I Wayan Simpen Email: </span><a href="mailto:wyn.simpen@gmail.com"><span class="font6">wyn.simpen@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font6"> Udayana University</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6"><sup>3</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ni Wayan Sukarini Email: </span><a href="mailto:wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font6">wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font6"> Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Abstract-Text based approach is one of the approaches implemented in 2013 curriculum which is ignored by the English teacher in teaching. Besides, the teacher has not yet related the materials taught with the learners` environment, especially the local excellences. This research aims to give a description both quantitatively and qualitatively on how the result of descriptive writing skill of the 7th gradersʼ of SMP Kristen Payeti before and after the implementation of text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `njara` is. The data were collected through pretest, observation during the treatment, and posttest. This research</span><span class="font6"> uses </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">concurrent embedded design in which the qualitative method is embedded or nested within the quantitative method. The results show that before the treatment the average achievement of the learners in composing descriptive text was 62. It is below the minimum completion criteria (KKM), that is 70. Individually, only 10 of 32 learners passed the exam. After the treatment, the average achievement became 78.69 or increased by 16.69 on five aspects analyzed, content, organization, vocabulary, language use, and mechanic. Only 3 of 32 learners failed. In addition, the treatment is suitable with the perspective of ecolinguistics in language learning, mainly the relation, the context, the emergence, the quality, the variability, and the activity. In conclusion, text based approach using ecotext can be implemented to improve the learners skill in writing descriptive text.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6">English is important as a world-wide communication tool. Schools in Indonesia are teaching English as a foreign language with the aim that learners can adapt themselves to the global association and follow the development of information, technology, arts and culture and all life arrangements of the nations of the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">To implement English subject at school, it needs a teaching and learning process. Based on the statements of Dimyati and Mudjiono (1999: 297) and Sagala (2009: 61), teaching a language is an activity to make learners learn the language in the form of a planned process and involve teachers, learners and learning resources in a particular learning environment to help learners experience a change in attitude, knowledge, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">skills in accordance with certain predefined standards.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Of the four aspects of language in learning English discourse, writing poses the difficult skill to be mastered by the learners. In addition, they must know the steps or criteria in making a writing. The ability to write requires the mastery of various linguistic elements and elements outside the language (Iskandar wassid, 2013:248) in Warmadewi (2017:180). Further Warmadewi in her research claims that learners assume that writing is very difficult, as they must pour ideas to form a good paragraph. Brown (2004:218) said that learning to write well in any language is not easy, even writing in our native language. These difficulties need to be overcome with the right approach, strategy and method. One of the approaches implemented in the 2013 curriculum (K-13) that can be used as the solution to this problem is the text-based approach. Richards (2006:36) stated that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">“Text-based instruction, also known as a genre-based approach, sees communicative competence as involving the mastery of different types of texts. Text here is used in a special sense to refer to structured sequences of language that are used in specific contexts in specific ways”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Text-Based Approach (TBA) aims to strengthen the mastery of texts implemented in junior high school in Indonesia including SMP Kristen Payeti, East Sumba as the location of this research. This approach is used to support writing functional texts in which one among others is descriptive text. Semi (1990: 42), states that the descriptive text aims to give details about an object so that it can affect the imagination of the readers or listeners as if they hear, see, feel or experience the object directly. Particularly in written text, the aspect of writing competence in this text is taught in a simple form to achieve the communicative competence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">To support &nbsp;&nbsp;environmentally-focused</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">English learning activities, the descriptive texts in</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">the English subject syllabus based on the 2013 curriculum provides an opportunity for the teacher to be creative in developing the materials in accordance with the conditions of society and accommodate local advantages. It is considered that there is a close relationship between the learner and his environment which linguistically makes it a special study. Lier (2004: 4) suggests that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">“Ecological Linguistics (EL) focuses on language as relations between people and the world, and on the language learning as ways of relating more effectively to people and the world. The environment includes all physical, social and symbolic affordances that provide ground for activities”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Language learning and language use cannot be clearly distinguished from one another and both form part of activity and interaction. As Fill (2001:2) in Rambut </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font6"> (2015:41) states that Lingual signs that describe the environment in which people live are interacting, interrelated, and interdependent. Naturally, children grow and live in their cultural wisdom, so it is appropriate to relate the content of their writing with their environment. The learners learn English in order to interact with their surroundings. Not paying good attention to the local culture will certainly affect the character of the learners and slowly but surely they will be uprooted from their culture. In principle, learning English is not learning about English but learning to do things that are useful for their lives using English (Attachment III Permendikbud no.58, 2014).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In order to let the learners get closer and not to be uprooted from their environment, the </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> should be implemented in teaching writing. In this research, </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> stands for ecology text that is a part of a discourse which involves environment as the content of the text. The environment chosen for this purpose is the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara`</span><span class="font6"> ‘ in writing descriptive text for the 7th graders of Christian Payeti Junior High School (SMP Kristen Payeti). The reason of</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">choosing it as the theme is that most of the students are native Sumbanese children and their lives are very close to the horse </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ʻnjaraʼ</span><span class="font6"> that becomes the icon and pride of Sumba island but unfortunately, the teaching materials used by the teachers in the class have not touched the theme of the horse ‘</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Based on this reason, the researcher is interested in identifying the improvement of the descriptive writing skill of the 7th graders of SMP Kristen Payeti after applying text-based approach using </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> with the theme of horse ‘</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njaraʼ</span><span class="font6">. The answer to this problem are analyzed and presented quantitavely and qualitatively.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6">The approach applied in this research is mixed methods which is an approach that combines or associates both qualitative and quantitative forms. In this research, the data were collected concurrently. Both quantitative and qualitative data were gathered at the same time and the implementation was simultaneous. It uses the concurrent em</span><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;">bedded design as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">qual</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">QUAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of findings</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Capitalization indicates a weight or priority on the quantitative data, analysis, and interpretation in the study. In this case, the qualitative method is embedded, or nested, within the quantitative method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The location of this research is at SMP Kristen Payeti, East Sumba and the subjects are the 7<sup>th</sup> graders that consist of 32 learners in experimental group. The methods used for data collection were observation and tests in the form of pretest and posttest. The Quantitative and qualitative data obtained from the activities of writing English descriptive text with the theme of</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">horse ‘</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">’ were analyzed using ESL Composition Profile by Jacobs et al and ecolinguistics perspective.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Theory</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Ecotext</span><span class="font6"> stands for ecology text. It consists of two terms </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecology</span><span class="font6"> and </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">text</span><span class="font6">. Lier (2004:3) states that originally, ecology was the study and management of the environment (ecosphere, or biosphere) or specific ecosystem; it is also the study of movement, process, and action (p11), while text is the verbal record of a communicative act, (Brown and Yule, 1983). Thus, </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> is a text that consists of the verbal record of the relationship in communicative act between the learners and their environment through language by movement, process, and action.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">There are two main theories used to analyze the data collected. Those are ESL Composition Profile proposed by Jacobs et al (1981:236-237) and ecolinguistics perspective proposed by Lier (2004:4-8) as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Table of ESL Composition Profile (Jacobs et al, 1981: 236-237)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">Analysis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">Maximal Scores</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">Content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">30</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">Organization</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">Vocabulary</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">Language use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">25</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">Mechanic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font6">5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font6">Total Scores</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font6">100</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font6">Lier (2004:4-8) presents 10 characteristics of language learning in the following ecolinguistic perspectives. For the need of this research, the researcher took 6 of those 10 characteristics as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Relations</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Ecological linguistics (EL) focuses on language as relations between people and the world‚ and on language learning as ways of</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">relating more effectively to people and the world. The relation in language learning is the relationship between language, learning, activity, and curriculum.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">EL regards context as not just something that surrounds language‚ but that in fact defines language‚ while at the same time being defined by it. A common piece of advice in research is “to take the context into account.” In ecology‚ context is the heart of the matter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emergence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">In language‚ grammar emerges from lexis (Bates &amp;&nbsp;Goodman‚ 1999)‚ symbols emerge from tools (Vygotsky‚ 1978)‚ and learning emerges from participation (Lave &amp;&nbsp;Wenger‚ 1991). Language proficiency emerges from all these transformations.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Quality</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">EL makes the notion of quality a central construct to be investigated. A valid ecological aim of education is to harmonize quality and standards.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Variability</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Equal treatment is surely a doubtful pedagogical practice. There are many differences among learners that are relevant to their educational opportunities in general‚ and their classroom learning opportunities in particular. A good teacher understands the learners‚ and this means taking the differences into account.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Ecological linguistics studies language and language learning as areas of activity. We visualize a community of practice in which learners go about the business of learning by carrying out activities of various kinds‚ working together‚ side by side‚ or on their own. In this ecosystem‚ learners are autonomous‚ i.e.‚ they are allowed to define the meaning of their own acts within their social context (Shotter 1984‚ p. 147‚ cited in Oyama‚ 2000‚ p. 189).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The quantitative data analysis of the pretest and posttest</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Before and after applying text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse ' </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara'</span><span class="font6">, the researcher gave pretest and posttest to the learners in the form of writing descriptive text based on the topic and image taught to 7th graders of SMP Kristen Payeti. The following table presents the pretest and post test results</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">A. Table of the result of the learners` pre-test</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Num ber</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Learne rs`</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Names</span></p></td><td colspan="5" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Score</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">B</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">C</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">D</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">E</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">62</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">67</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">46</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">44</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">60</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">56</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">63</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">49</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">48</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">71</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">43</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">77</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">66</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">71</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">49</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">76</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">66</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">66</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">77</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">59</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">78</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">81</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">56</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">51</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">44</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">64</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">E 32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">40</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Total Achievem</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">627</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">419</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">396</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">446</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">96</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">1984</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Mean</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Achievement</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">19.59</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">13.09</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">12.38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">13.94</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">3.00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">62.00</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Achievement (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">65.31%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">65.46%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">61.87%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">55.75%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">60.00%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">62.00%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Maximum</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Achievement</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">960</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">640</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">640</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">800</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">160</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">3200</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Maximum Rate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">100</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font6">Descriptor: A. Content B. Organization C.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Vocabulary D. Language Use E. Mechanic</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">B. Table of the result of the learners` post-test</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Num ber</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Learne rs`</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Names</span></p></td><td colspan="4" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Score</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">B</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">C</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">D</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">E</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">66</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">73</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">82</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">82</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">82</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">69</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">74</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">81</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">88</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">80</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">94</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">94</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">73</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">93</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">71</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">92</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">82</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">93</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">82</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">76</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">88</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">73</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">67</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">76</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">87</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">E 32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">72</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Total Achievem</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">753</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">511</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">506</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">610</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">140</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">2520</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Mean</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Achievement</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">23.53</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15.97</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">15.81</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">19.06</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">4.38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">78.69</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Achievement (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">78.48%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">79.53%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">79.06%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">76.25%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">87.50%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">78.69%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Maximum</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Achievement</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">960</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">640</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">640</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">800</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">160</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3200</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Maximum Rate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">100</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font6">Descriptor: A. Content B. Organization C.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Vocabulary D. Language Use E. Mechanic</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Based on table A and B, from the pretest results presented, the aspect of the organization occupied the highest percentage of achievement, that is 65.46% and the lowest aspect is language use, that is 55.75%, while from the result of the posttest given, the aspect of mechanic occupies the highest percentage of achievement, that is 87.50% and the lowest aspect is language usage, that is 76.25%. There are significant increases in the five aspects after the treatment. The content increases by 13.13%, the organization increases by 14.07%, the vocabulary increases by 17.19%, the language use increases by 20.50%, and the mechanic increases by 27.50%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The average of the total achievement scores of the learners is 62 in pretest, while in posttest it reaches 78.68, meaning that there is a 16.69 point increase after treatment. The average of achievement in pretest is still under the minimum completion criteria `KKM`, that is 70. Individually, there are only 10 (ten) students who reach the KKM with the highest score of 81 which is achieved by the learner number E25 and the lowest score of 40 is achieved by the learner number E32 in attendance list, whereas the average of achievement in posttest has exceeded the minimum completion criteria (KKM) of English subjects in SMP Kristen Payeti, that is 78.68. Individually, only 3 of 32 learners have not reached KKM with the lowest score of 66 which is achieved by the learner number E1 and the highest score of 94 is achieved by the learners number E14 and E15 in attendance list.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">If it is sorted according to the percentage of achievement of each aspect from the highest to the lowest, then the ability of the learners in writing descriptive text themed Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` has changed into the rank as follows. The mechanical aspect is in the first position, followed by the organization in second position, vocabulary in the third, the content in the fourth and last order is language use, while in pretest, the aspect of organization is in the first position, followed by the content in the second position, vocabulary in the third,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">mechanic in the fourth stage and the last is language use. Quantitatively, the number of the learners that are declared having the ability to compose descriptive text before the treatment are 10 students (31.25%), whereas after the treatment, the number changes into 29 students (90.63%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Qualitative data analysis towards the observation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">During the application of text-based approach using </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` mainly Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">`, the observation towards the implementation of the teaching and learning process in the classroom was made. There are a number of steps for learning activities (introduction, main activities, and the closing) and the assessment. These activities were analyzed using an </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecolinguistic</span><span class="font6"> perspective especially through the following aspects.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Relations</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">The relation in language learning is the relationship between language, learning, activity, and curriculum (Lier, 2004: 4). Regarding with this research, the curriculum of English subjects should be translated into language learning through activities appropriate to the curriculum. In the English subject syllabus of junior high school based on the 2013 curriculum, it is stated that the text is studied not as the ultimate goal, but as a tool for performing various activities in real life. The use of texts also aims to develop an attitude of appreciating and living up to social values in interacting effectively with social and natural environment within the reach of the learners` interaction and existence. The implementation of the text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` has accommodated the mandate of the 2013 curriculum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The relation between the learners and their environment has caused to be active in learning because the ecotext-themed Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` that has been</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">established by the researcher and the learners as being very familiar and close to their daily lives. They enthusiastically responded to questions about material relating to the topic. They shared their knowledge and wrote about the topic of the Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` because they had experience related to the topic. Jayantini </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font6"> (2018:25) in the introduction of their journal declares that language can be a means of building communication by transferring information from one language to another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">In ecology, context is the heart of the matter. Context is not just something that surrounds the language, but that, in fact, defines the language, while at the same time being defined by it (Lier 2004:5). A language teaching, including teaching English should focus on improving the competence of the learners in order to be able to use the language in achieving communication goals in various contexts, both oral and written. One approach that focuses on improving the competence of the learners to use the language they learn in various communication objectives is text-based approach (KEMDIKBUD 2016:1). The implementation of the text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` has addressed the improvement of the learners` ability to write descriptive text. The context of local excellence chosen has a meaningful value to the learners to recognize and understand the texts taught and relate them to their daily lives. The context of learning to write English does not mean that the learners have to write something about the environment where the language was born but to lead them to fulfilling the content of English syllabus that is English needs to be learned so that it can be functioned for the learners` everyday lives in various texts. In line with that, in language teaching, ELT creates situations in which the learners use their new language instead of just learning about it, Norland &amp;&nbsp;Pruett-Said (2006: 25)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emergence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">EL regards language learning not as gradual, linear acquisition, but as emergence. In language, grammar emerges from lexis (Bates &amp;&nbsp;Goodman, 1999), symbols emerge from tools (Vygotsky, 1978), and learning emerges from participation (Lave &amp;&nbsp;Wenger, 1991). Language proficiency emerges from all these transformations (Lier 2004:5). The implementation of the text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` improves the learning motivation, competence, and performance of the learners in writing descriptive text. The increases happen because the learners participate in observing the topic of descriptive text that are taught by reading the material given by the researcher, getting knowledge from friends or others in the environment, and seeing directly the object being told, asking about information that is not understood from what is observed or questions to get additional information about what is observed, then analyzing and associating/processing the information that has been collected both limited from the results of collecting activities and the results of observing activities to find the structure and characteristics of the language descriptive text being taught, discussing it to reason logical and systematic thinking by making descriptive text in small groups, editing the construction of descriptive text made on the board, and communicating individually by writing descriptive text on known topics from the draft to the end.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Quality</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">A valid ecological aim of education is to harmonize quality and standards of educational experience (Lier 2004:5). In this study, the standard set is that the learners are able to write descriptive text in English which is marked by achieving minimum completion criteria (KKM). But the question raised on the quality of the content, whether writing about animals outside the island of Sumba is considered more qualified, while the learners were born and live in East Sumba. It should be appropriate that they know</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">and understand their neighborhood well. This is in line with the statement in the syllabus of junior high school English subjects, that is the text is a tool to perform various activities in real life; the text is also aimed at developing an attitude of appreciating and living up to social values and interacting effectively with the social and natural environment in the learners` social range and existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The implementation of the text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` is judged to have a value that is equal to the standard set in the syllabus. Learners learn English but they are not uprooted from the environment. The benefits of writing a descriptive English text mainly themed Sumba racing horse </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">`njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` are not only to improve the competence of the learners in communicating through writing but also improving their understanding of the local excellence in their environment as a way to feel proud, which then leads to the conservation and promotion of the region of East Sumba.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Variability</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Equal treatment is surely a doubtful pedagogical practice. There are many differences among learners that are relevant to their educational opportunities in general‚ and their classroom learning opportunities in particular. A good teacher understands the learners and this means taking the differences into account (Lier 2004:7). The implementation of the text-based approach using ecotext with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` is a manifestation of understanding of the different backgrounds of the learners. SMP Kristen Payeti is a school located in Waingapu city, but most of the learners are East Sumbanese children. Doing different treatment by teaching the learners the topic of Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` is suitable to the needs of the learners. It is not wise if the learning materials published by publishers on the island of Java is directly implemented to the learners. They are treated equally with the learners in the island of Java. The learners in Sumba do not recognize</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">well the lives of animals such as lions, tigers, rhinoceros, giraffes, elephants, and others. They know more about horses in East Sumba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The adjustment to the needs of learners in writing descriptive text with animal-themed has improved their writing skill as it was indicated by the results of the quantitative and qualitative analysis of the learners posttest. The qualitative statements of the learners in the questionnaire also show a change in skill and motivation in writing descriptive text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">6. Activity</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Ecological linguistics studies language and language learning as areas of activity. We visualize a community of learning by carrying out activities of various kinds, working together, side by side, or on their own. In this ecosystem, learners are autonomous, i.e., they are allowed to define the meaning of their own acts within their social context (Shotter 1984, p. 147, cited in Oyama, 2000, &nbsp;p.189). The result of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">observations shows that the implementation of the text-based approach using </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">ecotext</span><span class="font6"> with the theme of horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span><span class="font6">` provides a wide area of activity for the learners to cooperate in groups and work independently. In the stage of building knowledge of the text, the learners shared information with teacher and other learners about the topic &nbsp;of Sumba racing horse &nbsp;`</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">palapangu</span><span class="font6">`. In the modeling stage of the text, the learners paid attention to the descriptive text model on the topic that had been understood then analyzed and associated/processed the information that had been collected both limited from the results of collecting activities and the results of observing activities to find the structure and the language characteristics of descriptive discourse taught in groups. At the joint construction of the text, learners discussed about descriptive discourse with the topic of Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` which had been mastered to reason logical and systematic thinking process by making descriptive text in small group about the topic starting from making prewriting, drafting, revising and editing and</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">presenting. At the independent construction of the text stage, the learners individually wrote descriptive texts with the topic of Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu</span><span class="font6">` which had been already known from the draft to the final result.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In this learning activity, the learners were no longer passive and received all material from the teacher, but became active learners. They poured their ideas freely because the topic set together was a very well-known thing, but had not been documented yet. The researcher functioned as a facilitator.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>THE CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6">The competence, the performance, and the interest of the 7th Graders of SMP Kristen Payeti, East Sumba in writing descriptive text in English became higher after applying Text-Based Approach using Ecotext with the theme of horse mainly Sumba racing horse `</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">njara palapangu` </span><span class="font6">because the learners were learning and getting closer to their environment. They did not only learn to know about English but also learned to do things useful to their lives in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The implementation of Text-Based Approach using Ecotext to improve Descriptive Writing Skill of the 7th Graders of SMP Kristen Payeti, East Sumba significantly improved their writing skill. After the treatment, the scores increased by 16.69 % (from 62.00% in pretest to 78.69% in posttest) and there were only 3 of 32 learners that could not reach KKM, whereas before the treatment 22 students failed. The highest score before the treatment was 81 and after the treatment it was 94. It has also suit the ecolinguistic perspective mainly relation, context, emergence, quality, variability, and activity. Overall, this research has successfully provided discourse therapy. It brings impact on improving the quality of language learning, cultural preservation, and promotion of regional culture and the learners interflow with the environment or the sake of diversity in the real world, and love the environment with its diversity, nature and culture which feature the plurality in Indonesia.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6">Aryanto, Sugeng. 2009. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">A Guide to Write Descriptive Texts</span><span class="font6">. Pakar Raya. Bandung</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Brandvik, Mary Lou &amp;&nbsp;McKnight, Katherine S. 2013. Buku Panduan Guru Bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">: Bebagai Teknik Siap Pakai &amp;&nbsp;Materi</span><span class="font6">. Penata Puri Media. Jakarta Barat</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Brown, H. Douglas, 2004. Language Assesment: </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Principle and Classroom Practices. </span><span class="font6">Longman ELT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Creswell, John W. 2009. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mix Methods Approaches.</span><span class="font6"> Third Edition. SAGE Publication, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Derni, Ammaria. 2008. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The Ecolinguistic Paradigm: An Integrationist Trend in Language Study.</span><span class="font6"> The International</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Jayantini, I G. A. S. Rwa et al. 2018. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Naturalization and Adaptation Taking Place in the Translation of Medical Texts from English into Indonesian</span><span class="font6">. e-Journal of Linguistics DOAJ Indexed (Since 15 Sep 2015) January2018 Vol.12 No.1 P: 25-36 DOI.10.24843/eJL.2018.v.12.i01.p.03 e-ISSN: &nbsp;2442-7586 p-ISSN: 2541-5514</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/38245/23201"><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article</span></a><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/38245/23201"><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;">/view/38245/23201</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font6">Journal of Language Society and Culture Editors: Thao Lê and Quynh Lê URL: </span><a href="http://www.educ.utas.edu.au/users/tle/JOURNA"><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.educ.utas.edu.au/users/tle/JOURNA</span></a><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font6">L/ ISSN 1327-774X</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Dimyati dan Mudjiono. 1999. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Belajar dan Pembelajaran</span><span class="font6">. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Fill, Alwin. 2001. Language and Ecology: e</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">colinguistics perspective for 2000 and beyond.</span><span class="font6"> UK: Cathline, The English Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Harmer, Jeremy, 2001. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The Practice of English Language Teaching</span><span class="font6">. Third Edition. Longman ELT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Hougen, Ann. 2008. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">First Step in Academic Writing</span><span class="font6">. &nbsp;&nbsp;Second Edition. Pearson</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Education, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Kementerian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 2016. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Silabus Mata Pelajaran Sekolah Menengah &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pertama/Madrasah</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Tsanawiyah (SMP/MTs) Mata Pelajaran Bahasa Inggris.</span><span class="font6"> Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Kementerian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 2014. Buku guru Bahasa Inggris: &nbsp;</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">“When</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">English Rings a Bell”.</span><span class="font6"> Pusat Kurikulum dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perbukuan, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balitbang,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Kemdikbud.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Lier, Leo Van. 2004. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning</span><span class="font6">: </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociocultural Perspective.</span><span class="font6"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kluwer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Academic</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Publishers. New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Warmadewi A. A. I. Manik. 2017. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Meningkatkan Kemampuan Menulis Report Text melalui Mind Mapping pada kelas XI IPA 7 di SMAN 8 Denpasar.</span><span class="font6"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistika,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">september 2017 p-ISSN: 0854-9613. Vol. 24. No. 47. 178.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Mbete, Aron Meko. 2012. Pentingnya Pendidikan Bahasa Berbasis Lingkungan: Bahan Awal Untuk Berbagi Gagasan. Pelatihan Keprofesian Para Guru se-Kabupaten-Kota Manokwari. Fakultas Sastra m.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Rambut, Kanisius et al. 2015. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Ecolinguistic Perspective of Kerapingan Culture</span><span class="font6">. eJournal of Linguistics, [S.l.], p. 40--53, oct. 2015. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: &lt;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/16129"><span class="font6">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/articl e/view/16129</span></a><span class="font6">&gt;. Date accessed: 09 july 2018.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Yule, George. 2010. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language</span><span class="font6">. Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">155</span></p>