---
layout: full_article
title: "Lexical Cohesion and Semantic Relation in the English Texts"
author: "Putu Dina Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i03.p28</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.3 Agustus 2018: 758-763</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Lexical Cohesion and Semantic Relation in the English Texts</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Putu Dina Pratiwi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:pratiwidina08@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[pratiwidina08@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">This study is entitled Lexical Cohesion and Semantic Relation in the English texts. The aims of this study are identifying the types of lexical cohesion and analyzing the semantic relation found in the texts. The d a t a w e r e t a ke n from five t ex ts with different genres. &nbsp;&nbsp;It contains aspects of life and consists of twelve pages. This study was library</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">research which applied the documentation method to collect the data. The data of this study were analyzed using the qualitative method. The theory applied in this study is cohesion in English that explains the types of cohesion into two; lexical cohesion and grammatical cohesion and analyzing the semantic relation found in the text. The result of the analysis shows a lot of lexical cohesions found in the data such as reiteration. Reiteration consists of repetition, synonym and superordinate. Collocation can be explained by means of; Antonym, the same ordered series, and certain lexical sets. Semantic relation between lexical items in the text that makes the text cohesive was also found in this study</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Lexical cohesion, Semantic relation, Text, Texture.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini berjudul Hubungan Leksikal dan Semantik dalam teks bahasa Inggris. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi jenis kohesi leksikal dan menganalisis hubungan semantik yang ditemukan dalam teks. Data diambil dari lima teks yang memiliki genre yang berbeda. Ini berisi aspek kehidupan yang terdiri dari dua belas halaman. Penelitian ini merupakan penelitian kepustakaan yang menerapkan metode dokumentasi untuk mengumpulkan data. Data penelitian ini dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Teori yang diterapkan dalam penelitian ini adalah kohesi dalam bahasa Inggris yang menjelaskan jenis kohesi menjadi dua; kohesi leksikal dan kohesi gramatikal dan menganalisis hubungan semantic yang ditemukan dalam teks.Hasil analisis yang dilakukan menunjukan banyak kohesi leksikal dalam data seperti pengulangan. Pengulangan terdiri dari pengulangan, sinonim dan superordinate. Kolokasi dapat dijelaskan dengan cara; Antonym, seri orde yang sama, dan rangkaian leksikal tertentu. Hubungan semantik antara item leksikal dalam teks yang membuat teks kohesif juga ditemukan dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Kohesi lexical, Hubungan semantic, Texture,Text</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In our life text is very important for us. A text is best regarded as a semantic unit, a unit not of form but of meaning. Text is used in linguistics to refer any passage, spoken or written, of language whatever length that does form of unified</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">whole as stated by Halliday and Hasan (1976:1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A text is related to the cohesiveness of the text itself. It is characterized by coherence as well as cohesion and these sets of linguistic resources are found in every language for linking one part of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">text to another. Coherence in linguistics is what makes a text semantically meaningful and cohesion is the grammatical and lexical relationship within a text or sentence. Cohesion is the links that hold a text together and give it meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday and Hasan (1976:5) mention that cohesion in text can be achieved through grammatical and lexical cohesions. Grammatical cohesion is a kind of cohesion expressed through relation on grammar which can be divided into four parts; they are reference, substitution, ellipsis, and conjunction. In addition, lexical cohesion is the cohesion expressed through relation on vocabulary which can be divided into two parts: reiteration and collocation. Thus grammatical and lexical cohesion support each other, both of them are parts of sentences and cannot be separated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The concept of lexical cohesion as one of cohesive devices within a text should be fully mastered especially when interpreting the meaning of a lexeme to show how the sentences are related in form to make the text coherence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cohesion is related to the semantic tie within text whereby a tie is made when there is some dependent link between items that combine to create meaning. Cohesion is semantic relation between meanings. The relation is between a word and an expression or phrase and it is realized through lexico-grammatical system. Some forms of cohesion can be realized through the grammar and other through the vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Furthermore, it is interesting in analyzing of the types of lexical cohesion and semantic relation in English texts with five different fields since to understand what words often happen and also there are a lot of lexical cohesions</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and semantic relations occurring in the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background stated above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of lexical cohesion are found in the English texts?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What semantic &nbsp;relations &nbsp;are</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">found in the texts?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems of the study above the aims of study can be formulated as the first is identifying the types of lexical cohesion in the English texts and the second is analyzing the semantic relation found in the texts</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method of this study covers four points including data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data and method and technique of presenting data</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study was English texts taken from internet. The texts as the data source were five texts taken from several website. Those are text talking about Internet from (</span><a href="http://www.sanjran.wordpress.com"><span class="font2">www.sanjran.wordpress.com</span></a><span class="font2">), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Food</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">from &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(</span><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com"><span class="font2">www.preservearticles.com</span></a><span class="font2">),</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hospitality &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Industry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(</span><a href="http://www.essaysamples.blogspot.co.id"><span class="font2">www.essaysamples.blogspot.co.id</span></a><span class="font2">), Importance of Education from (</span><a href="http://www.wditorialfragua.com"><span class="font2">www.wditorialfragua.com</span></a><span class="font2">) and The Role of Culture in Promoting Architectural Identity,(</span><a href="http://www.researchgate.net"><span class="font2">www.researchgate.net</span></a><span class="font2">). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">texts in those websites were chosen as the data source because they contain a lot of variations of lexical items in the text that contain many aspects of the five field mentioned above.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected by library research method. This method was assisted by some techniques. The first step was downloading the English texts from the internet then reading them carefully in order to get a good understanding of the English texts. The next step was finding out and highlighting the texts that contain lexical cohesion having the meaning of reiteration and collocation. The reiteration can be divided into four classes: repetition, synonymy or near synonymy, superordinate and general word. The collocation can be explained by means of complementary, antonym, converseness, the same ordered series, unordered lexical sets, and certain lexical sets. Finally, identifying the relation between meaning (semantic relation) and the elements in the text and some other elements that ae crucial to the interpretation of it</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data in this study were analyzed using the descriptive qualitative method. Qualitative means that the data were described in detail based on the relevant theories of the topic discussion. There were some steps in analyzing the data in this study. First, the data were classified based on the theory of types of lexical cohesion proposed by Halliday and Hasan on their book entitled Cohesion in English (1976). The data were categorized into the elements of lexical cohesion such as; reiteration and collocation. The second is the data analysis was presented descriptively by showing the types of lexical cohesion and semantic relation in the text paragraph because the problems of this study need description of analysis in order to make the text understandable to the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of this study was presented descriptively by standard sentences and explanation to show types of lexical cohesion and semantic relation in the text. Therefore, in order to answer the problems in this study, the reporting the model of analysis is arranged based on two sub chapters which cover reiteration and collocation. Each sub chapter covers all aspects of each type. The second is data analysis of semantic relation in the text to show how the cohesive devices exist to create meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The basic theory applied in this study is the cohesion theory proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976) in their book entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2">. This theory is very closely related to this study because it is aimed to identify the types of lexical cohesion and analyze the semantic relation in the English texts. Cohesion is partly expressed through grammar and partly through vocabulary. Halliday and Hasan distinguishes the types of cohesion into two; grammatical cohesion and lexical cohesion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reiteration</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Reiteration is a form of lexical cohesion which involves the repetition of a lexical item at one end of the scale: the use of general word to refer back to a lexical item, the other scale; and a number of things in between the use of synonym, near synonym, super ordinate, or general word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the definition provided by oxford dictionary, the internet is an arrangement of connected </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">computers</span><span class="font2">, which lets the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">computer </span><span class="font2">users all over the globe exchange data. At the present time approximately 2.1 billion (33%)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">of the total population has accessibility to the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">internet</span><span class="font2">. The </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">internet </span><span class="font2">is an extraordinary entertainment and learning too that may be utilized in a number of m</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">o</span><span class="font2">des to increase the ability of a user to collect information.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/"><span class="font2">(https://sanjran.wordpress.com)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first data is constructed by three sentences that repeat the same words which are connected with each other. In the first sentence the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">computer</span><span class="font2"> is repeated twice. Meanwhile, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet</span><span class="font2"> is repeated in the second and third sentences. The lexical </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">computer</span><span class="font2"> in the first sentence is marked by the indefinite article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2"> and also in its second assistance also marked by the definite article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">computer </span><span class="font2">means an electronic machine that can store, organize and find information. While </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet</span><span class="font2"> means an international computer network connecting other networks. Those of words are related since internet can be used if there is a computer as a place to connection. Both of those words have the word class as a noun. Therefore, the three sentences are coherent through lexical cohesive device. This is indicated by the appearance of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">computer</span><span class="font2"> in the first sentence and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet</span><span class="font2"> in the second and third sentences</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonym</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You can </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">find </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">any type of information on any subject with the help of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">search </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">engines like yahoo and Google.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(https://sanjran.wordpress.com)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above is identical or has the same referent to each other. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">find</span><span class="font2"> is synonymous with the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">search</span><span class="font2">. Those words are different in their word class, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">find</span><span class="font2"> is a verb and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">search</span><span class="font2"> is a noun in the sentence analyzed. However, they are identical or have the same referent to each other. The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">find </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">search</span><span class="font2"> have the same meaning as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">an attempt to find especially by looking carefully for it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superordinate</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">human body </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">requires food in order to produce the forces which keep the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">heart </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beating, the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lungs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">breathing and the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">limbs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">moving. But the discovery of vitamins at the turn of the present century has 'rediscovered' the science of nutrition</span><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(http://www.preservearticles.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heart, lungs</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">limbs </span><span class="font2">in the text above collocate with one another and it can be classified as cohyponym. The reason is that they are included in the same superordinate term namely part of the human body. The word h</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">uman body</span><span class="font2"> is superordinate of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heart, lungs</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">limbs</span><span class="font2">. The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heart</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lungs</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">limbs</span><span class="font2"> are preceded with the definite article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2">. Both words belong to the same word class as nouns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collocation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Collocation is the term that uses all items in the texts that are semantically related, it is related to the idea or sense of meaning. The analysis of collocation can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Antonym</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Now it’s the responsibility of the parents, teacher and well-wishers of this world to educate their children to differentiate between the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">good </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bad</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. We must all work for the betterment of this world and make it a better place for ourselves and for our coming generations.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(https://sanjran.wordpress.com)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The text above the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">good </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bad</span><span class="font2"> in one sentence can be classified as antonym, because they have opposite meaning. Both of those words belong to the same word class as adjectives. The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">good</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bad</span><span class="font2"> are preceded with the definite article </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">good </span><span class="font2">means high quality or an acceptable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">While, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bad</span><span class="font2"> means unpleasant; full of problems</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The same ordered series</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">early</span><span class="font2"> name of internet was ARPANET. The idea grew and progressed to the Internet we have </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">today </span><span class="font2">nobody knows where it might lead us </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tomorrow</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.researchgate.net/"><span class="font2">(https://www.researchgate.net/</span></a><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data above is constructed by two sentences, the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">early, today</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tomorrow</span><span class="font2"> can be classified as collocation. It is a kind of the same ordered series and they are included as related items. Here the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">early, today</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tomorrow</span><span class="font2"> refer to the period of times. Both words belong to the same class as adverbs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Certain lexical</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Internet is</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;an &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;extraordinary</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">entertainment and learning too that may be utilized in a number of modes to increase the ability of a user to collect </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">information</span><span class="font2">. You can find any type of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">information</span><span class="font2"> on any subject with the help of the search engines like </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yahoo</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Google</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(https://sanjran.wordpress.com)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The text above consists of two sentences that are semantically related through lexical cohesive devices. It is related by the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet, information, yahoo</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">google</span><span class="font2">. Those words can be classified as collocation in which they are considered as certain lexical sets. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">internet</span><span class="font2"> is related to the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">information</span><span class="font2"> since internet gives the ability of user to collect information on any subject with the help of the search engines like yahoo and google. Therefore, the text is semantically related by the occurrence of such lexical pairs in the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semantic relation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">human body </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">requires food in order to produce the forces which keep the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">heart </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">beating, the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lungs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">breathing and the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">limbs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">moving. But the discovery of vitamins at the turn of the present century has 'rediscovered' the science of nutrition</span><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2">(http://www.preservearticles.com</span></a><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The text above consists of two sentences that express semantic relation to hold to each other. It can be seen the cohesive effect of the text formed by the items </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">human body</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heart</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lungs</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">limbs</span><span class="font2"> are classified in semantic terms since they have semantic relation to one and another. The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">human body</span><span class="font2"> are considered to be subordinate of the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heart</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lungs</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">limbs</span><span class="font2"> and they are parts of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">human body</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis in the preceding chapter, there are some conclusions can be drawn; they are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The types of lexical cohesion were classified into two forms: the first was reiteration which involved repetition, synonym and super ordinate. The second was collocation which can be divided into complementary, antonym, converseness, the same ordered series, unordered lexical sets, and certain lexical sets. Almost all of lexical items were dominated by repetition since many words were repeated in the text although other lexical items show the same meaning, opposite meaning or super ordinate. However, all lexical items support the cohesiveness of text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The semantic relation of lexical items could be found in the relation between the lexical items that had identity of reference. The coherence of the text helped cohesiveness in the text itself. The use of the lexical item like superordinate and collocation helps cohesiveness in the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hospitality Industry.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://essay-samples.blogspot.co.id/"><span class="font2">http://essay-samples.blogspot.co.id.</span></a><span class="font2"> (Accessed in November, 21<sup>th</sup> 2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim. &nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Importance &nbsp;of Education</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.editorialfragua.com/essay-sample-on-importance-of-education"><span class="font2">http://www.editorialfragua.com</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="http://www.editorialfragua.com/essay-sample-on-importance-of-education"><span class="font2">(Ac</span></a><span class="font2">cessed in November, 21th2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Atul Joshi. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Food.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2">http://www.preservearticles.com</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="http://www.preservearticles.com/"><span class="font2">(A</span></a><span class="font2">ccessed in November, 21th 2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 1976</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman group Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sanjran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gichki. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Internet</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/essay-on-internet/"><span class="font2">https://sanjran.wordpress.com/essay-on-</span></a><span class="font2"></span><a href="https://sanjran.wordpress.com/essay-on-internet/"><span class="font2">internet/. </span></a><span class="font2">(Accessed in November, 21th 2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">763</span></p>