---
layout: full_article
title: "Women’s Language in the Movie Script of The Perks of being a Wallflower"
author: "Nunung Kurniaty"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p37 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.2 Mei 2018: 542-548</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Women’s Language in the Movie Script of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Perks of being a Wallflower</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Nunung Kurniaty</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University </span><span class="font1">[</span><a href="mailto:nunungkurniaty65@gmail.com"><span class="font1">nunungkurniaty65@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study entitled Women’s Languange in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">. This study is aimed at identifying the language features applied by women and finding out the functions of the language in the movie script.The theories applied in this study were the theory of women’s language proposed by lakoff (1975). Lakoff states that women’s speech was characterized by language features such as: the use hedges and fillers, tag question, rising or question intonation, empty adjective, precise color, intensifier, hypercorrect grammar, super polite form, the avoidance strong swear word, and emphatic stress. This study used the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">as the data source. The movie script was choosen as the data in this study because it contained women’s language. The collected data were selected and put into categories of women’s language features and their functions which were descriptively analyzed based on the theory applied.The finding of analysis shows that the women’s language features found in this movie script include the use lexical hedges, tag question, rising or question intonation, empty adjective, intensifier, hypercorrect grammar, super polite form, and the avoidance strong swear word. Morever, the findings also show that the function of the women’s language features show the speaker’s strengthened assertion, the speaker’s admiration for something, and to emphasize the speaker’s judgment of something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: sociolinguistics, women’s language, women’s language features and functions.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Women’s Language In The Movie Script Of The Perks Of Being a Wallflower”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan dan juga menemukan fungsi dari masing-masing fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori bahasa perempuan oleh Lakoff (1975). Data diperoleh dari naskah film “The Perks Of Being a Wallflower”. Data yang terkumpul kemudian dianalisis secara deskriptif dengan menerapkan teori Lakoff (1975). Hasil analisis data menunjukkan bahwa ditemukan fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan dalan naskah film ini, yakni: lexical hedges, tag question, rising or question intonation, empty adjective, intensifier, hypercorrect grammar, super polite form, and the avoidance strong swear word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: sosiolinguistik, bahasa perempuan, fitur bahasa perempuan dan fungsinya.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language can be defined as a tool for communication. The existence of language takes an important role in society because by language people can communicate with one another and maintain relationship in social life. People interact in society through language conversation. According to Manser (2006), he divided the types of language in conversation itself into two groups. The first is Informal Language, it is defined as the language of ordinary or casual conversation that is a conversation between people who know one another and feel relatively. The second is Formal Language which is defined as the language official conversation that language agrees with the rules. The conversation feels relatively constrained and with best behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sociolinguistics explains how people speak differently in different social contexts.Men or women are the person who communicates each other. They do not speak in the same way. The differences of their conversations are in the content categories. When women talk to women, they usually talk about their feelings, their relationship and families. On the other hand, when men talk to men, they talk about sports, cars, and doing things. This study would analyze the features and their functions as represented by the women’s characters in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">.The movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2"> was chosen since this movie script could show the phenomenon of the features women’s language more completely to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems of this study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of women’s language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">features are used in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">women’s language features in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;Aims off the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are related to the problems proposed above, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the women’slanguage</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">features used in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the functions of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">women’s language features used in the movie script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a Wallflower</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section, there are four points of discussion covered including data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, the last is method and technique of presenting the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from the observation script of the movie “The Perks of Being a Wallflower”. The original script of the movie has been published in the internet. The script contains many conversations between women’s and men’s characters, and also women’s and women’s characters but</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">this study only analyzes women’s language in the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from the movie script of “The Perks of Being a Wallflower” by using documentation method. There weresome steps taken in collecting data. First, reading the script of the movie thoroughly to find out the sentence which could be conseidered as women’s language features and their function. Then note taking of the data and ordering it into the list.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;collected &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">wereanalyzedusing the qualitative method. </span><span class="font1">Based on the method and technique of collecting data above, after classifying the data based on the characteristic of women’s language, the data were analyzed descriptively to find out the language features applied by the women and analyzed their functions using the theory proposed by Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of presenting result of analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were analyzed by qualitative method, which means that the data were described or explained by words. Analyzing the data based on women’s language features and their functions proposed by Lakoff (1975). The result of the analysis was presented descriptively by showing the types of women’s language features and their functions in the sentence of the conversation, because the problem of this study needs description of analysis in order to make the utterance understandable for the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Of Women’s Language Features And Functions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The language features found in this movie script were the use of lexical hedges, the use of tag question, the use of rising intonation, the use of empty adjective, the use of intensifier, the use of hypercorrect grammar, the use of super polite form, and the use of avoidance strong swear words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.1 . Lexical Hedges</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff (1975:54) states hedges is one features that convey the sense the speaker is uncertain about what he (or she) is saying, or cannot vouch for the accuracy of the statement, such as ‘well’, ‘you know’, ‘so fourth’. The functions to mitigate the possible unfriendliness or unkindness of a statement used for the sake of politeness and to show speaker’s uncertainty about what she is saying, or cannot vouch for the accuracy of the statement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary &nbsp;Elizabeth:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie... &nbsp;have you</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">heard of the Sadie Hawkins dance?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The one where the girl</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">asks the guy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary Elizabeth:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Well</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">obviously, it's completely stupid and sexist. It's like, &quot;Hey, thanks for the crumb.&quot; And normally, I'd just blowit off because school dances suck torture. But, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">you know</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, it's my last year, and... would you maybe want to go with me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You want to go with me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary Elizabeth:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I'm sick of macho guys. And you looked really cute in your costume. So, what do you say?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The women character, Mary Elizabeth used </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance. She used the hedges </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font2"> to express that her statement cannot vouch for the accuracy. Mary Elizabeth does not like Sadie Hawkins dance, such as, in Mary</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Elizabeth’s utterance that she thinks that the Sadie Hawkins dance is stupid and sexist, Lexical hegdes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you know</span><span class="font2"> is also used by Mary Elizabeth in this conversation. She used </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you know</span><span class="font2"> to show that she is uncertain about what she talked about.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Here it could be concluded that the function of hedges </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you know</span><span class="font2"> in the conversation was to show the speaker’s uncertainty about what she is saying, or cannot vouch for the accuracy of the statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tag Question</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tag question is a grammatical structure in which a declarative statement or an imperative is turned into a question by adding an interrogative fragment (the&quot;tag&quot;) to request confirmation or disconfirmation of the statement from theaddressee. The functions are to give the addressee leeway, not forcing him to goalong with the speaker, make ‘small talk’, trying to elicit conversation from theaddressee, ask one’s opinion in polite way in discussing personal feeling, avoidasserting herself in strong way, thereby to avoid coming in the conflict with theaddressee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That's sure a nice fire.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary Elizabeth: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah. After I'm done being a lobbyist, Iwant to move to a house like this in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">CapeCod. That sounds nice, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">doesn't it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doesn’t it</span><span class="font2"> used by Mary Elizabeth above is used to show her lack confidence. It seems that the speaker has not convinced by what she said. She used tag question since she was not sure whether Charlie like it or not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doesn’t it</span><span class="font2"> in the conversation above is used to make a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">small talk or try to elicit conversation from the addressee. Women usually exploit tag question in order to keep conversation going.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rising Intonation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Rising intonation is how people talk or ask something with a higher voice at the end of the sentence.The function of rising or question intonations is used when the speaker is seeking for confirmation, though at the same time speaker may be the only one who has the requisite information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Candace's &nbsp;&nbsp;Friend:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Candace... &nbsp;&nbsp;your</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">brother's on the phone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Candace casually picks up the phone.) </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Candace:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hello.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hey, Candace. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Candace:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sam and Patrick left, and um, I just can't stop thinking something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Candace:</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">What?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Candace, I killed Aunt Helen, didn't I?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">She died getting my birthday present, so I guess I killed her, right?I've tried to stop thinking that, but I can't. She keeps driving away and dying over and over.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation, between Candace and Charlie is on the phone. Candace knows that there was something happen to Charlie. The rising intonation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“what?”</span><span class="font2"> was very useful to make him respond the question immediately. The intonation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“what?”</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance also seems that she was worry about her brother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The rising or question intonations is used when the speaker is seeking for confirmation, Therefore, the rising intonation in the conversation above used by the speakerto seek confirmation whether there was something happening to addressee.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Empty Adjective</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Empty adjective is used to the express approbation in terms of one’s ownpersonal reaction, rather than by gauging the likely general reaction. The function is to show the speaker’s approbation or admiration for something in her own way.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Alice:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">It's </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">gorgeous</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, Craig. What did you use?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Craig:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Color film, but black and white paper forthe printing. My professor gave me an&quot;A,&quot; but for the wrong reasons. Most ofthem are idiots. You'll see what I meanwhen you get to college. How were yourSAT's by the way?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Alice:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1150. I think I'll get into NYU. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Craig:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah, I hope so.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation, Alice used the empty adjectives </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“gorgeous”</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance to show that she likes the black and white photo of naked Sam back on the wall of Craig’s loft apartment.She used the empty adjectives in order to indicate the approbation for something but it is only used to convey the emotional reaction rather than to give specific information.The use of empty the adjective </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gorgeous</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance is to express her admiration for Craig’s photo.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intensifier</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Intensifier is the emphasis on the words spoken by the speaker. The function is to strengthen an assertion shown through women’s feeling about something as they do not know how strong the feeling is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mother:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You must be Mary Elizabeth. It's </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">so</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">good to meet you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary Elizabeth:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You, too, Mrs. Kelmeckis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Father :</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie tells me you're a Buddhist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlie’s mother used intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance to show her feeling to Mary Elizabeth. She was happy that she met Mary Elizabeth for the first time. Intensifier can be used to strengthen an assertion. It is also used to hedge on one’s feelings and to show strong emotions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In addition, the intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> functions to show that the speaker (Charlie’s mother) had a strong feeling on her assertion. The use of intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> showed Charlie’s Mother strong emotions that she was happy to meet Mary Elizabeth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hypercorrect Grammar</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hypercorrect grammar is standard grammar used by the speaker while they are speaking. It functions to show politeness and at the same time create a distance to the addressees.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sam:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That first night, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">I had grilled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">stickies. It was so good. You have to visit in the Fall. We'll have some. Okay?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Charlie:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Definitely.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Patrick:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sorry, &nbsp;Sam. Charlie has a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">breakdown scheduled for October.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used hypercorrect grammar </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I had grilled</span><span class="font2">. The sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I had grilled</span><span class="font2"> in Sam utterance was considered past perfect tense and the rule is: S+ had+ past participle. She used hypercorrect grammar in her utterance since she wanted to speak politely. This utterance called hypercorrect grammar since it contains sentence structure in the conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">So, the conversation could be seen that the function of the hypercorrect grammar is to show politeness and at the same</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">time to create a distance to the addressees.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superpolite Form</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Super polite form is uttered to make the listeners feel comfortable, and to hold on well the relationship. It is often suggested that politeness is developed by societies in order to reduce friction in personal interaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mother:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You must be Mary Elizabeth. It's so good to meet you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Mary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elizabeth:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;too,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Mrs.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kelmeckis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows the use of superpolite form </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mrs.</span><span class="font2"> by Mary Elizabeth in her utterance. The use of title </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mrs.</span><span class="font2"> before the addressee’s last name shows that she speaks in a polite way and creates a distance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mrs.</span><span class="font2">functions as the indicator that Mary Elizabeth speaks in a polite way and creates the distance to Mrs. Kelmeckis as Charlie’s mother. Hence, she must speak in polite way because she does not know well who Mrs. Kelmeckis and she does not have close relationship with Mrs. Kelmeckis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>5.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Avoidance of Strong Swear Words</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff (1975:10) states that women often avoide using the strong swear word or strong expletive (such damn, shit or one of many other words).The function of how strongly one allows oneself to feel about something so the strength of emotion conveyed in sentence corresponds to the strength of particle</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sam:</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Oh, my God</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> They're playing good music.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Patrick:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Holy shit. They are! They're playing good music!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sam &nbsp;:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Living room routine?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Patrick:</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Living room routine!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation, Sam use </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oh, my God</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance shows how she got surprised by the music. Sam was very happy so she runs to the center on the floor and she starts dancing. The most form of swear word form found in the data is the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">God</span><span class="font2"> used by the women characters in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of the words Oh</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, My God </span><span class="font2">spoken by Sam was to show how strongly she allowed herself to feel about something, so the strength of the emotion conveyed in a sentence corresponds to strength of the particle in her utterance; she showed how surprised she was.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The topic of discussion in this study was women’s language in term of women’s linguistic features and their functions.There are eight features of women language, as identified by Robin Lakoff (1975). They are lexical hedges, the use of tag question, the use of rising intonation, the use of empty adjective, the use of intensifier, the use of hypercorrect grammar, the use of super polite form, and the use of avoidance strong swear words. All of those features were found in the movie script entitled “The Perks of Being a Wallflower” and used by the some female characters in this movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Cbhosky, Stephen. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Perks of Being a &nbsp;Wallflower</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;Summit</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Entertainment. Available form: </span><a href="http://www.imsdb.com/scripts/Perksof-Being-a-Wallflower,-The.html"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.imsdb.com/scripts/Perk</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.imsdb.com/scripts/Perksof-Being-a-Wallflower,-The.html"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">s</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imsdb.com/scripts/Perksof-Being-a-Wallflower,-The.html"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">of-Being-a-Wallflower,-The.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, Robin. 1975. Language and Women’s Place. New York: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Manser, Martin H. 2006.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guide to Style: Essential Guide to The Basic of Writing Style</span><span class="font2">. Facts on File.Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pratiwi, Desak Putu Eka. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Women Language in Oprah Winfrey Talk &nbsp;&nbsp;Show</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar: FS Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rusady, Ni Made Yuliantari. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women Language in the movie “Pride and Prejudice”</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: FS Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">548</span></p>