---
layout: full_article
title: "POWER RELATION OF PUNGGAWA-SAWI ON FISHERMEN OF BAJO ETHNICS AT TIWORO ARCHIPELAGO, NORTH TIWORO DISTRICT, WEST MUNA REGENCY, SOUTH EAST SULAWESI"
author: "Akhmad Marhadi"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-40625 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-40625"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-40625"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">August 2018 Vol. 11, Number 3, Page 23-32</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">POWER RELATION OF PUNGGAWA-SAWI ON FISHERMEN OF BAJO ETHNICS AT TIWORO ARCHIPELAGO, NORTH TIWORO DISTRICT, WEST MUNA REGENCY, SOUTH EAST SULAWESI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Akhmad Marhadi<sup>1</sup>, I Ketut Ardhana2, I Nyoman Darma Putra<sup>3</sup>, Ni Luh Arjani<sup>4 1</sup>Faculty of Art Halu Oleo University, <sup>2 3 4</sup> Cultural Studies Program Faculty of Art Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">email: </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:ajie_np@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ajie_np@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2phejepsdrlipi@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>phejepsdrlipi@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:3idarmaputra@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>3</sup></span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">idarmaputra@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1"><sup>4</sup></span><a href="mailto:arjani_psw@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">arjani_psw@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After the coming of globalization flow and ideology of capitalism in Ner Order around 1970s and 1980s until reformation era in 1998 up to now, power relation of punggawa-sawi resulted in hegemony on the group of sawi that had the impact on economic imbalance in the life of Bajo ethnics. This research is a qualitative method. Next, this research used a qualitative method with technique of snowball according to the purpose and objective of research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Result of this research showed that in forming power relation and hegemony of the group of punggawa is done not only directly in recruiting sawi as the worker to collect sea product, but also do the power and hegemony through another punggawa, through capital restriction and restrain of trade. In addition, manipulating regulation of government, power relation and hegemony through trader outside and through security apparatus are also done in recruiting sawi with the purpose of pursuing economic profit. Ideology of capitalism and religiousity is the supporting factor of hegemony towards sawi to happen. In this case, power relation between punggawa and sawi has the implication on ideological aspect that also influences system of knowledge of Bajo ethnics. Besides, this thing also has the implication on economic aspect, namely inegality of incoming between punggawa with sawi, political aspect, namely the involvement of the group of punggawa in practical politic, and has the implication in practical poliytics and has the implicatin on the condition of social stratification in which the change on the system of socil stratification happens on the society of Bajo ethnics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: power relation, Punggawa-Sawi, Bajo ethnics, ideology, and capitalist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the light of economic aspect, societal life of Bajo ethnics at Tiworo Archipelago, North Tiworo District, West Muna Regency constitutes the relation of patron-client between the capital owner and worker that is usually called with the term of “punggawa-sawi”. In analyzing the power relation between punggawa and sawi during New Order in 1970s and 1980s and the coming of reformation era in 1998 up to now with globalization flow and capitalism that is increasingly strong did not make the change totally on the life of Bajo ethnics. One of which that is still inherent in economic life as their cultural heritage is the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">relationship of patron-client between capital owner/production leader and worker that is usually called by Bajo ethnics in South and Southeast Sulawesi with the term of punggawa-sawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word of punggawa is similirized with leader or boss. This term is used to describe the relationship in the broad scope between superior and subordinate that is accompanied with personal bonds. The term of sawi is the complement of punggawa that can be interpreted as the subordinate or the person having personal relationship with the superior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The relation between pungawa-sawi on fishermen community of Bajo ethnics at North Tiworo forms the bonds of patron-client. Initially, the relationship of punggawa and sawi in doing fish-catching and catching-product division ran in a balanced and fair manner between punggawa and sawi. But, the advent of capitalism flow causes the group of punggawa increasingly intensively builds the relations with other parties in doing management of sea product that, without being realized, arouse the power and hegemony to the group of sawi. This has the implication on economic condition of society of Bajo ethnics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The main question in this research how the forms of power relation of punggawa-sawi in the activity of fishermen of Bajo ethnics at Tiworo Archipelago, North Tiworo District, West Muna Regency are. This research aims at answering the general problems that happen on fishermen of Bajo ethnics at Tiworo Archipelago, North Tiworo District West Muna Regency related to the power relation of the group of punggawa and group of sawi. Whereas, the specific purpose of this research is to respond the problems in the problem formulation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research uses a power relation theory of Foucault to study the forms of power relation between the interest supporter namely punggawa (rural government and entrepreneur of sea product collector) and society of fishermen of sawi and influence of modernization towards ideology of group of punggawa and sawi. This research also employed a theory of capital of Bourdieu. This theory is used not only to see the form of power relation, but also to study the implication that happens in power relation of punggawa-sawi on fishermen of Bajo ethnics at North Tiworo District, West Muna Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The forms of the power relation of fishermen’s activities mentioned above are as follows. The form of working-relation also happens between small punggawa with his sawi. Small punggawa is the punggawa given capital by big punggawa to be managed with the purpose of enlarging his working-area. The task of small punggawa is recruiting the group of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">sawi or traditional small fishermen to work to punggawa. The direct recruitement of sawi that is done by small punggawa is the strategy done to create their own fishermen in their own region in collecting sea products like Tasipi Village, Bero Village, Tiga Village, and all villages at North Tiworo District. This is carried out not only to expand working-relation, but also to fulfill their production necessity including how the small punggawa as the mediator of big punggawa can become the relation and hegemonize the distribution areas of fishermen of sawi to be made the worker in collecting sea products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The target of small punggawa in doing the recruitement of sawi to do the activity of fish-catching is the group of small fishermen that works individually either they who use traditional boat by using sticking-machine or traditional boat by using oar or they who do not have catching-tools.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The way done by small punggawa is by giving additional capital loan for the fishermen of sawi who have had the business of catching previously according to their needs. Whereas, for sawi who begins their business for the first time is given capital loan in the form of tools and equipment of catching-tool and is given money loan to fulfill their daily life needs. The strategy of direct recruitement of sawi by giving capital and loan for daily life needs aims to be easier to monitor and control their performance so that it makes the power and hegemony of punggawa towards sawi to be increasingly strong. It is due to the life pattern of sawi himself that tends to be pragmatical and irregular in the management of finance because of their mindset that regards that sea has provided their life needs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The relation formed by big punggawa to expand his business network is by forming small punggawa as the mediator of big punggawa in building power relation and hegemony towards sawi. One of the criteria in lifting small punggawa is done by being chosen a sawi that has worked for a long time and has obtained the trust, loyality and still owns kinship bonds with big punggawa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is through the small punggawa that in turn recruites sawi to work to collect sea products either by using traditional boat or by using sticking-machine in all areas of North Tiworo District to fulfill the necessity of market. The way of big punggawa builds the connections in enlarging his business expansion by creating small punggawa as the mediator of big punggawa. The group of small punggawa spreads in every island that also constitutes the villages at North Tiworo District to facilitate the access of small punggawa and collect sea products from the fishermen (sawi). Through the small punggawa that has been created by big punggawa aims at strengthening the power and hegemony of punggawa towards sawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Working-relation that happens between punggawa and sawi is carried out by giving the trust to manage capital with the purpose of binding the group of sawi in order to keep working and obeying towards the command of punggawa that is helped by small punggawa. The group of big punggawa expands their working-relation and develops business with the purpose of dominating sea products so that they can fulfill their production needs. In actuating this strategy, big punggawa depends on the capability of the small punggawa as their mediator in every village that spreads at North Tiworo District. In choosing the person that is made as their working-partner, the group of big punggawa has their own requirement. This requirement is done to give the guarantee in order that the distributing of capital and loan to sawi can run well and make sure that the collecting of sea product can be dominated by big punggawa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This strategy is carried out in order that the cost is still in the control of big punggawa. The submission of authority in capital management and purchase cost determining towards catching-product of the fishermen of sawi is made use of by the group of small punggawa to do the purchase according to the cost established partially by the group of small punggawa, eventhough the cost does not exceed the standard of cost established by the group of big punggawa. This case becomes the space of the group of small punggawa to do the power and hegemony towards the group of sawi by means of giving capital according to the needs of sawi and on the aspect of product division and purchase are not greatly imbalanced and tend to lose the group of sawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Social bond between punggawa and sawi not only obtains the profit economically, but this relation in turn develops and is directed to reach a bigger political interest. Its purpose is to strengthen the existence of punggawa in the middle of Bajo ethnics by making use of social bond between punggawa and sawi for political interests with the hope of being capable of arranging and of actuating the aids given by both central government and local government to the group of fishermen of Bajo ethnics. Economic dependence of fishermen of sawi towards punggawa becomes moral bond with the obligations that must follow the will of punggawa in giving his political decision.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The capability of punggawa in controlling his member becomes special attention both executive and legislative government. Punggawa is in turn made as the connection of building communication with groups of fishermen that are controlled by the group of big punggawa. This condition opens the space in which power relation and hegemony paly in the midst of society of Bajo fishermen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Along with the socio-political development in the region, the group of punggawa in turn changes into the agent that guards governmental policy even becomes political connection in the midst of society of fishermen of Bajo ethnics at North Tiworo District. The group of punggawa plays a role not only as the capital owner in domination of economical assets, but begins entering in political fields. In addition to strengthening their existence in the society, the group of punggawa also protects and adds their economic assets through governmental policy both executive and legislative government. This progressively strengthens the power and hegemony of punggawa towards sawi by doing manipulation of governmental policy regulation both executive and legislative government.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The group of punggawa to optimalize performance of sawi in collecting sea products in order to be able to get big profit by means of interlacing relation and collaboration with traders outside whether they who are in Makassar, Bali, Surabaya, or Jakarta. The relation that is built through the traders outside of North Tiworo District is done in order that they obtain capital loan and make sure that the route of marketing of sea products can be overcome and can get bigger profit. The traders outside are also not reluctant to give the trust in the aid of capital for the group of punggawa to make them easier to obtain the supply of sea products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The relationship of power relation between big punggawa with trader of sea product collector from outside has had their each own route. The abovementioned trading-route may not be broken and if they break the rule that has been established will get sanction from the collectors of sea products from four cities in Indonesia. In addition, they as the capital supplier, it signifies that it has happened the power and hegemony of traders outside towards the role of big punggawa. Therefore, they cannot help but obliging to guard the relationship of fellow punggawa and do the power and hegemony towards sawi to work as well as possible for the survival and trust of their business from the sanction that they obtain whenever from traders outside.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Punggawa as the doer of business in the midst of society certainly always expects to conduct their safe and comfortable business and without any disturbance. Principally, punggawa requires the security guarantee in doing their business according to what is expected without any disturbance from another person or from certain societal groups as the consequence of business competition. For that reason, the group of punggawa entrusts safety and protection of their business through security apparatus. In this case, institution of police matter is the best institution in ascertaining the safety of their business.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">There is mutualistic relation in which punggawa gets the sense of safety in one hand, on the other hand, the group of punggawa can also give the fear towards sawi that tries to do the bad things or opposition towards punggawa. Based on this case, punggawa makes the security side as the tool to give the fear towards the group of sawi in order to guard and guarantee their obedience towards punggawa. The relationship of power relation and hegemony through security side also aims at guaranteeing the survival of fish-catching business and preventing conflict of inter fellow fishermen that depend his life form sea products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Besides, power and hegemony through security apparatus also aims at avoiding and acting on emphatically the fishermen from out of North Tiworo to conduct sea product catching in their area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CLOSING</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The implication of power relation of punggawa-sawi on the fishermen of Bajo ethnics at Tiworo Archipelago, North Tiworo District, West Muna Regency is as follows. Loyality and obedience of Bajo ethnics are keeping ritual and pamali in the form of prohibition and forbidding and are keeping the belief to the existence of magical creature of sea guardian. The prohibition that must be obeyed both sawi and his family member when the husband is going in the sea may not break pamali. Pamali is in the form of prohibition and forbidding that have been institutionalized in the self of every fishermen of Bajo ethnics so that it forms the action and paradigm of Bajo ethnics about surroundings. This implies on the action of balancing between human beings and papu (the God), between human and human, and between human and nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pamali that is in the form of prohibition and forbidding is made use of by punggawa to influence sawi in doing his activity during going in the sea. The belief towards the sea guardian is considered as a truth. As a result, it arouses the high faith, loyality, and obedience from sawi towards punggawa. It is through this ideology that in turn punggawa instills and strengthens the power of his hegemony to obtain legitimation from society of Bajo ethnics to persue his economic interest towards sawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The portrait of life of fishermen of Bajo ethnics at North Tiworo District initially was still simple. They have not used modern catching-tools yet. The boat that they use was still driven by human’s energy (manual) by using oar (busae), catching-tool used is also the work of fishermen themselves. Along with the time goes, the life of Bajo ethnics at North Tiworo</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">District begins being influenced by modernization, the coming of modernization results in the change of paradigm and knowledge of Bajo ethnics. The change of life pattern in the society of fishermen of Bajo ethnics appears on the using of means and traditional catching-tools that in turn becomes the using of means and modern catching-tools in the form of technological application of mini ship of pursein 5-10 GT with catching-tool of ring dragnet that is usually called with gae.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The using of modern technology in fish-catching has the implication on plentiness and unplentiness of their catching-product. This condition is not only resulted in by the capacity of exploring-power means and modern catching-tools employed, but is also caused by the shift from human’s energy (manual) to machine. In addition, it is also due to specific skill from sawi in operating the abovementioned means and catching-tools. Another implication is the change of social structure of fishermen. The fishermen of capital owner (money and production means) are categorized as punggawa, while the fishermen having capital of energy and skill of catching fish are called as worker or sawi. Besides, the change of relational pattern that happens becomes hierarchical but does not direct to exploitative thing in which with his skill of catching fish, a sawi is employed by punggawa. The using of means and modern catching-tools that are given by punggawa to sawi is managed as maximal as possible by punggawa as the media to dominate and hegemonize for the sake of obtaining profit as much as possible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Punggawa owns the strength of money and catching-tools. Having capital strength and fish-catching-tools make punggawa to have many loyal followers in this case the group of sawi. It is the reality that makes the candidates in the election both in the level of village like the election of village head and general election such as: legislative election, Regent election, Governor election, and President election are more interested in approaching punggawa than sawi. Punggawa can employ his influence (power) to organize and can make his sawi to be present to the Place of Vote-Taking for electing one of the candidates required by the punggawa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The existence of punggawa is considered by the fishermen of sawi as the person having the right in deciding the direction of political support for the fishermen of Bajo ethnics particularly for the group of sawi. The decision mentioned above has consequence if it is not followed. The real consequence on the denial of the abovementioned decision from punggawa is felt directly by sawi. Some of the punggawa get involved in political spaces as the effort of strengthening the power by becoming the part of political party organizer or</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">success team. Even, there are also some of them that have become the member of legislative by making use of his power towards their sawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After the coming of economical interest of the traders outside of North Tiworo District, it has the implication on the change of social stratification of society of Bajo ethnics. Initially, Bajo ethnics knew three layers in social stratification, namely Lolo Bajo, Sandro, and Sesehe, but currently becomes four social layers of society. The position of punggawa as the capital owner becomes the top position or first layer, the second layer is Lolo Bajo (the noblemen), the third layer is sandro (the shaman), and the fourth layer is sesehe that changes into sawi (the worker) occupies the last layer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Abdul Hafid. 2012. Kearifan Lokal Nelayan Bajo. Makassar. Pustaka Rekfleksi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">---------</span><span class="font1">2014. Pengetahuan Lokal Nelayan Bajo. Pustaka Refleksi. Makassar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Alias, 2012. Kearifan Lokal Orang Bajo dalam Pengelolaan Sumber Daya Laut. Tesis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Badan Pusat Statistik. 2015. Kabupaten Muna Dalam Angka 2015. Badan Pusat Statistik Kabupaten Muna Barat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">---------</span><span class="font1">2015. Kecamatan Tiworo Utara Dalam Angka Tahun 2015. Muna Barat : Badan Pusat Statistik Kabupaten Muna Barat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Baskara. 2016. Islam Bajo Agama Orang Laut (Banten: Javanica).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bourdieu, Pierre. 2005. The Social Structures of the Economy, Cambridge: Polity Pres.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">---------</span><span class="font1"> 1986, “The Forms of Capital”, terj. dari Bahasa Perancis oleh Richard Nice, dalam Richardson, J.E. (ed.), Handbook of Theory of Research for the Sociology of Education, New York: Greenword Press, hlm. 46-58.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foucault, Michel. 1983. Structuralism and Post-Structuralism. In The Essential Foucault. The New Press. New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">---------</span><span class="font1">, 2002. Power/knowledge Wacana Kuasa/Pengetahuan. (Terjemahan Yudi Santoso).Yogyakarta : Bentang Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Garna, Judistira K. 1999. Metode Penelitian Pendekatan Kualitatif. Bandung: CV Primaco Academia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gramsci, Antonio. 1976. Selections From Prison Notebooks. Newyork: International publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hamzah, Awaluddin. 2015. “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Fishing Technology Conversion, Differentiation, And Social Mobility of Fisherman in Lagasa Village of Muna Regency”</span><span class="font1">, Jurnal International Journal of Sustainable Tropical Agricultural Sciences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hanafi. Hussin, 2008. Diaspora Bajau Laut dan Pengekalan serta Penerusan Amalan Tradisi di Sabah”. Borneo Research Journal, No. 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Harris, Z. 1991. “Bajo, Suku Yang Tinggal Terapung di Perairan Timur Kendari”, Kendari. Sinar Harapan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kumbara, Dkk. 2016. Pergeseran Hubungan Siwa-Sisya (Patron Klien) Dalam Keberagaman Umat Hindu di Kota Denpasar. Denpasar laporan hiba grup riset Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lampe, Munsi dkk. 2010. Punggawa-Sawi Nelayan Bugis-Makassar dalam Analisis Relasi Internal Dan Eksternal, Jurnal masyarakat &amp;&nbsp;budaya, volume 17 no. 1 tahun 2015.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lapian, A.B. 1987. Orang Laut, Bajak Laut, Raja Laut : Sejarah Kawasan Laut Sulawesi Abad XIX, Disertasi, Universitas Gadjah Mada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maleong, Lexy J. 2003. Metode Penelitian Kualitatif. Bandung: PT Remaja rosda karya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pelras, Christian. 2009. Hubungan Patron-klien pada masyarakat Bugis dan Makassar di Sulawesi Selatan dalam Tol, Makassar. Ininnawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Saad S. 2009. Bajo berumah di laut nusantara. Jakarta. COREMAP 11.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sufirudin, 2016. Hubungan Patron-Klien di Antara Masyarakat Nelayan Desa Kangkunawe Kecamatan Maginti Kabupaten Muna Barat Provinsi Sulawesi Tenggara. Jurnal holistik, tahun IX no. 17a / Januari - Juni 2016.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suyuti, Nasruddin. 2011. Orang Bajo di Tengah Perubahan. Yogyakarta: Ombak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tahara, 2011. Politik Identitas Orang Bajo. Dalam:yuga, surya (ed.). Jagad Bahari Nusantara: Telaah Dinamika Pranata Sosial Terhadap Kearifan Lokal Masyarakat Pantai, Melestarikan Budaya Bahari Dalam Pembangunan Kebudayaan Dan Pariwisata. Jakarta: Kementerian kebudayaan dan Pariwisata.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">--------</span><span class="font1"> 2013. “Kebangkitan Identitas orang Bajo di Kepulauan Wakatobi”. Jakarta. Antropologi Indonesia Vol. 34 no. 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wianti Nur Isiyana. 2011. Kapitalisme Lokal Suku Bajo (Studi Kasus Nelayan Bajo Mola dan Mantigola, Kabupaten Wakatobi, Provinsi Sulawesi Tenggara Tesis magister, Sekolah pascasarjana institut pertanian Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wilson M.A. Therik. 2008. Nelayan Dalam Bayang Juragan: Potret Kehidupan Nelayan Tradisional Bajo di Tanjung Pasir, Pulau Rote, Nusa Tenggara Timur. Salatiga, Pusat Studi Kawasan Timur Indonesia (PSKTI) Universitas Kristen Satya Wacana (UKSW).</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zada Ua, Marsianus. 1996. Nelayan Bajo Lewoleba di Lembata Kab. Flores Timur Nusa Tenggara Timur (Suatu Tinjauan Antropologi Maritim). Yogyakarta:, Jurusan Antropologi, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Gadjah Mada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">32</span></p>