---
layout: full_article
title: "TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN THE WORLD CULTURAL HERITAGE AREA OF SUBAK JATILUWIH, TABANAN, BALI"
author: "I Gede Susila"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-36922 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-36922"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-36922"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">May 2018 Vol. 11, Number 2, Page 9-14</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN THE WORLD CULTURAL HERITAGE AREA OF SUBAK JATILUWIH, TABANAN, BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Gede Susila</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cultural Studies Program Faculty of Arts Universitas Udayana email: </span><a href="mailto:gedesusila15@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">gedesusila15@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Subak Jatiluwih in Tabanan Regency, Bali, has double status. On the one hand the Subak (water irrigation system) is a tourist attraction (destination), and on the other hand its status is as World Cultural Heritage (Warisan Budaya Dunia or WBD). Related to that matter, this paper describes two things: (1) the development of tourism facilities in Subak Jatiluwih area, and (2) the financial input in managing Jatiluwih tourist attraction and its distribution. This is a qualitative study. The data found is analyzed using qualitative data analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of study shows that, regarding the double status as stated above, it is precisely within the perceptions of local community about the status of Subak Jatiluwih as WBD are related to &quot;tourism brand&quot;. Therefore, the development of tourism facilities that violate the provisions of the law in the area of Subat Jatiluwih WBD was inevitable. On the rice fields in the subak, area parking lots of buses and restaurants have been built. Thus, there are some conversion of rice field into parking lots and restaurants in the area of the WBD. Specifically in relation to financial input in the management of DTW Jatiluwih, it turns out financial input reaches hundreds of millions of dollars even nearly 1 billion per month. The distribution of the results of the DTW (daerah tujuan wisata or tourist destination) management is conducted with the management of the parties based on justice that is tailored to the contribution and needs of each manager. This means that the greater the contribution and the needs of the parties involved in managing the DTW, the greater the share of the financial results it receives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: tourist attraction, world cultural heritage, construction of tourism facilities, parking area, restaurant.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Subak Jatiluwih in Tabanan regency, Bali has a double status. On the one hand, it is a tourist attraction (hereinafter called DTW or daerah tujuan wisata) and on the other hand a world cultural heritage (hereinafter referred to as WBD, Warisan Budaya Dunia). There are various parties involved in the management of Subak Jatiluwih as DTW: Local Government of Tabanan Regency, the village of Jatiluwih, Jatiluwih Customary (Traditional) Villages or</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">desa adat, Desa Adat Gunungsari, and Subak Jatiluwih. Jatiluwih Management Board shows financial input as a result of the DTW management reaches hundreds of millions even almost 1 billion rupiah per month.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Such financial inputs may stimulate or encourage the managers of DTW Jatiluwih to develop tourism facilities in the DTW area as well as the WBD area. If the stimulus or encouragement is responded by building tourism facilities in the area, then it can be a dilemmatic thing. That is, if in the area it is built tourism facilities, then there is a violation of the provisions on the management of WBD, that the WBD area should not be converted. Conversely, if it is not done, the tourism business in the area could experience a stagnation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In relation to the above explanation, this paper tries to give an idea of (1) the development of tourism facilities in Subak Jatiluwih area, and (2) financial input in the management of Jatiluwih DTW and its distribution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The method of this research is qualitative. Researchers conducted interviews, observation, and document study. The analysis is done through data reduction, data presentation, and conclusion. The technique of the presentation of the research results is descriptively done.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutama (2014) in his paper entitled &quot;Subak Jatiluwih after Two Years Established as World Cultural Heritage (2012-2014)&quot; describes the fact that occurred in the context of tourism development in the area of WBD Subak Jatiluwih. In his presentation it was stated that there is a mistake in the local community in perceiving the status of Subak Jatiluwih which is the area of the WBD. The erroneous thing in this case is that the local people perceive the status of Subak Jatiluwih in the WBD system as what he called &quot;tourism brand&quot;. Related to this matter, the management of DTW Jatiluwih stated that what is meant by DTW Jatuiluwih is rice field area which is Subak Jatiluwih area. Of course the misperception of WBD Subak Jatiluwih can be accompanied by actions contrary to the prevailing provisions in the context of WBD governance. If the mistake really does occur, of course it can be accompanied by wrong action.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Associated with the perception of the status of Subak Jatiluwih as WBD area it turns out that on existing paddy fields in WBD Subak Jatiluwih area has been built tourism facilities in the form of parking of buses and restaurants. In fact, this happens when it is known that there are regulations of UNESCO, the Decree of the Regent of Tabanan on Sawah Abadi, the Tabanan Regency Regulation on the Green Line (Jalur Hijau), which prohibit all of tourism development in the area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It seems that the violation of some of these regulations is not because the local people are unaware of the regulation, but because of their intense desire to develop a tourism facility at the site. Local people should be very aware that the location is prohibited to build, considering the location has been installed boards ban building on the green line.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ban board is in fact not too far from the parking lot and the restaurant which is in a single lane with the board (the green lane). Thus, it is clear that the construction of the parking lot and the restaurant is a violation of the law, but not sanctioned at all. Indeed, the development of this tourism facility is done in line with the development of the number of tourists visiting DTW Jatiluwih, so that the financial input in the management of the DTW has increased.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Associated with the management of DTW Jatiluwih there is a document regarding Cooperation Agreement between Tabanan Government with Jatiluwih Village, Jatiluwih Pakraman Village, Gunungsari Pakraman Village and Subak Jatiluwih. The cooperation agreement is essentially concerned with the Implementation and Management of Tourism in the Jatiluwih Tourism Attraction Area. In Article 3 of the Cooperation Agreement, it is stated that the distribution of the result of the management of tourist attraction shall be regulated with the following provisions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Operational management fee as high as 30% will be calculated from gross income minus insurance premium.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The cost of development and promotion of tourist attraction shall be set as high as 15% of the gross proceeds after deducting the cost of insurance and operational cost management of tourist attraction with details: (1) 10% development cost, and (2) 5% promotion fee.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Operational cost of the Management Board shall be stipulated as high as 10% of gross income after deducted by insurance fees, operational management fees, and development and promotion costs.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the Government of Tabanan Regency as the first party gets a share of 45% of gross income after deducting insurance costs, operational management fees, development and promotion costs, and operational costs of the management agency.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile, the second party (Jatiluwih Village), the third party (Jatiluwih Pakraman Village), the fourth party (Gunungsari Pakraman Village, and the fifth party (Subak Jatiluwih) are set to get a share of 55% of gross income after deducting the insurance fee, operational management, development and promotion costs, and operational costs of the management agency. Portion for the second, third, fourth and fifth parties are 100% and arranged in such a way that the Jatiluwih Village is 25%, Jatiluwih Pakraman Village 30 %, Gunungsari Pakraman Village 20%, Subak Jatiluwih 21%, Subak Abian Jatiluwih 2%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It seems that Subak Research Center of Udayana University (Universitas Udayana) sees the distribution of results with the provisions described above as a reflection of injustice. Therefore, through the letter number 043 / PUSLIT-SUBAK / IX / 2015 regarding the portion of fee to the Subak Jatiluwih area dated 26 September 2015 addressed to the Regent of Tabanan and Chairman of the Parliament Tabanan, Udayana University Subak Research Center submitted a proposal to improve the portion fee for Subak Jatiluwih.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the action plan dossier submitted to UNESCO, five promises were made in the following strategic priorities: (i) protection and improvement of living standards of farmers and subak institutions as guardians of Bali's cultural landscape; (ii) promotion of ecosystem services, to which subak is dependent; (iii) preservation of material culture; (iv) the development of tourism that is directed within the region; and (v) infrastructure development according to the preservation and improvement of the cultural landscape.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The entry fee into the Jatiluwih area currently seems to be not proportional to the institution Subak Jatiluwih. For that reason, it is proposed that the portion given to Subak Jatiluwih, to be increased to 45% of the total fee receipt, and to Tabanan regency for about 10% of the total revenue. Now the portion is upside down, and it seems “unfair.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The excerpt of the above information clearly shows the idea that Subak Jatiluwih needs to be treated fairly by giving priority in the division of fees which of course is in the form of money. In relation to the division of income in the management of Jatiluwih DTW, Jatiluwih DTW Management Board notes that from January to July 2017 this gross income in the management of DTW Jatiluwih ranged from Rp 450,865,000, - to Rp 770,935,000. Under such circumstances, Subak Jatiluwih got part of the amount ranging from Rp 27.391.899, - to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rp 46.839.132. Meanwhile, Jatiluwih Adat Village and Jatiluwih Village got a higher share because the percentage is higher, ie 30% for Desa Adat (Pakraman Village) Jatiluwih and 25% for Jatiluwih Village, while for Subak Jatiluwih only 21%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The question is whether the distribution of the results of Jatiluwih DTW is fair (justice). Related to this question, in Article 2 of the Letter of Cooperation Agreement of Tabanan Regency Government with Jatiluwih Village, Jatiluwih Pakraman Village, Gunung Sari Pakraman Village, and Subak Jatiluwih stated that &quot;the distribution of the result of tourism attraction management needs to be adjusted to the contribution and needs of the parties in supporting tourism activities in the tourist destination&quot;. If interpreted with reference to the concept of justice put forward by Sears, Freedman, and Peplau (1985: 242-243), then it can be said that the statement reflects the idea of justice. The idea is that justice can be realized through the sharing of results tailored to the contributions and needs of the parties in the activities that bring results.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tourism is an economic business for the sake of the prosperity of the people with its relation to the role of tourism industry which involved and the government as well (see: MUDANA, I Gede; SUTAMA, I Ketut; WIDHARI, Cokorda Istri Sri. MODEL KEWIRAUSAHAAN MEMANDU WISATA MENDAKI GUNUNG AGUNG DI DESA SELAT, KARANGASEM. Soshum : Jurnal Sosial dan Humaniora, [S.l.], v. 7, n. 3, p. 324-333, dec. 2017. ISSN 2580-5622. Available at: &lt;</span><a href="http://ojs.pnb.ac.id/index.php/SOSHUM/article/view/717"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://ojs.pnb.ac.id/index.php/SOSHUM/article/ view/717</span></a><span class="font1">&gt;. Date accessed: 22 jan. 2018.) and MUDANA, I Gede; SUTAMA, I Ketut; WIDHARI, Cokorda Istri Sri. Kepeloporan kewirausahaan memandu pendakian daya tarik wisata Gunung Agung, Karangasem, Bali. Journal of Bali Studies, [S.l.], v. 7, n. 2, p. 19-38, oct. 2017. ISSN 2580-0698. Available at: &lt;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kajianbali/article/view/35152"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kajianbali/article/ view/35152</span></a><span class="font1">&gt;. Date accessed: 12 jan. 2018.). Based on the given description before, it can be concluded that the development of tourism in Subak Jatiluwih which is a DTW and a WBD is loaded with the desire to develop tourism. However this is done by ignoring the existing law. The distribution of the results of the management of Jatuluwih DTW seems to be justice tailored to the contribution and needs of the parties concerned.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this occasion, let me thank to E-Journal of Cultural Studies for its kindness to publish this article. The writer hopes that the results of this research will be meaningful for all parties involved in the </span><span class="font2">tourism development in the World Cultural Heritage area of Subak Jatiluwih in Tabanan, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2005. Culture Studies Teori dan Praktek. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sears, David O., Jonathan L. Freedman, and L. Anne Peplau. 1985. Social Psychology (Volume 1). Jakarta: Erlangga Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutama, I Nyoman. 2014. &quot;Subak Jatiluwih After Two Years Established as World Cultural Heritage (2012-2014). Paper in Sarasehan Bali Art Festival XXXVI Date July 3, 2014 at Art Centre, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">MUDANA, I Gede; SUTAMA, I Ketut; WIDHARI, Cokorda Istri Sri. MODEL KEWIRAUSAHAAN MEMANDU WISATA MENDAKI GUNUNG AGUNG DI DESA SELAT, KARANGASEM. Soshum : Jurnal Sosial dan Humaniora, [S.l.], v. 7, n. 3, p. 324-333, dec. 2017. ISSN 2580-5622. Available at: &lt;</span><a href="http://ojs.pnb.ac.id/index.php/SOSHUM/article/view/717"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://ojs.pnb.ac.id/index.php/SOSHUM/article/view/717</span></a><span class="font0">&gt;. Date accessed: 22 jan. 2018.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">MUDANA, I Gede; SUTAMA, I Ketut; WIDHARI, Cokorda Istri Sri. Kepeloporan kewirausahaan memandu pendakian daya tarik wisata Gunung Agung, Karangasem, Bali. Journal of Bali Studies, [S.l.], v. 7, n. 2, p. 19-38, oct. 2017. ISSN 2580-0698. Available at: &lt;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kajianbali/article/view/35152"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kajianbali/article/view/35152</span></a><span class="font0">&gt;. Date accessed: 12 jan. 2018.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Timothy, Dallen J. Timothy and Boyd, Stephen. W. 2003. Heritage Tourism. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>