---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Three Dimension Aspects of the Main Character in the Novel The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner"
author: "Ida Ayu Febi Dwi Sangastu, I Gusti Agung Istri Aryani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p23</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">v</span><span class="font0">ol 22.2 </span><span class="font2">Mei </span><span class="font0">2018: 442-446</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Three Dimension Aspects of the Main Character in the Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Ayu Febi Dwi Sangastu<sup>1*</sup>, I Gusti Agung Istri Aryani<sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font2">English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:idaayufebi@gmail.com"><span class="font2">idaayufebi@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">], <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ig_aryani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">ig_aryani@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature is one of the written works that express aspect of human life. This study is using a novel entitled The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner. It is analyzing the main character in terms of physiological, psychological, and sociological dimension aspects. Dramatic and character on the other character method were used in analyzing the study based on character dialogue, action, opinion, and feeling. These were explained descriptively in order to have a clear understanding of the aspects implied in the story. The result of findings were three dimension aspects, as of; physiological, that influenced the main character are the age and physical appearance. The psychological, about the situation that she was ran away from her father when she still human. The sociological background and human relationship are influenced in sociological aspect. It can be concluded that the whole three dimension aspects of the main character showed in physiological, Bree was fifteen years old girl almost sixteen years old when she became a vampire,but she did not remember how old she was when she was a human. Her body will sparkling like a crystal when exposed to sunlight and also have a bright and red eyes. In psychological, she is an introvert vampire with few friends and does not really like to make trouble andspare time with other vampire. In sociological, before became a vampire, Bree was a girl who lived with her father. But, after her mother died, her relationship with her father not good, because her father was rude person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Literature, main character, three dimension aspects.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra adalah salah satu karya tulis yang mengekspresikan aspek kehidupan manusia. Penelitian ini menggunakan novel berjudul The Short Second Life dari Bree Tanner. Penelitian ini menganalisis karakter utama dalam hal aspek dimensi fisiologis, psikologis, dan sosiologis. Karakter drama dan karakter pada metode karakter lainnya digunakan dalam menganalisis penelitian berdasarkan dialog karakter, tindakan, pendapat, dan perasaan. Ini dijelaskan secara deskriptif agar bisa memahami secara jelas aspek-aspek yang tersirat dalam cerita. Hasil temuan adalah aspek tiga dimensi, antara lain; Fisiologis, yang mempengaruhi karakter utamanya adalah usia dan penampilan fisik. Secara psikologis tentang situasi bahwa dia lari dari ayahnya saat dia masih manusia. Latar belakang sosiologis dan hubungan manusia dipengaruhi aspek sosiologis. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa keseluruhan aspek tiga dimensi dari karakter utama menunjukkan secara fisiologis, Bree adalah gadis berusia lima belas tahun yang hampir enam belas tahun saat ia menjadi vampir, namun ia tidak ingat berapa umur dirinya ketika ia masih seorang manusia. Tubuhnya akan berkilau seperti kristal saat terkena sinar matahari dan juga memiliki mata yang cerah dan merah. Secara psikologis, dia adalah vampir introvert dengan sedikit teman dan tidak terlalu suka membuat masalah dan waktu luang dengan vampir lainnya. Secara sosiologis, sebelum menjadi vampir, Bree adalah seorang gadis yang tinggal bersama ayahnya. Tapi, setelah ibunya meninggal, hubungannya dengan ayahnya tidak baik, karena ayahnya orangnya kasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sastra, karakter utama, tiga dimensi aspek.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Semi (1988: 8), conveys that literature is a form of universal culture, a product of creative art, of which the object is human that is formed by language which has an aesthetic value. Literature does not only describe the problem of life, but also about society. Literature is creativity, an artwork that must always have a structure and an aesthetic value art, a total coherence and effect. Literary works can be divided into three main genres such as poetry, drama, and novel (Warren, 1955: 219). One of literary works chosen in this study is novel. Novel is a long piece of prose and contains a series of stories of one’s life with others by highlighting the character and nature of each actor. Novel is medium to pour the thoughts, feeling, and ideas of the author in responding to life around him (Nurgiyantoro, 2010: 9).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The intrinsic element provides the elements which build up the structure of literary works. In the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner,</span><span class="font2"> there are four characters that have important role in the story, as of: Bree Tanner as the main character, and the other three characters are Diego, Fred, and Riley as the secondary or peripheral characters. Character is person in literary work. The existence of character is important to the story, because the purpose of reading a story is to find out what happens or to see how the plot works, an equally compelling reason is to follow the fortunes of the character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The main character is most important in the story to tell about his or her experience. Almost all novels start the story with the main character described in detail first and started to get into the story. The main character has a central point in the story, because of a problem in the story that made sure that there is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">always a connection with the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Three dimension aspects presented in the main character, they are: physiological, psychological, and sociological &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dimension &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aspects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Physiological dimension of the character is the physical appearance which includes some physical aspects, such as skin color, eye color, sex, age, heredity, size, etc. Psychological dimension is interested in everything related to the character’s activities and experience. Sociological dimension is the social relationship of the characters, consisting of family, religion, occupation, belief, economic, status, social activity, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner</span><span class="font2"> is spin-off of the third book series entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Eclipse.</span><span class="font2"> The story is related to novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> which is told from another point of view, namely from the perspective of one vampire named Bree Tanner who is the main character in this novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing the three dimension aspects of the main character of the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner, </span><span class="font2">the problems raise in this study are formulated into the following questions:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;physiological,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">psychological, and sociological dimensions of the main character?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the methods of characterization used in terms of physiological, psychological, and sociological dimensions?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study has some aims as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the physiological, psychological, and sociological</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">dimensions of the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the methods of characterization used in terms of physiological, psychological, and sociological dimensions.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method in this study consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analysing the data, and method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study were taken from the novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner</span><span class="font2">, written by Stephenie Meyer. This novel was published in June 2010 in the United States. It is interested to analyze the three dimensions of the main character of this novel, because the novel illustrates clearly how the Bree Tanner life from the point of view of herself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method and technique of collecting data used in this study is the documentary method. It means that the data were collected by reading the novel. The processes of collecting data are; first, by reading the novel repeatedly and intensively to understand the novel. Then, identifying, selecting, and taking note of which part of the novel provides the information about the three dimensions of the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Analysing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data was qualitativelyanalysed, based on the theory by Egri to find three dimensions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The methods of characterization in the story were further based on the theory proposed by Kenny.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Three Dimensions in the Novel</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life Of Bree Tanner </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. Physiological Dimension</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bree Tanner is a girl who turned into a vampire after bitten by Riley who is a vampire and wants to create new vampires. Besides, she wanted to fight with another vampire called The Cullens. Bree became a vampire when she was fifteen years old, but she did not remember how old she was when she was a human being.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘How old are you?’ he asked abruptly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Three months. I told you that.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘That’s not what I meant. Um, how old </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">were</span><span class="font2"> you? I guess that’s the right way to ask.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I leaned away, uncomfortable, when I realized he was talking about human stuff. Nobody talked about that. Nobody wanted to think about it. But I didn’t want to end the conversations, either. Just having a conversation at all was something new and different. I hesitated, and he waited with a curious expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">‘I was, um, I guess fifteen. Almost sixteen. I can’t remember the day…was I past my birthday?’</span><span class="font2"> I tried to think about it, but those last hungry weeks were a big blur, and it hurt my head in a weird way to try to clear them up. (Meyer, p. 28-29: 2010).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Dimension</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is part of her habits to hide behind Fred. Actually, Bree is a vampire who does not like to make trouble and always obey rules. Often hide behind Fred's body so other new vampires did not realize that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">she was in that place. These can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">If I were being honest with myself, I’d pretty much turned into a huge vampire nerd.I followed the rules, I didn’t cause trouble, I hung out with the most unpopular kid in the group, and I always got home early.</span><span class="font2"> (Meyer, p. 24: 2010)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological Dimension</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After becoming a vampire, Bree with the other new vampires live in Seattle, and they move often from place to place. The house they occupied is a house which belongs to owners who are died. Its location was far away from human places. It is located on a mountain, island, or hidden in large farm. They chose these kinds of places so others cannot realize on their existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Every house we’d borrowed, whether it was up a mountain or on an island or hidden on a big farm, had a few things in common. The dead owners, the remote locale, and one other thing. They all were sort of focused on Seattle. Oriented around the big city like orbiting moons. Seattle was always the hub, always the target.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The house was a big, log cabin—style affair, tucked into a hollow in the pines with no sign of any neighbors for miles around.</span><span class="font2"> All the windows were black, as if the place were empty, but the whole frame was trembling from the heavy bass in the basement. (Meyer, p. 54 and 56: 2010).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of Characterization in Presenting Bree Tanner as the Main Character</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Dramatic Method</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As a vampire Bree Tanner's body will glow like crystal when exposed to sunlight.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Unreal,’ Diego whispered. He put the rest of his hand into the beam, and the cave somehow got even brighter. He rolled his hand over to look at the back, then turned it palm up again. The reflections danced like he was spinning a prism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">There was no smell of burning, and he clearly wasn’t in pain. I looked closely at his hand, and it seemed like there were a zillion tiny mirrors in the surface, too small to distinguish separately, all shining back the light with double the intensity of a regular mirror.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Come here, Bree – you have to try this.’ ‘I couldn’t think of a reason to refuse, and I was curious, but I was also still reluctant as I slid to his side.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘No burn?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘None. Light doesn’t burn us, it just…reflects off of us. I guess that’s kind of an understatement.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Slow as a human, I reluctantly stretched my fingers into the light. Immediately, reflection blazed away</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bree Tanner as the main character has important part in this story and central position in the whole story. Diego, Fred, and Riley are considered the peripheral or secondary characters in the story, because they give great influence to the main character. The function of the secondary characters is to illuminate the main characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Even though, they do not appear continually in every event, but indirectly they influence the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Physically, Bree Tanner was a girl fifteen years old girl or almost sixteen years old when she became a vampire, but she did not remember how old she was when she was a human. Her body will sparkle like a crystal when exposed to sunlight and also hasbright and red eyes. Psychologically, Bree is an introvert</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">vampire with few friends and does not really like to make trouble and spare time with other vampires. Sociologically, before becoming a vampire, Bree was a girl who lived with her parents. But, after her mother died, Bree’s relationship with her father was not good, because her father was a rude person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on characterization, it can be concluded that the methods used by the author of this novel are dramatic and characters on the other characters method used in the story. Meanwhile, the three dimensions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bree &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tanner</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Physiological, Psychological, and Sociological) are mostly presented through the dramatic method because Bree Tanner is the narrator of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Kenny, W. (1966).</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font2">New York: Monarch Press. Kong. Oxford University Hong Kong Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meyer, S. (2010). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner.</span><span class="font2">Little, Brown and Company. New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nugriyantoro, B. (2010). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory PengkajianFiksi.GadjahMada University ‘Passion’s Promise (</span><span class="font2">script). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Semi, A. M. &nbsp;(1988).</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">AnatomiSastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Padang: Angkasa Raya Padang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Warren, A. and W.R.(1955). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font2">London: Jonathan Cape.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">446</span></p>