---
layout: full_article
title: "The English Nominal Group Structure with Special Reference to John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s Speech"
author: "Ni Kadek Indah Suryadewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p12</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.2 </span><span class="font1">Mei </span><span class="font0">2018: 361-367</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The English Nominal Group Structure with Special Reference to John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s Speech</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Kadek Indah Suryadewi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:nikadekindahsuryadewi@gmail.com"><span class="font2">nikadekindahsuryadewi@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This study entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The English Nominal Group Structure with Special Reference to John Kerry and Ban Ki-Moon’s Speech </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">is aimed to analyze the experiential structures and logical structure elements of nominal group used by John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon in their speech. The data were taken from the transcript of John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech at the United States Department of State in Washington, D.C. on February 14, 2013. Descriptive qualitative method was applied to analyze the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">experiential and logical structures of nominal group. The theory used to analyze it is the theory of Nominal Group proposed by Halliday and Matthiessen in the book entitled Halliday’s Introduction to Functional Grammar the fourth edition. The result of analysis shows that in the experiential structure, T structure becomes the most frequent structure that occurs followed by D+T and D+T+Q structure. Meanwhile, in the logical structure, H and M are the logical structure elements found. Therefore, from the structures found, John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s nominal group structures have a simple construction and it emphasizes Thing without adding any information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: Functional Grammar, Speech, Nominal Group</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menemukan struktur experiential dan elemen struktur logis pada grup nominal yang digunakan oleh John Kerry dan Ban Ki-moon dalam pidato mereka. Data diambil dari transkrip pidato John Kerry dan Ban Ki-moon pada Departemen Luar Negeri Amerika Serikat di Washington D.C. pada tanggal 14 Februari 2013. Metode deskriptif kualitatif diterapkan untuk menemukan struktur experiential dan logis pada grup nominal. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisis data adalah teori Grup Nominal yang diusulkan oleh Halliday dan Matthiessen. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa dalam struktur experiential, struktur T menjadi struktur yang paling sering muncul dan diikuti oleh struktur D+T dan struktur D+T+Q. Sementara itu, dalam struktur logis, H dan M merupakan element struktur logis yang ditemukan. Oleh karena itu, dari struktur yang ditemukan, struktur grup nominal pada pidato mereka mempunyai bentuk yang sederhana dan menekankan “element Thing” tanpa menambahkan informasi lain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: Functional Grammar, Pidato, Grup Nominal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language as a means of communication has an important role in the interaction among the people (Lintang, 2013). Language is used for</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">communication among people in a particular country over a period of time. There are several kinds of language which are used to communicate by the people are body language, written</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language, and spoken language. Those kinds of language are usually used by the people to deliver the message from the speaker to the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The spoken language or in this case, the speech of John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon was related to this study, the structure of their group of words especially Nominal Group in the speech would be analyzed. John Kerry is an American politician who served as the 68th United States Secretary of State from February 1st, 2013 – January 20th, 2017 and Ban Ki-moon is a South Korean diplomat who was the eighth Secretary-General of the United Nations from January 1st, 2007 to December 31st, 2016.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is concerned with the Nominal Group of the short speech in delivering remarks during the United Nations general meeting at the United States Department of State in Washington, D.C. on February 14th, 2013.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing the Nominal Group in the speech, the Theory of Nominal Group proposed by Halliday &amp;&nbsp;Matthiessen (2014) in the book entitled Halliday’s Introduction to Functional Grammar the fourth edition was used. According to the Theory of Nominal Group in the book entitled Halliday’s Introduction to Functional Grammar (2014:362), a group is a combination of words that are built up on the basis of a particular logical relation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Previously, the study about Nominal Group was rarely discussed in speech. In 2014, there was a study about Nominal Group by Kartini Bangun, but she discussed the Nominal Group within Batak Karo Language and the same study in 2013, Lintang Karina discussed the Nominal Group in opinion articles in the Jakarta Post. Therefore, from those studies, it becomes the reason why the researcher is interested in discussing the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nominal Group in speech. The spoken language of John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon especially in the Nominal Group in the speech was analyzed because the previous studies had discussed the written one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What experiential structures of nominal group are found in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What logical structure elements are found in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;To find &nbsp;&nbsp;out the experiential</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">structures of nominal group found in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the logical structure elements of nominal group found in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the research method, there are four elements referring to the problems already formulated, namely: data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting analysis. These methods are described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study is the transcript of the speech of John Kerry, the 68<sup>th</sup> United States Secretary of State and Ban Ki-moon, the 8<sup>th</sup> United Nations Secretary General in United States. The speech is about John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech during the United Nations general meeting at the United States Department of State in Washington, D.C. on February 14<sup>th</sup>, 2013. the source is exquisitely special because this is the first time UN has spoken during the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">humanitarian issues especially refugees from regime’s countries.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Collecting Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected using the documentation method. This method was applied to the transcript of John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech in Washington D.C., which had been downloaded from USA’s government official website. The technique that was used in this study was note taking through several steps as follows: reading the transcript, taking a note, and selecting the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Analyzing Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed by applying descriptive qualitative method, since the data was not in the numerative form. The data were analyzed using descriptive technique and the steps of analyzing data are described as follows: presenting the relevant data, meaning that the collected data consisting of nominal group were used by those speakers. Next, identifying and classifying the collected data based on the theory in order to find out the experiential structure elements of each experiential structure of the nominal group. The last step was analyzing those structures according to the theory in order to find out the logical structure of the elements of those structures.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Presenting Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In presenting the analysis of the first and second problems, the formal and informal methods were applied, since the analysis was presented in words and symbols. In presenting the data, several steps were taken. Firstly, the data were categorized into the structures of nominal group and they were presented in the form of symbol and elaborated in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">form of paragraph. The second step was analyzing the logical structure elements of the nominal group in the form of symbol and elaborating in the form of paragraph.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preliminary</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data that had been analyzed was the Nominal Group in the speech of John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon in Washington D.C. In the data, there are 440 nominal groups that had been found and analyzed. However, in this result and discussion, only several nominal groups that contained &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;particular &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;experiential</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">structures and logical structure elements are shown.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal Group with One</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Modification</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group with one modification means that the nominal group which only consists of one experiential structure element that precedes and/or follows the Thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pre Modification</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of the analysis presents one experiential structure element which precedes the Thing. The Thing elements found in the data are common noun.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(N.11) ....security in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">the world</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;world</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">D &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">M &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data (N.11) shows that the nominal group “the world” consists of two experiential structure elements. These two elements are Deictic and Thing. Deictic element in this nominal group is identified by a definite article “the”. According to the theory used, the definite article “the” functions as specific Deictic, because the definite article “the” is a demonstrative determiner. And the Thing element in this nominal group is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">indicated by a common noun “world”. The word “world” is categorized as a common noun because it is a noun that is common to a class of referent. The common noun “world” is the semantic core of this nominal group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therefore, the nominal group “the world” has D+T structure. Data (N.11) shows that Deictic element functions as Modifier because Deictic element modifies Thing. Therefore, the noun “world” is the Head of the nominal group because Thing element functions as Head and it is modified by an article “the”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mix Modification</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of the analysis presents one experiential structure element which precedes and follows the Thing. The Thing element found in the data is a common noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(N.34) I know from </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">many conversations with the Secretary General </span><span class="font2">- we've been at....</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Many</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">conversations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">[with the Secgen]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">T</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Q</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">M</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">H</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">M</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Data (N.34) shows that the nominal group “many conversations with the Secretary General” consists of three experiential structure elements. These elements are Numerative, Thing, and Qualifier. Numerative element in this nominal group is indicated by the indefinite quantitative “many”. The numerative element “many” is categorized as an inexact number in Numerative element of nominal group. Another element produced is Thing which is indicated by the common noun “conversations”. The last element is Qualifier which is indicated by the prepositional phrase “with the Secretary General”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group has N+T+Q structure. This nominal group has mix modification because it consists of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">premodifier and postmodifier. Thing element has function as Head of the nominal group and Numerative and Qualifier elements have function as Modifier.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal Group with Two</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Modifications</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group with two modifications means that the nominal group which consists of two experiential structure elements that precede the Thing element. However, there is only Qualifier element that follows the Thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pre Modification</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of the analysis presents two experiential structure elements which precede the Thing. The Thing elements found in the data are common noun.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(N.15) ....in all of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">my first meetings</span><span class="font2">, I intend to....</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">My &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;first &nbsp;&nbsp;meetings</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">D &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">M &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data (N.15) shows that the nominal group “my first meetings” consists of three experiential structure elements. These elements are Deictic, Numerative, and Thing. The Deictic element in this nominal group is indicated by the specific possessive determiner “my”. Another element produced is Numerative which is indicated by the ordering numerative “first” and the last element is Thing which is indicated by the common noun “meetings”. The Thing element “meetings” is a semantic core of this nominal group and the Thing element “meetings” is specified by the possessive Deictic features of possession “my”. Therefore, it is categorized as specific deictic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the nominal group “my first meetings”, there are two logical structure elements found, namely: Head and Modifier elements. According to Halliday (2014:390) the nominal group</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">can be distinguished from the two positions by using the terms Premodifier and Postmodifier. The Head of this nominal group is indicated by the Thing element, which is modified by Deictic and Numerative elements. Therefore, Deictic and Numerative elements of the nominal group have function as Premodifier because it appears before Head element.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mix Modification</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of the analysis presents two experiential structure elements which precede the Thing element, but only one experiential structure element found which follows the Thing. The Thing element found in the data is common noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Nnon.82) ....towards </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">our shared</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">goals of peace, development, and human rights.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">our shared</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">goals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">[of peace, .... human rights]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">D &nbsp;&nbsp;C</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">T</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Q</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">M</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">H</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">M</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Data (Nnon.82) shows that the nominal group “our shared goals of peace, development, and human rights” consists of four experiential structure elements. These elements are Deictic, Classifier, Thing, and Qualifier. Deictic in this nominal group is indicated by possessive Deictic features “our”. Another element produced is Classifier which is indicated by the verb “shared”. The element Thing is indicated by the common noun “goals”. The verb “shared” is considered Classifier element because it indicates a particular subclass of the Thing question. Furthermore, “shared” as a word of the verb class the sense of a simple present form (passive); “shared goals” means ‘goals which are shared’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group “our shared goals of peace, development, and human rights” has D+C+T+Q structure. Deictic, Classifier, and Qualifier elements have</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">function as Modifier because it modifies the Head “goals”. Deictic and Classifier elements are called premodifiers because they appear before Head, meanwhile, Qualifier element is called postmodifier.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal Group with Three</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Modifications</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group with three modifications means that the nominal group which consists of three experiential structure elements that precede the Thing element. However, there is only one experiential element found that follows the Thing element.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pre Modification</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of the analysis presents three experiential structure elements which precede the Thing. The Thing elements found in the data are common noun.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(N.31) ....President Obama raised in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">his second Inaugural Address </span><span class="font2">and then again in....</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">his &nbsp;second &nbsp;Inaugural &nbsp;&nbsp;Address</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">D &nbsp;&nbsp;N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;T</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">M &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data (N.31) shows that the nominal group “his second Inaugural Address” consists of four experiential structure elements. These four elements are Deictic which is identified by the possessive determiner “his”. According to Halliday (2014), the possessive determiner “his” functions as specific Deictic. Another nominal group produced is Numerative which is indicated by “second”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The following nominal group is Classifier which is indicated by “Inaugural”. It is considered Classifier element because it indicates a particular subclass of the Thing question; it is an Inaugural Address, not a final or latest Address. Furthermore, the Thing in this nominal group is indicated by a the common noun “Address.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therefore, from all of those elements identified, the nominal group “his second Inaugural Address” has D+N+C+T structure. Meanwhile, for the logical structure element, this nominal group consists of two elements; Head and Modifier. The Head of this nominal group is indicated by Thing. D+N+C has function as Modifier (Premodifier) because it appears before Head.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Group &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;without</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Modification</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The nominal group without modification means the nominal group in which there is no experiential structure element that precedes or follows the Thing element.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(N.10) First of all, with respect to </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">North Kore</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">a</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, this....</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">North Korea</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">T H</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data (N.10) shows that the nominal group “North Korea” consists of one experiential structure element. This element is Thing. Thing in this nominal group is indicated by a proper name “North Korea”; a name for a particular place and it is also the semantic core of this nominal group. Meanwhile, there is only one logical structure element found, namely; Head element. Thing element in this nominal group has function as Head of the nominal group. This nominal group has only T structure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing 440 nominal groups found in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech in United States based on the Theory of Nominal Group proposed by Halliday and Matthiessen, it can be concluded that in the experiential structure, all kinds of experiential elements occur in both John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech. They are Deictic (specific and non-specific), Numerative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(exact and inexact), Epithet (experiential and interpersonal), Classifier, Qualifier (embedded phrase and embedded clause), and Thing (personal pronoun, proper name, and common noun). In analyzing the experiential structures of those nominal groups, it can be concluded that there are twenty-seven experiential structures of nominal group produced by John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon. T structure becomes the most frequent structure that occurs followed by D+T and D+T+Q structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Furthermore, in the logical structure, all of the logical elements also occur in John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s speech. They are Head and Modifier (Premodifier and Postmodifier). From the structures found, John Kerry and Ban Ki-moon’s nominal group structures have a simple construction and it emphasizes Thing without adding some information.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bangun, Kartini Br. 2014. “Experiential and Logical Structures within Karo Batak Nominal Groups: A Study in Systemic Functional Linguistics”, the IOSR journal of Humanities and Social Science (IOSR-JHSS) Volume 19, Issue 9, Ver. III (Sep.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2014) .</span><a href="http://iosrjournals.org/iosr-jhss/papers/Vol19-issue9/Version-3/H019934352.pdf"><span class="font2"> http://iosrjournals.org/iosr-</span></a><span class="font2"></span><a href="http://iosrjournals.org/iosr-jhss/papers/Vol19-issue9/Version-3/H019934352.pdf"><span class="font2">jhss/papers/Vol19-issue9/Version-</span></a><span class="font2"></span><a href="http://iosrjournals.org/iosr-jhss/papers/Vol19-issue9/Version-3/H019934352.pdf"><span class="font2">3/H019934352.pdf </span></a><span class="font2">(accessed on February 17th, 2017)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York: Holt Rinehart Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bloor, Thomas, Bloor, Meriel. 2004. The Functional Analysis of English. 2nd ed. London: Edward Arnold, 2004.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Davies, A. (1991). The native speaker in applied linguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, Michael A K.1994. Functional Grammar. 2nd ed. London: Edward Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, Michael A K.1961. Categories of the theory of grammar: The Collected Works of M. A. K. Halliday Volume One: On Grammar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M. A. K. &amp;&nbsp;Matthiessen, C. M.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I. M. (2014). An Introduction to Functional Grammar (Fourth Edition). London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2000. Guide to patterns and usage in English 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Karina, Lintang. 2013. “Structures of Nominal Group of An Opinion Articles in the Jakarta Post” (undergraduate thesis). Semarang: Dian Nuswantoro University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sapire, Edward. 1921. Language: an Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">367</span></p>