---
layout: full_article
title: "Building Entrepreneurship Environment For Students Through Balinese Speaking Skills"
author: "I Wayan Suardiana"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-44789 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-44789"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-44789"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">| </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">75</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Udayana Journal of Social Sciencec and Humanities, Vol. 2 No. 2, Agustus 2018 DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2018.v02.i02.p01"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2018.v02.i02.p01</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Building Entrepreneurship Environment For Students Through Balinese Speaking Skills</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Suardiana I Wayan</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Udayana University e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:i.suardiana@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font4">i.suardiana@yahoo.co.id</span></a></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font3">Efforts to innovate in language care is done by developing a model of skills that can be used as a provision of life by the speaker. Balinese language skills that will be offered in oral level such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mapidarta</span><span class="font3"> art (speech / orator), become </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugrawakya</span><span class="font3">/MC (Master of Ceremony), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">madarmawacana art</span><span class="font3"> (sermon), art of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">masatua</span><span class="font3"> (telling) Bali, as broadcaster (radio and TV); in the level of writing covers the art of writing opinion, writing reportoar in relation as a journalist. In this study only disclosed about the guide (model) of art into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugrawakya</span><span class="font3">/MC (Master of Ceremony). This research data is a qualitative data that is extracted from the relevant books to guide or direct someone to be able to become a </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugrawakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) well. Methods of data collection is done by library study assisted by the technique of record. Data were analyzed by analytic descriptive method with deductive-inductive technique, and presented by informal method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: Language skills, students, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ugrawakya</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> (MC), and entrepreneurship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark7"></a>I.</span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The research entitled &quot;Building Entrepreneurship Souls in Students through Balinese Speaking Skills&quot; aims to explore and foster the spirit of entrepreneurship for students of Bali Literature Program, Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Udayana University in particular and the younger generation of Bali in general in the field of Balinese language skills. Nida (1957: 19) pointed out that the components of language skills have four parts, namely: (a) listening skills; (b) speaking skills; (c) reading skills; and (d) writing skills. Of the four language skills will be made a guide to be entrepreneurs for students in Prodi Sastra Bali, Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Unud especially after they finish the study able to answer the challenges of the world of work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The model is a guide that will be divided into two parts: first describes the techniques and procedures in organizing the event or in the language of Bali called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya </span><span class="font3">(reader/MC), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">masatua</span><span class="font3"> (telling) Bali, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mapidato</span><span class="font3"> technique (speech) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">madharma wacana</span><span class="font3"> (sermon). In the second part (the level of writing) will be presented a guide model on writing literature and writing on mass media (newspaper/magazine) in Bali. In the first stage it belongs to the speaking skill, while in the second stage is the writing skill. This sequence is based on the advice of Sukirno (2010: 9 - 10) who says, &quot;... </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ketrampilan menulis merupakan ketrampilan yang paling sulit untuk dilakukan oleh manusia</span><span class="font3">&quot;, so in this study done later to organize the mindset of students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Writing skills will not come automatically, but should be through practice and practice on a regular and ongoing basis. More to write in Latin with Balinese language that has been rarely done among the younger generation of Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and even academics (read: students and lecturers). Therefore, in this period, this research tries to give guidance to students and society in Bali, especially in speaking level with Balinese language, that is technique as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugrawakya </span><span class="font3">(MC) as a means of searching life skill. The model or reference that we will offer to students in Balinese Literature, Faculty of of Cultural Sciences, Udayana University and the public speaking the mother language of Bali, especially among the younger generation in order to be able to become </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugrawakya</span><span class="font3"> (the host) well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Balinese language has been getting offortunity from Balinese policy makers in recent years. The government's attention to Balinese language does not necessarily make its speakers rise from adversity. In fact, many problems arise that must be addressed immediately. This has been the result, Mother's language for Balinese people almost forty years since the 1970s experienced 'blood deprivation'. It is said to be lethargic, because the Balinese language is not taught in formal education on an ongoing basis and on the other hand Balinese language is abandoned by its speakers because it does not promise financially to its learners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As a concrete manifestation that the government is concerned with the Balinese language, since 2016 the Bali Provincial Government has raised the Bali Language Extension Contractors who are deployed in all of the existing Bali Provinces of 716 (Suardiana, 2016: 4). Meanwhile, in the same year Badung Regency (2016) promised to the younger generation of Bali who have a teacher certificate, will be appointed to fill the formation at the level of Primary and Secondary Education (Bali Post, 24 August 2016 p.2). Furthermore, in the same daily also followed by Karangasem Regency and Denpasar City Departement promise the same thing for Balinese language assumption.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The possibility of appointment of Balinese Language and Literature graduates to fill the extension contractor and as a teacher like that is not without problems. The problem actually occurs on the quality of Human Resources (HR) graduate Language and Literature Bali itself. Evidently, after the Tenaga Pembrakkan Bali Language Workers for six months (July-December 2016) was at the beginning of the first contract in 2017 as many as 50 people non permanent job (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tenaga Kontrak</span><span class="font3">) Bali Language was resigned. One of the reasons why they are sad is that they are not skilled in Balinese language, especially when they are given the task of training elementary, junior high school and high school students in Balinese language (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">masatua</span><span class="font3">), giving speeches, hosting (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3">, MC), and other language skills. This is in line with Tarigan's (1986: 1) view, which says, to practice language skills also means to practice thinking skills. For this reason, this research is done to help the graduates of Balinese Departement and the public in pursue Balinese language skills so that after they plunge to the society ready to accept the challenge of work.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">II.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DISCUSSION</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Term Limitations</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The MC (Master of Ceremonies) in Indonesian is paired with the Event Organizer (Sugono, 2005: 5), while in Bali it is called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pangénter Baos</span><span class="font3">. As a profession, the role of MC is central to the success of an event, because, as a stylists, the event will be able to run well if the MC can organize the event nicely besides the arrangement of events that are also traced to the main event. Hence the importance of the role of an MC in an event then the MC profession has the value of useful in terms of personal and economic value in this life. Personally, a good MC will be able to lift his or her self-esteem and selfesteem more than others in the environment he is in, while in terms of economic value, the MC profession promises a good income also for the bearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">When traced further, the history of the MC is actually the same length as the history of human civilization, because in order to get to the society that sustainable and cultured that MC profession is alleged to appear. The presence of MC can also be aligned with the art of speech which is one of the art of speaking to influence audiences. Because, as an art of speech, the MC profession also deals with three main points as processed materials, such as: (1) self-expression related to thoughts, sparks of feeling, will, ideals, fantasies and imagination; (2) knowledge and experience, whether self-owned or the property of others; and (3) the surrounding environment and the universe. The elements of these three sources are processed into speech and then passed on to others with various labels, such as jokes, fairy tales, lectures, speeches, sermons, drama, poetry, prose and so on (Oka 1990: 1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As an oral language, the art of speech (also MC) in the history of mankind can be noted how effective the art of oral presentation, which can change the history of mankind or the history of a nation. Hitler with his skill in speaking or giving speeches dragged his people into the flames of war</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">with other nations, and caused great misery to mankind (Keraf, 1984: 314). But besides, it can also be noted the influence of important figures who are able to bring peace and prosperity of mankind thanks to their speaking skill. Such figures as Mahatma Gandhi from India and also Bung Karno who was able to deliver the nation of Indonesia to the gates of independence in 1945.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As a profession of 'siblings' with art of speech, MC both use speech as the delivery tool. The difference, the MC first present in an event because he as an opening, because, before someone speech is certainly someone who invited someone to make a speech. The one who invited it was the MC. Thus, the MC comes first and, of course, he first understands something that an orator will talk about or at least an MC can grasp the intent of an orator before he performs his lecture. Therefore, it could be the knowledge, experience, and understanding of a MC needed better than the knowledge and understanding of the orator earlier.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thus someone who lives by choosing a profession as an MC is required to have more knowledge of the person or event he or she is organizing. In addition to the opening act, MC also has an obligation as closing of an event.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conditions to be a Professional MC</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">All areas of life that demand maximum results would require conditions. Requirements are needed so that we can measure the ability of each self so as to position ourselves against others, especially if we are interested in developing the profession as an MC. MC is good if has the following conditions:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Extensive knowledge and experience</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">As already mentioned above that the knowledge and experience of an MC is very decisive success in delivering an event. Because, without extensive knowledge and experience, it is impossible for an MC to master the situation he faces in a short time, especially without adequate preparation. Having sufficient knowledge and life experience will form understanding attitudes to the community, and be able to appreciate and tolerate the vibrations that live around it. With the depth of knowledge concerning the living fair and the values adopted by society, a person MC can easily master his audience. Because the vast experience will be a source of creativity that is very effective in accordance with the demands of the situation. (b) Smart</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A smart MC will not run out of reason to be creative so the show he delivered will be interesting because of the breadth of his knowledge and experience. Intelligent MCs will be evident from the way things are delivered compared to the MCs that are simply brilliant on the surface that rely on beautiful faces, good sounds, but no creativity and appreciation in appearance. The intelligence can be seen from the ability of an MC to make decisions, make the message clearly, briefly, calmly when things suddenly have to be delivered.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sense of humor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In a large-scale event and formal, basically the audience wants an event other than the others. The atmosphere will be different if the MC is able to melt the atmosphere by</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">presenting jokes that match the theme of the event, not just imitate the jokes that have been there before. The saturation of the participants will be lost if the MC can insert fresh humor in the midst of an ongoing event, the more the humor is the contemporary joke.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Forbearance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The patience of an MC is required when repeated events change. This happens because an event generally involves many parties who each have their own ways and desires in achieving its goals. As a result, when the event is in progress there may be confusing instructions. Faced with such a difficult situation, patience coupled with intelligence is needed by an MC.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Imagination</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A variety of events will be encountered by an MC throughout his career path and each of these events has different characters and difficulty levels. At certain moments the MC is required to be creative, so that the mediocre event can become more lively, vibrant, and impressive. For that an MC is required ability to be able to 'embellish' the show and play its role well, by involving the emotions of his audience. That can be realized, if an MC able to issue bright ideas that can only come to those who have high imagination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An MC can create an atmosphere in accordance with his imagination, but not infrequently also MC should be able to muffle the emotions of his audience, by receiving imagination owned his own audience. Because, a good MC if it can cultivate a deep impression on his audience after the event ended. The seemingly mediocre event will be festive due to a reliable MC improvising. Therefore, he must often train himself, train his imagination, so that at certain moments in urgent circumstances his imagination arises spontaneously and produces brilliant ideas to cope with the situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(f) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Enthusiasm</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">All work will be done well if there is a mood or excitement to do it. An MC will not be able to perform its duties properly if it does not have enthusiasm. Because, according to Larry King enthusiasm will produce a special pleasure for a speaker (MC) and will determine its success (2005: 52 - 53). If without excitement in carrying out the task, an MC will fail to perform its role. The enthusiasm of an MC in delivering an event will be felt by the audience and will automatically affect them. Enthusiasm will reflect the seriousness of MC in communicating that occurs between the MC and his audience. Enthusiasm it should also be based on the background of the delivered event. Make no mistake putting enthusiasm at opposite event positions; happy events delivered with lackluster passion, otherwise melankolic event delivered with festival.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Events are considered a failure simply because the MC is not able to turn the mood. Such circumstances should be avoided. Do not let the appearance of MC actually lower the mood of the audience. Do not let the appearance of the MC to be anticlimactic from the overall graph of the event that is expected to reach the climax at the end of the event. (g) Humble and friendly</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MC who is able to deliver an event with good name will rapidly skyrocket. His fame is similar to the artist even parallel to the public officials. Therefore, in maintaining the image, as an MC does not quickly arrogant with big names. Because, the arrogance will be reflected on the appearance, through posture and also the words he chose when communicating with his audience. Humility makes the appearance of the MC into a friendly, candid, bright-faced, and ready-to-talk dialogue like a best friend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The famous MC will enter all segments of society so it must always not dissolve itself with the 'above' environment alone if its presence long wanted to be accepted in the hearts of the wider community.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(h) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ability to cooperate</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">As the organizer of an event, MC certainly can not work without cooperating with others. Parties are generally associated with the tasks of his profession, such as: protocol, stage manager, soundman, lightingman, and so on. The successful task of an MC, not entirely a personal success, but a team success. Therefore, it takes the ability to work together and a good understanding among fellow officers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In an event, the most important principle should be applied: The Master of Ceremony (MC) or the Host is an important part of an event and not a spectacle or entertainment!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preparations as MC</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The profession as MC (Master of Ceremonies) as his professional name, is required to be a master for the event he guides. Mention as a master is carried by an MC because of his involvement to perfect the organization of the event becomes the main task. An MC not only takes from one event to another, but he plays a direct role in creating the atmosphere as the characteristics of the show. Because, an event is generally carried out with a particular mission and each has its own character, both in the content of the event and the atmosphere that wants to create. For that, before starting the task as an MC, a professional MC must find out or make an analysis on the show he will bring!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lies Aryati (2008: 35), an announcer and also a famous MC in his day gave four tips for an MC before he guided or delivered an event. The four tips are the following questions: (a) What is the show ?; (b) Who is the audience ?; (c) Where is the location ?; and (d) What are its features?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event Type</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">An event will determine the type of event, organizer, characteristics, and how to bring it. Therefore, a professional MC when accepting an offer guides the event, must first understand the event to be guided. Because, knowing the event will be guided will make it easier for an MC to prepare themselves. There are four types of events that generally require the services of an MC, namely: A. Official events;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semi entertainment events;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Entertainment events; and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">D. Events of exhibitions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A. Official Events, including:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Official / state event, for example: official inauguration, handover of office, award of awards, signing of cooperation agreement (MOU);</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Official ceremonies, such as: National Solidarity Day ceremony, August 17th ceremony, Opening ceremony of PON;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inauguration ceremony, for example: the inauguration of the building, the inauguration of the overpass, the inauguration of the factory, the inauguration of the company, the organization, etc.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">&gt; </span><span class="font3">Characteristics of official events are: formal, serious, and solemn.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semi Entertainment Event, consisting of:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Company events (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">HUT</span><span class="font3">), generally held only for internal company (employees) or also for corporate external (corporate clients);</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lounching event, for the business, launching is usually the introduction of prime products, such as book launches, movies, cars, etc .;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The breaking event is a farewell event for officials to be transferred or retired within a company. The event is also utilized by the company to introduce new officials who replace previous officials;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iv) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wedding events. This wedding event was put into a kind of semi-entertainment event because the characteristics of the show is a blend of solemn and rousing. In addition, the arrangement of events is also different or adjust to the circumstances.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">&gt; </span><span class="font3">Characteristics of semi-entertainment events is a mix between the formal nature of the official event and the festive nature of entertainment events.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Entertainment Events, such as:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Variety show, which is usually a regular gathering event by inviting the audience to enjoy the show. Events like this include the commemoration of August 17, 1945, New</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Year's Eve, Evening Art, etc.;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Award presentation. The event is organized by inviting certain circles involved in the assessment to gain awards and related people in the assessment. The event includes: Indonesian Film Festival, Bali TV Award, etc .;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The event of the competition festival. This event is an event for the participants who follow the contest, such as; race kite competition, kebyar kebong competition, the selection of radio and tv stars (BRTV), festivals of popular songs, and so on.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The characteristics of this event are festive, passionate, and emotional.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exhibition Events, including:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exhibitions, such as; exhibition painting, photo, furniture, electronics, etc.,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seminars, for example; congresses, deliberations, symposia.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The characteristic of this event is serious but relaxed, according to the object on display or in accordance with the theme of the seminar.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Audience</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The next step that must be known by an MC after knowing the type of event and the frame of the show is who the audience of the event will be delivered. Understand and understand who the audience will be faced in delivering an event, for an MC is a very decisive success in carrying out the task. Because by knowing the background of the listener it will be easy for the MC to choose the vocabulary (language use) and the attitude taking in the event. Without understanding the background of the participants in an event, the possibility of an MC will not fit in choosing the vocabulary in delivering the show. The language for officials or government officials, for example, will certainly be different from the language of the community with the background of farmers. Therefore, the accuracy in selecting and using the terms appropriate to the background of the audience is also determining the success of an MC in guiding an event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Understanding of the background of an audience for an MC will determine its success in 'controlling' situations that are likely to be faced, especially since the guided event was attended by a considerable number of masses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The characteristics of the audience are distinguished in:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nature of group (maximum 50 people)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Individual</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rationale</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Responsive</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Critical</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The nature of the period (unlimited)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The nature of individual melting becomes the nature of togetherness</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotional</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Faded Norms</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Easy to influence</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sensitive</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Location</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The introduction of the location of an event required by someone who works as an MC solely related to the use of vocals, improvisation, and also clothing that must be prepared. When the event takes place inside a comfortable meeting hall, like a hotel for example, a vocal used by an MC will be very different when compared to an outdoor event. Meetings that take place in a special meeting hall with adequate equipment and a comfortable atmosphere will make the audience more solicitous to attend the event. Such an atmosphere there is very little chance of outside interference that can distract them. In such conditions the MC is free to improvise, no need to increase the volume and sound power.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Something that should be of particular concern to an MC to appear professional is when the event takes place in an open field. An open-air event requires a brief and clear talk, not long-winded, with more serious vocal formation. This is necessary because most likely the sound will break and sometimes disappear due to the wind.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Events Features</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Understanding the privilege of an event that will be guided for an MC will determine the accuracy in choosing clothes or accessories and how to bring the event. MCs who do not adapt her clothes to the show she's playing will cause her to lose shape or become alien in her own show. It takes a high flexibility of an MC to be able to adapt to different environments and situations. There is a possibility that the event will be held in different customs with the customs of the MC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The mistake of choosing a costume by an MC will affect the attitude of the MC in bringing an event, which then also will be influential in establishing the atmosphere. Therefore, the appearance in the world of the show is very decisive image for someone who acts the World Carr.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.4 Event Implementation Technique</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are four techniques that must be cultivated for an MC in the implementation of an event. The professional attitude of an MC is reflected in his mastery of the following techniques.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sound and speech</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language used</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body language</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Voice and How to Speak</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The formation of voice and speech is very important for the person working in the field of oral communication. Sound is the most vital weapon and communication tool for an MC, remembering with a good voice MC can influence his audience. Although a person's voice is not good, but does not reduce its role in this one area. There are several things that are important to do so that the weakness of the vocal sound can be covered while performing the task as an MC. Such things as speech, volume, power, tone, timbre, breath, speech, intonation, articulation, stressing, and phrasing (beheading a sentence or pause).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language Used</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Language is a medium of oral and written communication and also as a means of expressing ideas. In daily implementation, language is strongly influenced by the language style and dialect of the speaker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the world of MCs, especially for official occasions, the dialect is very taboo to be raised by an MC, except on occasions that want to highlight regional elements. Language (Indonesia, Bali) used in the implementation of MC work on official events is a good and correct Indonesian language, polite, and communicative. The selected words should belong to the elements: Ordinary sentences (sentences that refer to daily conversation); Beauty sentences (sentences by using beautiful words to give emotional touch (touch of emotion) to the audience); Hopes sentences; and Heroic sentences (sentences that can evoke audience emotions).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body Language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In the world of MC, body language has a role that is not less important with the mastery of language. Because, every move an MC - especially on entertainment or semi entertainment - is a form of acting. In the event, MC must seize first impressions (first impressions) for his audience to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">perform well. All that impression can be seen through the behavior, facial expressions, and eye contact. From the expression will be seen an MC including a person who is fun, intelligent, friendly, and warm, or a proud person, bodo and superficial.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Appearance in the world of MC includes dress and makeup. Since the MC in one event is part of an event other than the spectacle, then MC must be a solid harmonization between the organization and the characteristic of the event.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TIPS FOR GUIDING EVENTS WITH ENCHANTING</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unpack the event summary</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Outlining the overall event summary to the audience will add value because participants will indirectly be able to know the events they participated in during the event.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eye contact</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In order not to appear awkward and disrespectful to the audience, the MC must seek eye contact with the participants. Example: at the mention of the VIP guest, the officer's view so that the impression MC appear to recognize and give special respect to him. If you do not know which VIP guests are, slowly brush eyes into the front row.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Opening touch</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Opening touch is the effort of an MC to break the ice in an event with steps to pull out interesting jokes, make light inquiries, and can also make controversial questions to participants.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotional content</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In guiding the event, MC is obliged to create an atmosphere of togetherness and dialogue. For that, it takes the ability to bring controlled emotions that are the binding force between the MC with his audience so that the conversation is more interesting. Therefore an MC is expected to present emotionally speaking conversations, with the following steps.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;reinforce the word</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;repeating the word</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;delay the word</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;extend the word.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Profession </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya/ pangénter baos</span><span class="font3"> or MC (event organizer) is a skill that requires high skills because the success of an event is determined by the expertise of an </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) organize the event. Because the presence of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) greatly affect the appearance of the event as a whole then </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) profession can not be done by indiscriminate people. Thus, the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya </span><span class="font3">(MC) profession is one of the promising professions, especially the opportunity to improve the degree of life for the perpetrators.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) as an oral art requires the devotees to train more vocals than their ability to process language and body language in delivering an event. Appearance is also a requirement that must be taken into account if you want to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">become </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ugra wakya</span><span class="font3"> (MC) who quickly accepted in the hearts of the audience.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>References</span></h3>
<p><span class="font3">Aryati, Lies. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Panduan untuk Menjadi MC Profesional</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: Penerbit PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bali Post edisi Rabu tanggal 24 Agustus 2016 hlm.2. ”Badung Rekrut Ratusan Tenaga Pengajar&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keraf, Gorys. 1984. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Komposisi</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah &nbsp;Pengantar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kemahiran Bahasa</span><span class="font3">). Flores: Penerbit Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Larry King dan Bill Gilbert. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Seni Berbicara, kepada Siapa Saja, Kapan Saja, di Mana Saja</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: Penerbit PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nida, Eugene A. 1957. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Learning a Foreign Language. </span><span class="font3">Michigan, Ann Arbor: Cushing-Molloy, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oka, I Gusti Ngurah dan Basuki. 1990. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Retorika Kiat Bertutur</span><span class="font3">. Malang: Yayasan Asih Asah Asuh Malang (Y A 3 Malang).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suardiana, I Wayan. 2016. &quot;Kunci Wasiat Kebudayaan: Membuka Peradaban dengan Aksara Bali&quot; Paper dibawakan dalam Seminar Bulanan Seri Sastra dan Budaya, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya, Universitas Udayana yang diselenggarakan pada hari Jumat, 23 Desember 2016 di Aula FIB Unud.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sugono, Dendy. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Umum Pembentukan Istilah</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: &nbsp;&nbsp;Pusat Bahasa Departemen</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pendidikan Nasional.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sukirno. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Belajar Cepat Menulis Kreatif Berbasis Kuantum untuk yang Ingin Cepat Terampil Menulis Kreatif</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tarigan, Henry Guntur. 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Menulis Sebagai Suatu Keterampilan Berbahasa</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>