---
layout: full_article
title: "Interpersonal Metadiscourse Markers in the “Monash Life” Magazine"
author: "Ni Luh Putu Ayu Kezia Yasinta"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i03.p09</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.3 Agustus 2018: 626-632</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Interpersonal Metadiscourse Markers in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Monash Life”</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Magazine</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Luh Putu Ayu Kezia Yasinta</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:kezia27.ky@gmail.com"><span class="font2">kezia27.ky@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metadiscourse is a new concept of analyzing the discourse related to the relationship between the writer and reader. This can be the way of communicating used by writer to reader. Interpersonal metadiscourse markers are divided into two broad terms; they are interactive and interactional metadiscourse markers. The aims of this research are to identify and explain the interpersonal metadiscourse markers used in the “Monash Life” magazine. This magazine was chosen because it contains many articles in which the writers convey their opinions. The study used twenty two articles in the magazine. The note taking technique was used as the method of collecting the data. First, the articles were read intensively; second, the phrases or words categorized as the type of interpersonal metadiscourse markers were selected. The qualitative method was used to analyze the data. Every sentence or paragraph which contains the types of interpersonal metadiscourse markers were analyzed and classified. The theory of metadiscourse proposed by Hyland (2005) was used in this study. The result of the analysis shows that there were sixty one data that contain the interpersonal metadiscourse markers in the magazine. There were thirty four data found in the category of interactive metadiscourse markers, and twenty seven data in the category of interactional metadiscourse markers. It could be concluded that the use of interactive metadiscourse markers was more dominant than interactional metadiscourse markers in the Monash Life Magazine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Metadiscourse markers, interactive metadiscourse, interactional metadiscourse.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metadiscourse adalah konsep baru untuk menganalisa wacana terkait dengan hubungan antara penulis dan pembaca. Ini bisa menjadi cara berkomunikasi yang digunakan oleh penulis ke pembaca. Pemarka metadiscourse interpersonal dibagi menjadi dua istilah yang luas; yaitu metadiscourse interaktif dan interaksional. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi dan menjelaskan pemarka metadiscourse interpersonal yang digunakan pada majalah &quot;Monash Life&quot;. Majalah ini dipilih karena berisi banyak artikel dimana penulis menyampaikan pendapat mereka. Penelitian ini menggunakan dua puluh dua artikel di majalah tersebut. Teknik mencatat digunakan sebagai metode pengumpulan data. Pertama, artikel tersebut dibaca secara intensif; Kedua, ungkapan atau kata-kata yang dikategorikan sebagai jenis pemarka metadiscourse interpersonal dipilih. Metode kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisis data. Setiap kalimat atau paragraf yang berisi jenis pemarka metadiscourse interpersonal dianalisis dan diklasifikasikan. Teori metadiscourse yang diajukan oleh Hyland (2005) digunakan dalam penelitian ini. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa ada enam puluh satu data yang berisi pemarka metadiscourse interpersonal di majalah tersebut. Ada tiga puluh</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">empat data yang ditemukan dalam kategori pemarka metadiscourse interaktif, dan dua puluh tujuh data dalam kategori pemarka metadiscourse interaksional. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa penggunaan metadiscourse interaktif lebih dominan daripada pemarka metadiscourse interaktif pada majalah Monash Life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Pemarka metadiscourse, metadiscourse interaktif, metadiscourse interaksional.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing a text, the theory commonly used is discourse analysis. According to Nordquist (2017), discourse analysis is a broad term for the study of the ways in which language is used in texts and contexts, or texts' surrounding and defining discourse. This is also called discourse studies. Discourse analysis was developed in the 1970s as a field of study (e.g., Halliday &amp;&nbsp;Hasan, 1976). Theoretical perspectives and approaches used in discourse analysis include the following: applied linguistics, conversation analysis, pragmatics, rhetoric, stylistics, text linguistics, and many others. Therefore, it is important to enhance our knowledge of the use of language in society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The latest theory of discourse analysis is metadiscourse. Metadiscourse is a new concept in the field of discourse analysis that is related to the writer and reader. Language acts to present information through the organization of the text itself as well as engage the readers to understand it (Fuertes-Olivera et al., 2001). In analyzing a text, researchers may study metadiscourse elements based on their forms, meanings or functions among which functional studies have been more commonly used. (Gholami, Mehrnaz. Tajalli, Ghaffar.,. 2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Vande Kopple (1985) and Crismore (1993), metadiscourse markers are divided into two types: textual metadiscourse and interpersonal metadiscourse. Textual metadiscourse is responsible for creating some sort of integration and cohesion for the text</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">created. Meanwhile, interpersonal metadiscourse helps writers interact with their readers. According to Hyland (2005; 50-52) metadiscourse has only</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">two types; they are interactive metadiscourse &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;interactional</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">metadiscourse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research focuses on analyzing the interpersonal metadiscourse marker in the magazine entitled Monash Life. This magazine was chosen because it contains many articles in which the writers convey their opinions. It is related to the topic of this research that is interpersonal metadiscourse marker.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the forms of interpersonal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;metadiscourse</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">markers used in the articles of the magazine entitled Monash Life?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of interpersonal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;metadiscourse</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">markers in the articles of the magazine entitled Monash Life?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the forms of interpersonal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;metadiscourse</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">markers used in the articles of magazine entitled Monash Life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain and analyze the functions of interpersonal metadiscourse markers used in the articles of magazine entitled Monash Life.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This section has four parts; they are data source, method and technique of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting analysis. This research is qualitative research, because the data are the interpersonal metadiscourse markers in the Monash Life magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study were taken from the English magazine entitled Monash Life published by Monash University Strategic Marketing and Communications in 2016 which has more than thirty articles. However, in this analysis, the data were selected from twenty two articles that convey the writer’s opinion. It is related to the topic of interpersonal metadiscourse which means the relation between people and metadiscourse markers used to help engage the writer and reader.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The note taking technique was used as the method of collecting the data. The required data were collected from the magazine and the techniques used are as follows: First, the articles were read intensively; second, the phrases or words categorized as the types of interpersonal metadiscourse marker were selected.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The qualitative method was used to analyze the data. Every sentence or paragraph which contains the types of interpersonal metadiscourse markers were analyzed and classified.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The informal method was used as the way of presenting the result of the data analysis. The data were explained</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and described through sentences. The procedures of analyzing the data are as follows: First, the data in the form of paragraph was presented; the phrase or word categorized as the interpersonal metadiscourse markers were bolded and underlined. Second, the discussion of the data from each category is presented descriptively in-depth in the form of tables.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result and discussion of this analysis only show one each type of interpersonal metadiscourse markers found in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Monash Life</span><span class="font2"> magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interactive Metadiscourse </span><span class="font2">has five features; they are code glosses, endophoric markers, evidentials, frame markers, transition markers.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>(1-1)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Abo fronts 11 stories for the Monash campaign, which has, at its heart, a philosophy of challenging conventions with a spirit of interrogation </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">so that</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">we might have a bigger impact on the world. That is something Abo does, and as she found herself exploring faculties and spaces around the Clayton campus, it sparked memories of her own time at Monash when she completed an arts degree with a major in journalism, beginning in 2004. “It was like being a student again,” she says.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The seventh paragraphs of An Inquiring Mind)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">so that </span><span class="font2">is categorized as code glosses in interactive metadiscourse. It functions to give illustration to what might happen as the impact of the philosophy of the challenging conventions. It helps the reader understand the result of the previous discussion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(1-2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">For example</span><span class="font2">, our students are currently working on smart cities, regenerative medicine, solar cell energy systems and sustainability projects”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The third to seventh paragraphs of Ahead of the Game)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">for example </span><span class="font2">is categorized as endophoric markers in interactive metadiscourse. It functions to direct the reader to the specific information to what the writer’s intends. Here, the writer directs the reader to the information of the jobs done by the students.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>(1-3)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">What made her project so innovative, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">according to</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">program director, Ian Wong, is that it can be easily extended into other areas, such as keeping track of the eating patterns of elderly relatives, or organizing dinner parties for friend with various dietary and alcoholic preferences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The tenth to twelfth paragraphs of The China Solution)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">according to </span><span class="font2">is categorized as evidential in interactive metadiscourse. It functions to support the opinion of the text that comes from the specific source. Here, it refers to Ian Wong as program director who explains about the innovation of the project by Cindy. This helps convince the reader about the topic.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>(1-4)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">In short</span><span class="font2">, all the apparent paths to digital disruption have been trialled – and universities have participated in all these forms of trial. Yet no trial so far has accelerated in a way that produces the disruption to universities imagined by those who see “ancient institutions in their last days of decadence”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The fifth to seventh paragraphs of The Effects of Digital Disruption on The Future of Universities sub-point in Education in the Age of Disruption)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">in short </span><span class="font2">is categorized as frame markers in interactive metadiscourse. It functions to label stages of the discourse into the final conclusion. In this article, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">in short </span><span class="font2">guides the reader to the author’s conclusion of all the apparent paths to digital disruption that have been trialled – and universities have participated in all these forms of trial.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>(1-5)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Watch TV vision of Clarkson in the Hawtorn coach’s box each week and you will see he only communicates with his players between quarters. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Otherwise</span><span class="font2">, he talks to his assistant coaches (or line coaches as they are known in the business) and they communicate the key messages back to the interchange bench.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The twenty-third paragraphs of Mastermind)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">otherwise </span><span class="font2">is categorized as transition markers in interactive metadiscourse. The function is to indicate the other view point of the author to the reader. In this article, the author makes the reader see the other side of the coach.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interactional Metadiscourse </span><span class="font2">has five features; they are attitude markers, self-mention, engagement markers, hedges, boosters.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>(2-1)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">These three regulatory hurdles are neither minor nor easily dismissed or overcome. As a society we wish to be sure that our bridges and buildings will stand and be safe, that our health service will do no harm and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">hopefully</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">cure, and so on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The third to sixth paragraphs of The Quality and Reputation of Higher Education Providers sub-point in Education in the Age of Disruption)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">hopefully </span><span class="font2">is categorized as an attitude marker in interactional metadiscourse. It functions to express the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">author’s intended mood about the argument. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">hopefully </span><span class="font2">in this article emphasizes the word cure.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>(2-2)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Higher education and, indeed, universities will be the source of their own disruption. I do not expect it to be the end of venerable institutions, though I think the landscape will look different in 10 years. And </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">I</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">can make that prediction because the landscape looks very different now than 10 years ago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The third to sixth paragraphs of The Quality and Reputation of Higher Education Providers sub-point in Education in the Age of Disruption)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I </span><span class="font2">is categorized as selfmention in interactional metadiscourse. It functions to directly express the involvement of the author in the argument. The following statement on the Data 43, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I </span><span class="font2">refers to Professor Margaret Gardner AO as the author of the argument.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>(2-3)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">How real is this future for universities? What evidence is there of disruption occurring on this scale? To answer this, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">we must</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">consider two trends affecting universities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The seventh paragraphs of Education in the Age of Disruption)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">we must </span><span class="font2">is categorized as engagement marker in interactional metadiscourse. It functions to guide the reader’s expectation as intended by the author. In this article, the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">we must </span><span class="font2">is used by the author that refers the readers together to the author to guide their expectation as what the author intended.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>(2-4)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">If </span><span class="font2">we sit still for even one minute we’re going to be passed by,” he</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">declares. “So how do we modify ourselves to make us get even better?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The thirty-eight and thirty-ninth paragraphs of Mastermind)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">if </span><span class="font2">is categorized as hedges in interactional metadiscourse. It functions to show the author’s viewpoint of something by giving some possibilities. In this article, the author tries to steer the reader’s expectation by telling the possibility with the word choice </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">if</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>(2-5)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Managers must respond quickly as markets and organisations transform. Even when companies launch products and services in rapid succession, the next generation is ready to go. “In this context, the risk of managers and executives being hesitant are significant,” he warns. “They must be able to think clearly, draw conclusions quickly, and act </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">decisively</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(The third to seventh paragraphs of Ahead of the Game)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">decisively </span><span class="font2">is categorized as boosters in interactional metadiscourse. It functions to sway the reader and to create the unity with the audience. In this article, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">decisively </span><span class="font2">shows the expression of the author to make the reader certain and agree with the discourse as is intended by the author.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Interpersonal metadiscourse marker is a new term of discourse analysis. It functions to help the writer express their intended messages toward the reader or the audience. Interpersonal metadiscourse markers are divided into two broad terms; they are interactive and interactional metadiscourse markers. Both of the markers also are divided into five elements; interactive metadiscourse which includes code glosses, endophoric</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">markers, evidential, frame markers, and transition markers; and interactional metadiscouse are attitude markers, selfmention, engagement markers, hedges, and boosters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research analyzes the form and function of the interpersonal metadiscouse markers in the Monash Life magazine. The result of the analysis shows as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interactive Metadiscourse</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Code Glosses: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to supply</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">information by rephrasing and illustrating.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">such as, so that, as well as, called, while, in other words, typically, meanwhile, instead, Cindy explains</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endophoric Markers: to direct the reader to the information in the other parts of the text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">in this edition, for example, I outline earlier, for instance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Evidential: to direct the reader to the information in the other text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to quote, according to, Robinson says.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frame Markers: to order the information in the text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">in short, and then, by the time, after, to address, on the other hand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transition Markers: to express the relation between the argument.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">otherwise, yet, and,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">although, therefore, similarly, because, but, anyway.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interactional Metadiscourse</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Attitude Markers: To express the writer’s attitude toward the argument.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follow: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I hope, we hope,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">unfortunately, hopefully, I would expect, I think, of course.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Self-Mention: To reference the writer explicitly.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follows: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I, we.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Engagement Marker: To build relationship between the reader and the writer in the text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follows: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you, we must, we.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hedges: To indicate the writer’s viewpoint of possibilities.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follows: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">if, so, though, might, perhaps.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Boosters: To express certainty instead of doubt.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms found in the data are as follows: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">decisively, indeed,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">exactly, she believes, certainly, definitely.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>7. References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Crismore, A., Markkanen, R., &nbsp;&amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Steffensen, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;M. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1993.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Metadiscourse in persuasive writing: A study of texts written by American and Finish university students”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Written Communication</span><span class="font2">, 10(1), pp. 39-71.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dafouz, E. 2008. “The pragmatic role of textual and interpersonal metadiscourse markers in the construction and attainment of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">persuasion: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A cross-linguistic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">study of newspaper discourse”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">, 40, pp. 95113. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;doi:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">10.1016/j.pragma.2007.10.003</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fuertes-Olivera, P. A., Velasco-Sacristan, M., Arribas-Bano, A., &amp;&nbsp;Samaniego-Fernandez, E. 2001. “Persuasion and Advertising English: Metadiscourse in Slogans and Headlines”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">, 33, pp. 1291-1307.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gholami, Mehrnaz. Tajalli, Ghaffar.,. 2014. “An Investigation Of Metadiscourse Markers In English Medical Texts And Their Persian Translation Based On Hyland's Model”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">European Journal of English Language and Literature Studies.</span><span class="font2"> Volume 2, Nomor 2, pp. 114.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hunbbel Meer, S. (2016). Four Different Types of Writing Styles: Expository, Descriptive, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Persuasive, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Narrative [Internet]. Available from: </span><a href="https://letterpile.com/writing/Four-Types-of-Writing"><span class="font2">https://letterpile.com/writing/Four-</span></a><span class="font2"></span><a href="https://letterpile.com/writing/Four-Types-of-Writing"><span class="font2">Types-of-Writing </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed 1<sup>st </sup>January 2018]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hyland, K. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metadiscourse: Exploring Interaction in Writing</span><span class="font2">. London: Continuum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nordquist, Richard. (2017). Discourse Analysis, Observing the Use of Language [Internet]. Available from: </span><a href="https://www.thoughtco.com/discourse-analysis-or-da-1690462"><span class="font2">https://www.thoughtco.com/discours</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="https://www.thoughtco.com/discourse-analysis-or-da-1690462"><span class="font2">e-analysis-or-da-1690462 </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed 20<sup>th</sup> May 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vande Kopple, W. J. 1985. “Some Explanatory &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discourse &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Metadiscourse”. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">College</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Composition and Communication36, 82-93.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">632</span></p>