---
layout: full_article
title: "Types of Indonesian Reduplication as  The Translation Equivalence of English Lexicons"
author: "Muhammad Rafi’ie, I Wayan Pastika, Ni Luh Nyoman Seri Malini"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38114 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-38114"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38114"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2018</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 48. No. 25</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Types of Indonesian Reduplication as The Translation Equivalence of English Lexicons<sup>1</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Muhammad Rafi’ie<sup>(1)</sup>, I Wayan Pastika<sup>(2)</sup>, Ni Luh Nyoman Seri Malini<sup>(3) </sup></span><span class="font4">Linguistic Program in Translation Studies, Postgraduate Program, Udayana University Jl. Kubu Anyar 8, Kuta, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">082111932618</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">rafiier@yahoo.com<sup>(1)</sup>; wayanpastika@unud.ac.id<sup>(2)</sup>; kmserimalini@yahoo.com<sup>(3)</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">—This journal entitled Types of IndonesianReduplication as the Translation Equivalence of English Lexiconsinvestigates the types of Indonesian reduplications and how the English lexicons are translated in Indonesian reduplications. The data of the research is drawn from an English narrative textbook “The Magicˮ (Byrne, 2012) and its translation version in Indonesian “The Magicˮ (Purwoko, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">This study reveals three types of reduplications with their own distinctive forms and varieties on meaning implications, namely: full reduplication, partial reduplication, and imitative reduplication. Full reduplication consists of four sub-categories, namely: reduplication of simple words, reduplication of complex words, reduplication of bases within a complex word, and reduplication without corresponding single bases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The results of the research show that meaning is structured and therefore, it can be analyzed and represented into another language. English inflectional and derivational morphology can correspond productively to Indonesian reduplications. A menu of affixes of both English and Indonesian are the corresponding features of the morphological processes and the meaning components involvedin the translation equivalence analysis. The translation equivalence is then established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence or by contextual relations of the contextual meaning and relatable situational features of grammatical functions of the English lexicons into Indonesian reduplications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Keywords:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Reduplication, translation equivalence, inflectional morphology, derivational morphology,menu of affixes</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font4">—Jurnal yang berjudul “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tipe-TipeReduplikasi Bahasa Indonesia sebagai Terjemahan Ekuivalen dari Leksikon Bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font4">ini menginvestigasi tipe-tipe reduplikasi dalam bahasa Indonesia dan bagaimana leksikon bahasa Inggris diterjemahkan dalam tipe-tipe reduplikasi bahasa Indonesia. Data penelitian diperoleh dari teks buku naratif berbahasa Inggris “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic</span><span class="font4">” (Byrne, 2012) dan versi terjemahannya dalam bahasa Indonesia “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic</span><span class="font4">” (Purwoko, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Studi ini mengungkap tiga macam tipe reduplikasi dengan bentuk masing-masing dan ragam implikasi makna, yakni: reduplikasi penuh, reduplikasi parsial, dan reduplikasi imitatif. Reduplikasi penuh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">terdiri dari empat sub-kategori, yakni: reduplikasi kata dasar, reduplikasi kata kompleks, reduplikasi kata dasar di dalam kata kompleks, dan reduplikasi takberkorespondensi dengan kata dasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa makna terstruktur dan daripada itu, makna bisa dianalisis dan direpresentasikan ke dalam bahasa lain. Morfologi infleksional dan derivasional bahasa Inggris bisa berkorespondensi secara produktif terhadap reduplikasi-reduplikasi bahasa Indonesia. Ragam afiks bahasa Inggris dan bahasa Indonesia merupakan fitur-fitur yang berkorespondensi dalam proses-proses morfologis dan komponen-komponen makna yang terlibat dalam analisis terjemahan ekuivalen. Terjemahan ekuivalen kemudian ditentukan oleh ekuivalen tekstual dan korespondensi formal atau dengan relasi-relasi kontekstual dari makna kontekstual dan fitur-fitur situasional fungsi gramatikal yang bisa dikaitkan dari leksikon bahasa Inggris ke dalam reduplikasi bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: Reduplikasi, terjemahan ekuivalen,morfologi infleksional, morfologi derivasional, menu afiks.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Every language has its own form (morphology) to represent meaning (semantics). Indonesian language without exception has unique and distinctive morphological forms. One of these unique forms in Indonesian language is reduplication. Reduplication is an important and mostly a productive part in word-forming processes. Reduplication occurs by repeating the entire or part of a word. Meanings indicated by reduplication are various due to variety of reduplication types. English affixes both inflectional and derivational attached to certain lexicons can correspond with Indonesian reduplications. The correspondence between English lexicons and its translation equivalence in Indonesian reduplications will be the central topic to be analyzed in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The problems of the study include the following: (1) What are the types of Indonesian reduplication as the translation equivalence of English lexicons? (2) How are the English lexicons translated into Indonesian reduplications?Therefore, the objectives of the study are: (1) To find out the types of Indonesian reduplication as the translation equivalence of English lexicons. (2) To find out how the English lexicons are translated into Indonesian reduplications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Theoretically, it is hoped that this study will specifically improve understanding on</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">translation conditions regarding such aspects as translation equivalence, inflectional and derivational morphology, Indonesian reduplications, and the methods of identifying and describing English lexicons in corresponding contexts which lead to the use of Indonesian reduplications as the translation equivalence. Practically, this research provides practical and helpful information especially on the topic of translation equivalence of English lexicons into Indonesian reduplications.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Research approach that is applied to this study is qualitative method in which the data are analyzed descriptively. The analysis of this research relies on two narrative textbooks chosen for the data source, namely, the source language book in English “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic</span><span class="font4">” (Byrne, 2012) and the target language version in Indonesian “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic</span><span class="font4">” (Purwoko, 2012) as the product of translation.The genre of this particular narrative textbook includes self-help, spirituality, personal development, psychology, philosophy, inspiration, and non-fiction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Observation method proposed by Sudaryanto (1993) is used in collecting the data.Observation method is applied in such a way by observing carefully the entire source of data. To conduct the observation, the writer must understand the concepts of reduplication and its</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">corresponding contexts from the source language. Translational identity method proposed by Sudaryanto (1993) is used to analyze the data of the research. This method is applied to compare between one language with another language to find and analyze the equivalence.Formal and informal methodproposed by Sudaryanto (1993) is used in presenting the result of the data analysis. Formal method deals with the way of presenting a topic by applying explanation using words to describe findings. Informal method is used </span><span class="font3">for the presentation of the data in abbreviated patterns and a mathematical symbol such as +.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Previous studies relevant and helpful to the present study on reduplication and translation equivalence are briefly reviewed as follows: an article entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Equivalence in Translation Theories: A Critical Evaluation</span><span class="font4">” by Panou (2013) is helpful to this research for comparative materials since it presents various influential theories on equivalence in translation. It was concluded from the article that it could be argued that many translation theories are based on two opposing ways of translating. Nida (1964) distinguishes between formal and dynamic equivalence, Newmark (1981) between semantic and communicative translation, Catford (1965) between formal correspondence and textual equivalence, House (1997) between overt and covert translation and Pym (2010) between natural and directional equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another literary review that is relevant for this research is taken from an article entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Plural Semantics, Reduplication, and Numeral Modification in Indonesian</span><span class="font4">” (Dalrymple and Mofu, 2012). This article presents information on optionality of plural markings use by reduplication by looking at the context of a sentence, possibility to refer to multiple quantities of mass nouns by reduplication, and dispreference of numeral modifications use in reduplicated nouns. Another article investigating on Indonesian reduplication that is helpful for this research is from Baldwin et al. (2009) in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">their article entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Double-Double, Morphology and Trouble: Looking into Reduplication in Indonesian.</span><span class="font4">” This study looks at full reduplication in Indonesian verbs. In particular, it focuses on verb reduplication that has the agentive voice affix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meN-</span><span class="font4"> exhibiting the distinction of reciprocal reduplication and distributive reduplication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">To analyze the results of the translation as shown in the data of this research, relevant theories adopted as the main theoretical foundations include: theories of translation, translation equivalence and conditions of translation equivalence from linguistic point of view (Catford, 1965) to analyze how the English lexiconsare translated into Indonesian reduplications. Supporting theories in this study include form and meaning (Larson, 1984) to identify the forms and meaning components indicated by English lexicons in the forms and meaning components of Indonesian reduplications, theories of reduplication (Sapir, 1921; Katamba, 1993) to specify the morphological processes of reduplication and concepts of meaning carried by it, and theories of Indonesian reduplication (Sneddon et al, 2010) to identify and categorize the types of Indonesian reduplications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Catford (1965) defines translation from a linguistic point of view as “the replacement of textual material in one language (SL) by equivalent textual material in another language (TL).” From this definition, two lexical items in it call for comment. These are ‘textual material’ and ‘equivalent’. ‘Text’ is any stretch of language, spoken or written, which is under discussion. The use of the term ‘textual material’ underlines the fact that a text is expected in order to be processed as the translation material from the source language to the target language. The term ‘equivalent’ is the expectation for the result of the translation in the target language as intended by the source language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In term of equivalence, the translation can be observed from the point of view of equivalence as an empirical phenomenon proposed by Catford (1965). Equivalence as an</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">empirical phenomenon is conducted by comparing the SL and the TL text to determine </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">textual equivalence</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">formal correspondence</span><span class="font4">. “A textual equivalent is any TL text or portion of text which is observed on a particular occasion to be the equivalent of a given SL text or portion of text.”The discovery of textual equivalents is based on the authority of a competent bilingual informant or translator. Dictionary’s definitions are helpful in finding textual equivalence. The main dictionaries used for this research are </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Eleventh Edition of Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary</span><span class="font4"> (2003) and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Edisi KetigaKamus Indonesia-Inggris: Third Edition of an Indonesian-English Dictionary</span><span class="font4"> (Echols and Shadily, 1989).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In relation to formal correspondence, Catford (1965) states that “formal correspondence is any TL category which may be said to occupy, as nearly as possible, the ‘same’ place in the ‘economy’ of the TL as the given SL category occupies in the SL.” The term ‘economy’ can be considered as any element of the SL text that is occupied in the TL text as the translation equivalence at corresponding ranks of verbs, adverbs, adjectives, nouns etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Regarding the conditions of translation equivalence, Catford (1965) states that the TL text must be relatable to at least some of the situational features to which the SL text is relatable. Presumably, the greater the number of situational features common to the contextual meanings of both SL and TL text, the better the translation. Furthermore, Catford (1965) states that “contextual relation is the relationship of grammatical or lexical items to linguistically relevant elements in the situations which the items operate in texts. The range of situational elements which are thus found to be relevant to a given linguistic form constitute the contextual meaning of that form.” In this study, if the translation of the SL into the TL from the data source is not exactly processed as a word-for-word translation, the conditions of translation equivalence are applied to analyze the contextual meaning intended from the SL into the TL.The contextual meaning of the SL into the TL can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">established by contextual relations in the ways of relatable contextual meanings and relatable situational features of grammatical functions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In identifying English lexicons and their corresponding translation in Indonesian reduplications, the writer applies form and meaning theory proposed by Larson (1984). According to Larson (1984), one of the basic assumptions is that there is a valid distinction between the surface and the deep structures of languages. The form of language refers to the actual words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, etc., which are spoken or written. These forms are referred to as the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">surface structure</span><span class="font4"> of language. It is the structural part of language which is actually seen in print or heard in speech. Behind the surface structure is the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">deep structure</span><span class="font4">, the meaning. It is the meaning that serves as the base for translation into another language. A second basic assumption is that meaning is structured. It can be analyzed and represented in ways that are useful for the translator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">With regards to reduplication, in Katamba (1993); Sapir (1921) observes that “nothing is more natural than the prevalence of reduplication, in other words, the repetition of all or part or of the radical element. The process is generally employed, with self-evident symbolism, to indicate such concepts as distribution, plurality, repetition, customary activity, increase in size, added intensity, and continuance.” Sapir’s theory indicates that reduplication is a natural phenomenon in languages. The evidence of reduplication involves the repetition of all part or a part of the radical element. A radical element can be viewed as all part or a part of the word that is reduplicated. It can be of any word-class, such as nouns, verbs, or adjectives. A second theory on reduplication is proposed by Katamba (1993). Katamba views reduplication in a morphological sense, that “reduplication is restricted to situations where the repeated part of the word serves some derivational or inflectional purpose.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Limited to the data of the study, the correspondence of the SL lexicons and their</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">translation equivalence in the TL reduplications are analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>FULL REDUPLICATION OF SIMPLE WORDS (FREE BASES)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">According to Sneddon et al (2010), full reduplication involves repeating an entire word. The resulting two bases or words are separated by a hyphen in writing. The second base or word is treated as the reduplicated part. A</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">simple word </span><span class="font4">is word which consists solely of a base, which cannot be broken down into smaller units. A simple word can be of a noun, verb, adjective, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Full Reduplication of Noun</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: It’s one of the [reasons] why as adults we love to be around </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">children</span><span class="font4">…(Pg.2).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ini salah satu [sebab] mengapa sebagai orang dewasa kita senang berada di dekat </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">anak-anak</span><span class="font4"> …(Pg.2).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">First thing in the morning</span><span class="font4">, or as early as possible, Count Your Blessings (Pg.30).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hitunglah Karunia Anda </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pagi-pagi </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">benar, atau sedini mungkin setiap hari</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.33).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Full reduplication of noun bases in data above exhibits the following patterns functio</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ns: in (1), t</span><span class="font4">he TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anak-anak</span><span class="font4">in pattern</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">FULL</span><span class="font4">indicates plurality as</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">the and the the</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">correspondence of the SL noun inflection with the suff</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ix -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">s</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> for plura</span><span class="font4">lity seen in ‘children’ in the pattern </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N + INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">en</span><span class="font4">.The translation equivalence is established textual equivalence and formal corresponding of plural nouns. It is worth noting that unlike English that obliges a plural marking, in Indonesian a plural marking is optional: a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">plural marking generally occurs when it is unclear if the noun is plural or only if it is important to indicate plural. (Sneddon et al, 2010).In (1) the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebab</span><span class="font4"> (typed in square brackets) as the translation equivalence of the SL plural ‘reasons’ is not reduplicated for plurality for it is clearly seen as plural indicated by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">salah satu</span><span class="font4"> ‘one of’ in the context of the TL sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">(2), the reduplication of</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pagi-pag</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i</span><span class="font4">in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">pattern </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">PERIOD OF DAY </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+ RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">FULL</span><span class="font4">derives augmentative meaning from the noun base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pagi </span><span class="font4">indicating period of day as the correspondence of the English adjunct of </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">time ‘first thing in the</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">morning’ in t</span><span class="font4">he pattern </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">NP (first thing) + PP (in</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">the morning)</span><span class="font4">. According to Sneddon et al (2010), adjuncts are components of a clause which give information about such matters as place, time, frequency and manner. Thus, the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pagi-pagi </span><span class="font4">and the SL ‘first thing in the morning’ are adjuncts of time. The translation equivalence is established by the contextual meaning of both texts and formal correspondence at adverbial functions exhibiting adjuncts of time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Full Reduplication of Adjectives</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: … and you </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">sincerely</span><span class="font4"> feel the gratitude … (Pg.7).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;… </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dan Anda </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sungguh-sungguh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">merasakan syukur itu …</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (3), full reduplication of the adjective base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sungguh</span><span class="font4"> is exhibited to deri</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ve the</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">adverb</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">s</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ungguh-sungguh</span><span class="font4">in the pattern </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ADJ +</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ly</span><span class="font4">as the correspondence of the English adjective base ‘sincere’ suffixed with </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">–</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ly</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> to</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">derive the</span><span class="font4"> adverb ‘sincerely’ in the pattern</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ADJ +</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">FULL</span><span class="font4">. The translation equivalence is established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence at adverb functions.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>FULL REDUPLICATION OF COMPLEX WORDS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian complex words consist of an affix or more than one affix plus base(Sneddon et al, 2010). Full reduplication of complex nouns is especially involved in the data analyzed as the reduplication indicates full reduplication of the word bases along with the accompanying derivational affixes which constitute a complex noun. This particular reduplication is exhibited to indicate plurality as the correspondence of English plural complex noun by inflections. The discussion on this section is more emphasized at the accompanying derivational affixes that constitute both the SL and TL complex nouns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The translation equivalence of all the following data of reduplication of complex nouns as the correspondence of English lexicons is established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence of plural nouns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: … and when asked about his monumental </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">achievements</span><span class="font4"> … (Pg.10).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;… </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dan ketika ditanya tentang</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pencapaian-pencapaian</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> monumentalnya … </span><span class="font4">(Pg.10).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: Use the </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">practices</span><span class="font4"> … (Pg.24).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gunakan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">latihan-latihan</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> ini …</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Pg.25).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: … because those </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">feelings</span><span class="font4"> come from a lack of gratitude … (Pg.61).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: … </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">karena </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">perasaan-perasaan</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> itu datang dari tiadanya syukur …</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.65).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (4), the correspondence patterns can be seen in the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pencapaian-pencapaian</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">peng</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + V + DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">FULL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">and the SL ‘achievements</span><span class="font4">’ V + DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ment</span><span class="font4"> + INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Both the TL and SL complex nouns are derived from verbal bases. The TL verbal base</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">capai</span><span class="font4"> is prefixed with the derivational</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4"><sup>2</sup>- and suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4"> and fully reduplicated for plurality. The SL verbal base ‘achieve’ is suffixed with the derivational –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ment</span><span class="font4"> and the inflectional plural –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">In (5), the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">lati</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">han-latihan</span><span class="font4">in the pattern </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">V </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">-an</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">FULL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">corresponds to the SL ‘p</span><span class="font4">ractices’ </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N + DER</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">ZERO </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+ INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">s</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">latihan</span><span class="font4"> is derived from the verbal base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">latih</span><span class="font4">suffixed with the derivational –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4"> and fully reduplicated for plurality. The SL base ‘practice’ can be a noun or verb. ‘Practice’ is derived as a noun by conversion or zero derivation (Katamba, 1993). The inflectional suffix –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4"> marks it plural.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (6), b</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">oth patterns of the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">perasaan-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"></span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">perasaan</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">peng-</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> + V +DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">-an</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> +</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RED</span><span class="font2">FULL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">and the SL ‘feelings’ </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">V + DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ing</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> + INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">s</span><span class="font4">are derived as complex nouns from verbal bases. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL verb base rasa is prefixed with the derivational</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup>- and suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4"> and fully reduplicated for plurality. The SL verb base ‘feel’ is suffixed with the derivational –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> and inflectional plural –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>FULL REDUPLICATION OF BASES WITHIN A COMPLEX WORD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This type of reduplication, as indicated by its title, involves full reduplication of word bases within a complex word, which means that the accompanying &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;affixes &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;participate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">reduplication, but are not reduplicated. The data found in this type of reduplication include verbs and adjectives.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>a. Full Reduplication of Verb Bases within a Complex Verb</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">In this section, full reduplication of verb bases within a complex verb indicates various concepts of meaning and functions:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: Remember when you were a child and looked at life </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">in total wonder</span><span class="font4"> and awe? (Pg.1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ingatkah anda ketika anda masih kecil dan memandang hidup </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">dengan terheran-heran</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> dan takjub?</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.1)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: According to the law of </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">attraction</span><span class="font4"> … (Pg.6-7).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Menurut hukum </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tarik-menarik</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">…(Pg.7)</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(9) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: You can complete the second step at any time during the day today, either at the same time as listing your top ten desires, or </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">intermittently</span><span class="font4"> throughout the day (Pg.127).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anda bisa menyelesaikan langkah kedua ini kapan pun di hari ini, boleh di saat yang sama saat Anda membuat daftar sepuluh keinginan utama, boleh juga </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">terputus-putus</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> di sepanjang hari </span><span class="font4">(Pg.140).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(10) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: … because you </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">took</span><span class="font4"> your bad mood from the morning … (Pg.134).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: … </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">karena Anda </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">membawa-bawa </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suasana hati buruk dari pagi…</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.146).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Scan</span><span class="font4"> over the surface of yesterday until you feel satisfied … (Pg.236).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Ingat-ingatlah</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kejadian-kejadian</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kemarin sampai Anda merasa puas … </span><span class="font4">(Pg.261).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The analysis of the data of full reduplication of verb bases within a complex verb above exhibits the following functions: in (7), the reduplication of the verb base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">heran</span><span class="font4"> in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dengan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">terheran-heran</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">in the pattern</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">PREP + DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ter</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + V + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">BASE</span><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font4">derives augmentative meaning that corresponds with the SL adjective ‘total’ in ‘in total</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">wonder’in the patt</span><span class="font4">ern</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">PREP + ADJ + N</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The SL adjective ‘total’ intensifies the meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">of the noun ‘wonder’. In addition, the TL prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ter</span><span class="font4">- indicates accidental meaning. The translation</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">equivalence is augmentative</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">generalized by</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">meanings &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">correspondence of prepositional adverbial functions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">n (8) the TL reduplicated</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">contextual formal phrasesat</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">verb</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menarik</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">V + DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">meng</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">BASE</span><span class="font4">derives a reciprocal a</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ction to corres</span><span class="font4">pond with the SL noun ‘attraction’ </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">V+ DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ion</span><span class="font4">that textually indicates reciprocity in meaning. The undergoer voice in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-menarik</span><span class="font4"> is the unmarked bare verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik</span><span class="font4">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">and the agentive voice is marked with the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4"><sup>4</sup>- seen in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menarik</span><span class="font4">. In an active sentence, the reciprocal verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-menarik</span><span class="font4"> must have a plural subject to encode both the agent and the patient of the reciprocal verb. However, in this context of the data being discussed here, the derivation of the reciprocal verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-menarik </span><span class="font4">corresponds to the preceding noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hukum</span><span class="font4">. Thus, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hukum tarik-menarik</span><span class="font4"> is a noun phrase exhibiting </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hukum</span><span class="font4"> as the head noun and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-menarik</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">functions as the modifying adjective of the head noun. The SL and TL data exhibit different word-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">meaningsderived from the verbal bases of the SL ‘attract' in ‘attraction’ and the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik</span><span class="font4"> seen in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik-menarik</span><span class="font4">. Thus, the formal correspondence is operated from the verbal bases of the SL and the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (9), reduplication applies to derive a non-continuance in meaning. The correspondence is exhib</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ited in the TL adverb</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">terputus</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-putus</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ter</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + V + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">BASE</span><span class="font4">and the SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">adverb </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">‘intermittently’</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ADJ + DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ly</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font4">In addition, the TL prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ter</span><span class="font4">- is an abilitative indicating that the agent of the action able to choose how to perform the action.The SL –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ly</span><span class="font4"> suffixed to the adjective base ‘intermittent’ marks an adverb function in ‘intermittently. The translation equivalence is established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence at adverb functions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (10), the reduplication derives a continuance or repetition in meaning. The correspondence is shown in the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">membawa-bawa</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">INFL</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">meng</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + V + RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">BASE</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">time the by and</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">classes. The translation equivalence can beestablished by textual equivalence of reciprocal</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>b. Full Reduplication of Adjective Bases within a Complex Adjective</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(12) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: The </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">little irritations</span><span class="font4"> you once felt … (Pg.44)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Rasa tersinggung kecil-kecilan</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> yang pernah Anda rasakan</span><span class="font4"> … (Pg.48)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (12), full reduplication of adjective bases within a complex adjective exhibits the function of the distributive plural reading to an exhibited singular noun seen in </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">the noun phrase</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">rasa tersinggung</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> kecil-kecilan</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N + ADJ +</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">BASE </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+ DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font4">as the plural corres</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">pondence</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">of the SL</span><span class="font4"> noun phrase ‘little irritations’</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ADJ + N</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+ INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">s</span><span class="font4">.The SL and the TL plural formations are exhibited differently: the SL adjective ‘little’ modifies the noun ‘irritations’ as plural, whereas in the TL, the exhibited singular noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rasa tersinggung</span><span class="font4"> becomes plural with the distribution of the characteristics of the adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kecil— kecilan</span><span class="font4">to the noun. It is shown that unlike English adjectives, Indonesian adjectives can be modified to indicate plural. The translation equivalence is established by textual equivalence of the word bases involved and formal correspondence of noun phrases indicating plural nouns.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>FULL REDUPLICATION WITHOUT CORRESPONDING SINGLE BASES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Sneddon et al (2010) describe that sometimes reduplicated forms have no unreduplicated counterparts to which they can be related. This type of reduplication is exemplified below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(13) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: … the things you’ve dreamed of for so long </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">suddenly</span><span class="font4"> happening (Pg.2).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: … </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hal-hal yang telah lama Anda impikan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tiba-tiba</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> terjadi</span><span class="font4"> (Pg.3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (13), the translation equivalence is established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">at adverb</span><span class="font4"> functions seen in the TL adverb</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiba</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">-tiba</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">WCSB </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font4">d the SL adverb ‘suddenly’</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ADJ + DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ly</span><span class="font4">derived from an adjective base. The TL base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiba</span><span class="font4"> (v) has no relationship with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiba-tiba</span><span class="font4">, thus, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiba-tiba</span><span class="font4"> occurs as a single unit in the dictionary.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>IMITATIVE REDUPLICATION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Referring to Sneddon et al (2010), in imitative reduplication the two parts of the word are not identical, though they are similar. Nouns, adjectives and verbs can all undergo imitative reduplication. The variation between the two parts of the word can involve either consonants or vowels. Imitative reduplication is not productive; new forms cannot be created, nor can the two parts of the word change places. Frequently only the first component of the word occurs as a simple word. In some cases, neither part can occur alone. The reduplication usually indicates variety or emphasizes the meaning of the first component.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(14) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: The following passage comes from the Gospel of Matthew in the Holy Scriptures, and it has been </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">mystified</span><span class="font4">, confused, and been misunderstood by many people over thecenturies (Pg.5).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kutipan berikut datang dari Injil Matius di dalam Alkitab, dan selama berabad-abad kutipan itu telah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">menjadi teka-teki</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;membingungkan, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">disalahpahami oleh banyak orang</span><span class="font4">(Pg.5).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">n (14), the TL active verb phrase</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">menj</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">adi teka-teki</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">INFL</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">meng</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">- + V + N RED</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">IMITATIVE</span><span class="font4">and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the SL passive ver</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">b in presen</span><span class="font4">t perfect construction ‘mystified’ </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">V + INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">ed</span><span class="font4">correspond at their contextual meanings. The active voice signals with the inflectional prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4"><sup>6</sup>- in the TL indicates the unintentional action in reference</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">to the passage in the Holy Scriptures that has been mystified because of the nature of the passage itself, not because it has been mystified intentionally by an agent. The SL present perfect aspect is indicated in the TL that the action of the specified verb has been performed </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">selama berabad-abad</span><span class="font4"> ‘over the centuries’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The discussion scope on imitative reduplication involved in the TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi teka-teki</span><span class="font4"> refers to the two parts of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">teka-teki</span><span class="font4"> which are not identical, but similar. The only difference is one last vowel of each part. Neither part of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">teka-teki</span><span class="font4"> can occur alone, thus, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">teka-teki</span><span class="font4"> appears as a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">single unit in Indonesian dictionary. The translation equivalence is established by contextual relations of textual meanings of both the SL and TL and formal correspondence at relatable ranks of the SL verb and TL verb phrase.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>PARTIAL REDUPLICATION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">According to Sneddon et al (2010), partial reduplication occurs only with bases which begin with a consonant. It involves placing before the base a syllable consisting of the first consonant of the base followed by ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">e’</span><span class="font4">. This type of reduplication is no longer productive in the language; it occurs with a few bases, mainly nouns, and cannot be applied to others.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(15) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL: It’s not an accident that the </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">trees</span><span class="font4"> give off oxygen … (Pg.202).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bukanlah kebetulan bahwa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pepohonan</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> melepas oksigen …</span><span class="font4">(Pg.222).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In (15), the partial reduplication of noun is indicated for plurality or variety. The correspond</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ence is exhibited in the</span><span class="font4"> TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pepohonan</span><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">C + V + X ⅜ + C + </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">e</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> + N + - </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">an</span><span class="font4"> and the SL ‘trees’</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">N + INFL-s</span><span class="font4">. C, V, and X in partial reduplication above represent: C: consonant of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">any of the X word base first syllable plus the vocal ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font4">’, thus the first consonant of the word</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pohon</span><span class="font4"> is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">p</span><span class="font4"> plus the vocal </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font4"> create </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pe</span><span class="font4"> plus the word base and the suffix –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4"> create </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pepohonan</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Sneddon et al (2010), suffix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–an</span><span class="font4"> can occur with a reduplicated noun base to indicate a “variety” of what is indicated by the base. Moreover, the meaning of “variety” itself indicates “plurality,” thus what is various must be plural.The SL ‘trees’ consists of a noun base suffixed with the inflectional plural –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">. The translation equivalence is established by textual equivalence and formal correspondence at plural</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">nouns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This partial reduplication formation is especially common with words for plants, but only in few forms (other samples include </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rerumputan</span><span class="font4"> ‘weed’ from the base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rumput</span><span class="font4"> ‘weed’, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dedaunan</span><span class="font4"> ‘leaves’ from the base ‘leaf’).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Abbreviations and foot notes</span><span class="font4">:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">ADJ: adjective base.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">CVX: consonant of any of the word base first syllable plus the vocal ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font4">’ in partial reduplication. DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ly</span><span class="font4">: derivation suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ly</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ment</span><span class="font4">: derivation suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ment</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER</span><span class="font2">ZERO</span><span class="font4">: zero derivation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng-</span><span class="font4">: derivation prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">-.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-an</span><span class="font4">: derivation suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font4">: derivation suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ion</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ter</span><span class="font4">- derivation prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ter</span><span class="font4">-.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">en</span><span class="font4">: inflection suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">en</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">: inflection suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INFL</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-: inflection prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INFL</span><span class="font2">PAST</span><span class="font4">: past verb inflection.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INFL-</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed</span><span class="font4">: verb inflection suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">N: noun base.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">N</span><span class="font2">PERIOD OF DAY</span><span class="font4">: noun indicating a period of day.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">NP: noun phrase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">PP: prepositional phrase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">PREP: preposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RED</span><span class="font2">BASE</span><span class="font4">: reduplication of word bases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RED</span><span class="font2">FULL</span><span class="font4">: full reduplication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RED</span><span class="font2">IMITATIVE</span><span class="font4">: imitative reduplication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RED</span><span class="font2">WCSB</span><span class="font4">: reduplication without corresponding single bases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">SL: source language</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL: target language</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">V: verb base.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>2</sup>DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">- ... –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4">: derivation of noun prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">- and suffixed with –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4">. The -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> of the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">- represents a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-ng </span><span class="font4">becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">n</span><span class="font4"> with initial </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">d, t, c, j, sy, z</span><span class="font4"> (e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pencapaian</span><span class="font4">).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup>DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">- … -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font4">: derivation of noun from verbal bases. The -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> of the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">peng</span><span class="font4">-represents a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-ng</span><span class="font4"> becomes lost with initial </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">r</span><span class="font4"> (e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">perasaan</span><span class="font4">).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>4</sup>DER</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-: derivation of a reciprocal verb prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">- within reduplicated verb bases. The -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> of the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">- represents a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-ng</span><span class="font4"> becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">n</span><span class="font4"> with initial </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">t, </span><span class="font4">the initial </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">t</span><span class="font4"> is lost (e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menarik</span><span class="font4"> from the base </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tarik</span><span class="font4">).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>5</sup>INFL</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-: verb inflection prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-indicating an active-transitive verb. The –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> of the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">- represents a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> becomes “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">m</span><span class="font4">” with base verbs with initials </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">b, p, f</span><span class="font4"> (e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">membawa</span><span class="font4">).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>6</sup>INFL</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-: inflection of verb prefixed with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">-. The –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> of the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">meng</span><span class="font4">- represents a sound which changes depending on the first sound of the base. -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ng</span><span class="font4"> becomes “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">n</span><span class="font4">” with base verbs with initials </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">d, t, c, j, sy, z</span><span class="font4"> (e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi</span><span class="font4">).</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This research concludes that concepts of meaning indicated by reduplication proposed by Sapir (1921) can be incorporated into the types of Indonesian reduplications (Sneddon et al, 2010) in ways that, limited to the data of the study, reduplication of nouns can indicate concepts such as plurality, variety, and an adverbial function. Reduplication of verbs can indicate concepts of meaning such as repetition, continuance, non-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">continuance, casual manners,reciprocals, and augmentative effects.Reduplication of adjectives can derive adverbs and to derive a distributive plural reading.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The incorporation of reduplication theory of Katamba (1993) in Indonesian reduplications can be applied in ways that: for the purpose of derivation, another class of word is derived from a base or another meaning is derived from a base. Then, this derived form can productively participate in reduplication. Whereas, for the purpose of inflection, reduplication occurs without altering the word-class of the base. The difference found is that in English syntax a plural inflection is obligatory, whereas in Indonesian, depending on the context of a sentence, a plural marking is optional and; unlike English adjectives, Indonesian adjectives can be modified to indicate plural. All types of reduplications described in the analysis are mostly productive in word-forming processes, except imitative and partial reduplication.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Baldwin, T., et al. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Double-Double, Morphology in Trouble: Looking into Reduplication in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesian.</span><span class="font4"> The</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">University of Melbourne. The Australian National University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Byrne, R. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic</span><span class="font4">. Atria Books. New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Catford, J. C. 1965. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font4">. Great Britain: &nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dalrymple, M. and Mofu, S. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Plural Semantics, Reduplication, and Numeral Modification in Indonesian</span><span class="font4">. University of Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Echols, J. M., and Shadily, H. 1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Edisi KetigaKamus Indonesia-Inggris: Third Edition of an Indonesian-English Dictionary</span><span class="font4">. PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">House, J. 1997. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transalation Quality Assessment: &nbsp;&nbsp;A Model Revisited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tubingen. Narr.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Katamba, F. 1992. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font4">. London: Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Larson, L. Mildred. 1984. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation</span><span class="font4">. University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">11th Edition</span><span class="font4">. 2003. USA. Merriam-Webster, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, P. 1981. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Translation</span><span class="font4">. Oxford and New York: Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nida, E. A., &nbsp;1964. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Toward a Science of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translating</span><span class="font4">. Leiden. E: J. Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Panou, D. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Equivalence in Translation Theories: A Critical Evaluation</span><span class="font4">. Finland: Academy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Purwoko, S. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic.</span><span class="font4"> PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pym, A. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Exploring Translation Theories</span><span class="font4">. London and New York. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sapir, E. 1921. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Language</span><span class="font4">. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. In Katamba, F. 1992. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font4">. London: Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sneddon J. S., et al. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian Reference Grammar</span><span class="font4">. 2nd Edition. Everbest Printing Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font4"> Duta Wacana University Press. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">25</span></p>