---
layout: full_article
title: "The Translation Ideology of English Idiomatic Expressions in Temperatures Rising into Indonesian in Hasrat Membara"
author: "Ida Ayu Maharani, I Wayan Suardhana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p19</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.2 </span><span class="font1">Mei </span><span class="font0">2018: 409-415</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Translation Ideology of English Idiomatic Expressions in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> into Indonesian in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ida Ayu Maharani<sup>1*</sup>, I Wayan Suardhana<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:iamaharani20@gmail.com"><span class="font2">iamaharani20@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">], <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:wayan_suardhana@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">wayan_suardhana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">*</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This paper entitled “The Translation Ideology of English Idiomatic Expressions in Temperatures Rising into Indonesian in Hasrat Membara” which discusses the use of translation technique, translation method and translation ideology of idiomatic expressions. The problems of the study mainly focuses on the types of translation technique, translation method and translation ideology found in the novel. The aims of this research are to find out the types of translation technique, translation method and translation ideology applied in both novels. The data are presented and explained based on theoretical framework. The data were taken from a novel written by Sandra Brown. The data were collected through documentation and observation. This study used descriptive qualitative method and applied the theory proposed by Molina and Albir (2002) to classify the types of translation technique, the theory proposed by Newmark (1988) to describe the types of translation method and the theory proposed by Hatim (2001) to find the ideology applied in the translated novel. Among twelve translation techniques, there are only five types of translation techniques found in the data of the novel namely variation, adaptation, description, deletion, and generalization. Based on the types of translation technique found, all of them are oriented towards the target language. Thus, the method used in the translated novel is communicative method which is oriented towards to the target language. Based on translation technique and method, it is concluded that the translated novel has a tendency to domestication ideology which is target language oriented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key word: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">translation technique, translation method, translation ideology, idiomatic expressions</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian yang berjudul “The Translation Ideology of English Idiomatic Expressions in Temperatures Rising into Indonesian in Hasrat Membara” membahas penggunaan teknik penerjemahan, metode penerjemahan dan ideologi penerjemahan dari ekspresi idiomatik. Masalah penelitian berfokus pada jenis teknik penerjemahan, metode penerjemahan dan ideologi penerjemahan yang ditemukan dalam novel. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui jenis teknik penerjemahan, metode penerjemahan dan ideologi penerjemahan yang diterapkan pada kedua novel. Data disajikan dan dijelaskan berdasarkan kerangka teoritis. Data diambil dari novel, yang ditulis oleh Sandra Brown. Data dikumpulkan dengan dokumentasi dan pengamatan. Penelitian ini menggunakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">metode deskriptif kualitatif dan menerapkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Molina dan Albir (2002) untuk mengklasifikasikan jenis teknik penerjemahan, teori yang dikemukakan oleh Newmark (1988) menggambarkan jenis metode penerjemahan dan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Hatim (2001) untuk menemukan ideologi yang diterapkan dalam novel terjemahan. Hasil analisis menunjukkan, dari dua belas tipe teknik penerjemahan, hanya ada lima jenis teknik penerjemahan yang ditemukan dalam data novel yaitu variasi, adaptasi, deskripsi, penghapusan, dan generalisasi. Berdasarkan jenis teknik penerjemahan yang ditemukan, semuanya berorientasi pada bahasa target. Dengan demikian, metode yang digunakan dalam novel yang diterjemahkan adalah metode komunikatif yang condong ke bahasa target. Berdasarkan teknik penerjemahan yang ditemukan, dapat disimpulkan bahwa novel yang diterjemahkan condong ke ideologi domestikasi yang berorientasi pada bahasa target.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">teknik penerjemahan, metode penerjemahan, ideologi penerjemahan, ekspresi idiomatik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Translation is the process of transferring the meaning of the source language into the target language. In learning translation, there are three major points that have to be known; first translation technique, the micro level of translation. Translation technique is oriented towards two poles. The first pole is oriented towards the Source Language (SL) culture and system represented by literal, borrowing, and calque. The second pole is oriented towards Target Language (TL) culture and system represented by variation, deletion, transposition, addition, adaptation, modulation, amplification, description and generalization. The second is translation method, the macro level of translation. Newmark’s theory (1988) stated there are two kinds of translation method; semantic translation and communicative translation. Semantic translation attempts to render as closely as the semantic and syntactic structures of the second language, allowing the exact contextual meaning of the original. On the other hand, communicative translation attempts to produce on its reader an effect</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">as close as possible to that obtained on the reader of the original. The last is the translation ideology, the super macro level of translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In translation ideology, there are foreignization and domestication. In foreignization, the translator is willing to introduce the culture of the SL, and domestication is the contrast of it. The factors that influence translation are not only language, but also the transmission of ideology between different nations and countries. Every nation and country also have idiomatic expressions. Idiomatic expressions or idioms cannot be translated literally. Since that may bring difficulties in understanding the idea of the literary works, it might be useful to give analysis and explanation about it. Not only that, the translation method and translation technique used in both novels sometimes hard to be distinguished. According to those reasons, the topic chosen for this study is “The Translation Ideology of English Idiomatic Expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> into Indonesian in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2">”. This novel has a lot of idiomatic expressions that can be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of translation technique are applied in the translation of idiomatic expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> by Sandra Brown into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> by Rahmani Astuti?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of translation method are implemented in the translation of idiomatic expression in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> by Sandra Brown into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> by Rahmani Astuti?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What translation ideology of idiomatic expression found in the translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> by Sandra Brown into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> by Rahmani Astuti?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and classify the types of translation technique of English idiomatic expressions used in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> and its translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the types of translation method found in the translation of idiomatic expressions in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> and its translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the translation ideology of idiomatic expression applied in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> by Sandra Brown and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> by Rahmani Astuti.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The purpose of research is to discover answers to questions through the application of scientific procedures. The methodology used to analyze the data collection in this paper includes the following points.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study were collected from the novel written by Sandra Brown entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> which is published by A Bantam Book, New York in 1989 with 153 pages. This novel was translated by Rahmani Astuti entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara.</span><span class="font2"> It was published by PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama Jakarta in 2014 with 256 pages. This novel was chosen as the data source for this study because it contains a lot of English idiomatic expressions that rarely occur in daily communications and sometimes hard to understand since a single word may have more than one sense.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method applied in collecting data was library research method which means collecting the data based on library as the main source. The technique of collecting data was done through several steps. The first step started by reading the novel carefully to have a good understanding of the story. After that, words, phrases or sentences that contain idiomatic expressions were highlighted. At the same time, their translations were also found in the translated novel in order to find out the concepts of the equivalents of those idiomatic expressions. Next, it was continued by taking note of the idiomatic expressions found in the source novel and its translation. The idiomatic expressions were noted down in paper, and their translations in Indonesian version were noted down as well. Last, the data were classified based on their both translation technique and translation method to find the translation ideology.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing Data.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The qualitative method was applied in this study in order to describe and give actual explanations to the object of the research as its conclusion. The data in the novel were analyzed through several steps. In the first step the idiomatic expressions classified from the English novel were analyzed using the translating technique by Molina and Albir (2002). There are twelve types of translation technique applied for written translation. They are calque, literal, borrowing, adaptation, modulation, variation, addition, deletion, transposition, generalization, description, and amplification. Next, it was continued by the explanation of the data in the translation of the idiomatic expressions in Indonesian. The analysis is also concerned to the scope of discussion mentioned above. After that, it was analyzed using Newmark’s theory (1988) that stated there are two kinds of translation method namely semantic translation method, and communicative translation method. Last, the data were analyzed based on the translation ideology proposed by Hatim (2001) to find the translation ideology, either it has tendency to domestication or foreignization.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of presenting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, the result of the data was presented using informal method. Informal method is a way of presenting data by using table. The data were displayed in a form of table consisting of Source Language Text (SLT) and Target Language Text (TLT). It is also followed with an explanation of translation technique used by the translator in the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and discussion</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of translation technique</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this research, from twelve techniques proposed by Molina and Albir, there were only five types of translation techniques found in the translated novel, namely variation, adaptation, deletion, generalization and description. The other seven techniques were not found in the form of idiomatic expressions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Variation</span></h2>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">SLT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">“Good idea. Give yourself time to </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">wind down </span><span class="font0">before your wedding. I presume it’s still on.”</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">TLT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">“Ide bagus. Luangkan waktu untuk </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">bersantai </span><span class="font0">sebelum hari pernikahan. Kurasa masih bisa.”</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">“Late next month.” (Page 4)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font0">“Bulan depan.” (Hal. 9)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">According to SLT, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wind down</span><span class="font2"> as a phrasal verb has different meaning in the TL if it is translated in a literal way. The translator used variation technique because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wind down</span><span class="font2"> is a variation of language style in TL. The phrasal verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wind down</span><span class="font2"> is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bersantai</span><span class="font2"> which is a verb in TL. The phrasal above means an act of getting gradually relaxed after doing something that has made someone tired or worried (According to Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary &amp;&nbsp;Thesaurus).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deletion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SLT &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TLT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Each caress elicited a strange thrill from her lower body that </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">shimmered in widening circles </span><span class="font0">to the rest of her. (Page 80)</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">Setiap belaian membangkitkan getaran aneh pada tubuh Chantal yang membuatnya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">semakin bergairah. </span><span class="font0">(Hal. 138)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">The idiomatic expression that is bolded above is a verb phrase. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Shimmered</span><span class="font2"> is a past participle of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shimmer</span><span class="font2"> which is in the form of a verb that literally means shining with a soft tremulous light. Meanwhile, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">widening circle</span><span class="font2"> means making something wider or reaching out across the world. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Shimmered </span><span class="font2">can be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bergairah</span><span class="font2"> without words that follow. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In widening circles</span><span class="font2"> are deleted without changing the meaning.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.3 Adaptation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SLT &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TLT</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">She merely smiled. “Have it your way. Are you hungry?” “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">I could eat a horse</span><span class="font0">.” (Page 26)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">Chantal hanya tersenyum. “Terserah kau. Kau lapar?” “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Saking laparnya aku bisa makan kuda</span><span class="font0">.” (Hal. 45)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to the data given, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I could eat a horse</span><span class="font2"> is a verb phrase that is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">saking laparnya aku bisa makan kuda </span><span class="font2">using the adaptation technique in order to match the culture of the target language. When people say </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I could eat a horse</span><span class="font2">, they mean that they are extremely hungry. The popular expression </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I could eat a horse </span><span class="font2">appears to be from the early 19<sup>th</sup> century according to Google Books. It is found in the works of Tobias Smollett by Tobias George Smollett (1824).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Description</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">“The men of your</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">“Orang-orang di</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">village, willing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">desamu, meskipun</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">through they might</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">mereka mau bekerja</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">be, aren’t skilled</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">dengan suka rela,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">laborers. That’s not </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">a</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">bukanlah tenaga</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">put down. </span><span class="font0">It’s a</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">terampil. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Aku tidak</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">fact.” (Page 95)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">bermaksud merendahkan mereka. </span><span class="font0">Ini kenyataan.” (Hal.162)</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Put down</span><span class="font2"> is a phrasal verb. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Put</span><span class="font2"> in a literal way means moving to or placing in a particular position, while </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">down</span><span class="font2"> means from a higher to a lower point of something. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A put down</span><span class="font2"> in SL is added with description in order to give a clear message into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">aku tidak bermaksud merendahkan mereka</span><span class="font2"> in TL to make it more detail. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A put down</span><span class="font2"> here means a remark intended to humiliate or criticize someone. It is an insult or a negative statement about someone or something.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generalization</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SLT &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TLT</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">“Please don’t insult my intelligence with needless explanations. And don’t involve me in your </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">two timing</span><span class="font0">. I won’t be your temporary diversion until you return to your Boston bride.”</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">“Tolong jangan menghina kecerdasanku dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">penjelasan-penjelasan yang tidak perlu. Dan jangan libatkan aku dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">perselingkuhanmu. </span><span class="font0">Aku tidak ingin menjadi hiburan sementara bagimu sampai kau kembali kepada</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">mempelaimu di Boston.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Two</span><span class="font2"> is a number, equivalent to the sum of one and one or one less than three. Meanwhile </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">timing</span><span class="font2"> means a particular point or period of time when something happens. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Two timing</span><span class="font2"> in an idiomatic way means a form of cheating in a relationship where a person attempts to maintain two separate relationships at once without one-another involved in each relationship knowing about each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of translation method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Translation method is the application of translation technique itself. Calque, literal, and borrowing are oriented towards</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the SL, it is the same as the word for word translation, literal, and faithful translation which is also oriented towards the SL and belongs to semantic method. Adaptation, modulation, variation, deletion, addition, generalization, transposition, description, and amplification are oriented towards the TL, it is the same as free translation, adaptation, and idiomatic translation method which are also oriented towards the TL and belongs to communicative method. It is put in diagram V by Newmark.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the data, translation technique that represents semantic method such as borrowing, literal translation, and calque were not found. Meanwhile, variation, description, adaptation, deletion, and generalization were found as communicative method. Hence, it means that the translator was inclined to use communicative method in the translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of translation ideology</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Hatim (2001), there are two types of translation ideology. The first ideology has a tendency to the source text referred toi as foreignization that is SL-oriented. Meanwhile, domestication has a tendency to target language or simply said as TL oriented. The ideology of translation can be found using the analysis of the translation technique then classified by translation method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the analysis above, out from twelve techniques proposed by Molina and Albir, there are only five techniques of translation found in translating the English idiomatic expressions into Indonesian. They are variation, deletion, adaptation, description, and generalization that have the tendency to TL. Method is the actual implementation of the ideology translation. However, out of three translation techniques in foreignization ideology, none</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">was found in the data. On the other hand, out from nine translation techniques that are taking sides to TL, five were found as the realization of the application of the communicative translation and represents the ideology of domestication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis showed the tendencies of translation methods. The result of the present research proves that the translator made a tendency towards the translated novel. As it is analyzed, the translated novel has a tendency to communicative method, meaning that domestication ideology used in this translation is TL-oriented. The translator in the translated novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> tends to use the word or phrase adapted from the source language to the target language; hence, it is more acceptable for the target readers and the translation is suitable for them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The English idiomatic expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> which is translated into Indonesian in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2"> were adopted the culture of Indonesian. There are some points that can be proposed as the conclusion of this research according to the problems of the study mentioned before. The following paragraphs show several conclusions as a result of the analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The English idiomatic expressions that were translated into Indonesian are using five types of translation techniques. Those five types of translation technique are variation, adaptation, deletion, generalization, and description. Five types of translation technique found are TL-oriented. On the other side, the translation technique of SL-oriented was not found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Translation technique has a relation with translation method. Based on the result of translation technique above, there are five types of translation technique of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL-oriented, those techniques are the realization of the communicative translation method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The ideology can be seen from the application of technique and method on the quality of the idiomatic expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising.</span><span class="font2"> Five translation techniques such as variation</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> adaptation, deletion, generalization, and description are TL-oriented and represent communicative method and form domestication ideology. Thus, it means the translator used the ideology of domestication in translating </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> from English into Indonesian in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The application of translation technique, method and ideology of translation on the quality of the idiomatic expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2"> was very positive, both in terms of accuracy, acceptability and readability. All the techniques applied are accurate and acceptable in the target language. The readability also means all of five translation techniques applied by the translator in translating English idiomatic expressions into Indonesian positively affected the readers of the translated book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Letters and Culture. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hatim, B. (2001). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching and Resarching Translation.</span><span class="font2"> London and New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred. (1984). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross Language Equivalence</span><span class="font2">. Lanham, New York, London: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Molina, L &amp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Albir, &nbsp;A.H. (2002).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Functionalist</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Approach</span><span class="font2">. Dalam Meta, Vol. XLVII, No. 4.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter. (1988). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font2">. Hertfordshire: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nida &amp;&nbsp;Taber (1974). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Practice</span><span class="font2">. Netherlands: The United Bible Society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Seidl, J. And W Mc. Mordie. (1978). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Idiom and How to Use Them. </span><span class="font2">London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Refrences</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Astuti, Rahmani. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hasrat Membara</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: &nbsp;PT Gramedia Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, Sandra. (1989). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temperatures Rising</span><span class="font2">. New York: A Bantam Book.Austin, J.L 1970. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How To Do Things With Words.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frans, I Made Brata. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Application of Translation</span><span class="font2">. English Department, Faculty of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">415</span></p>