---
layout: full_article
title: "Taboo Language in “NEIGHBORS 2” Movie"
author: "Dewa Ayu Ketut Treanikita"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p05</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.2 </span><span class="font2">Mei </span><span class="font1">2018: 306-310</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Taboo Language in “NEIGHBORS 2” Movie</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dewa Ayu Ketut Treanikita<sup>1</sup>*, Luh Putu Laksminy<sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font2">English Department – Faculty Of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:treanikita@gmail.com"><span class="font2">treanikita@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">], <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:putu_laksminy@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">putu_laksminy@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2">] </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini berjudul Taboo Language dalam film &quot;Neighbors 2&quot; adalah untuk mengetahui jenis kata-kata tabu yang digunakan dalam film Neighbors 2 dan untuk menjelaskan faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan kata-kata tabu di film Neighbours 2. Data penelitian ini dianalisis dengan menggunakan teori yang diajukan oleh Jay (1992) sebagai teori utama untuk mengidentifikasi jenis kata-kata tabu dan teori pendukung yang diajukan oleh Fakuade (2013) untuk menganalisis linguistik tabu. Berdasarkan teori Jay ada 10 jenis kata-kata tabu; Mereka Crusing, Blasphemy, Obscenity, Taboo, Vulgarity, Profanity, Epithet, Slang, Insult dan Slurs, dan Scatology. Namun, menurut Fakuade, ada 5 jenis tabu linguistik: tabu linguistik terkait-moralitas, tabu linguistik terkait-dekorum, tabu linguistik terkait-penghormatan yang dihormati, tabu linguistik terkait-kepercayaan, tabu linguistik yang terkait-ditakuti. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini untuk melihat jenis dan faktor pengaruhnya di film Neighbors 2. Dalam film Neighbors 2 ada 10 jenis kata-kata tabu. Oleh karena itu, faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan kata tabu ditemukan 5 faktor. Ada 5 faktor kata-kata tabu yang telah diidentifikasi, yaitu: emosi, penghinaan, bingung, kotor, dan kaget.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: sosiolinguistik, kata taboo, tipe-tipe, faktor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This his study entitled Taboo Language in “Neighbors 2” Movie are to find out the types of taboo words used in Neighbors 2 movie, to explain the factor influence the used of taboo words in Neighbors 2 movie.The data of this study were analyzed using the theory proposed by Fakuade (2013) as the main theory to identify linguistic taboo and the supporting theory proposed by Jay (1992) to analyze the type of taboo words. Based on Fakuade’s theory there are 5 types of lingistic taboo; they are morality-related linguistic taboo, decorum-related linguistic taboo, veneration-related linguistic taboo. morality-related linguistic taboo, decorum-related linguistic taboo, veneration-related linguistic taboo. However, according to Jay, there are 10 types of taboo words; crusing, profanity, blasphemy, taboo, vulgarity, obscenity, epithet, slang, insult and slurs, and scatology.This study to see the types and factors influence in the movies. In the Neighbors 2 movie has 10 types of taboo words. Therefore, the factorcs influence the used of taboo word found 5 factors. There were 5 factors of taboo words which had been identified, they are: emotion, insulting, crused, dirtyjoke, and shock feeling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: sociolinguistic, taboo words, types, factors</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Taboo terms were firstly introduced by Captain Cook in the late 18th century when he was sent to Tahiti. According to Allan and Burridge (2006: 2-3), taboo or known as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tabu</span><span class="font2">is a Tongan term that denotes a person, object or act which is dangerous and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">therefore it must be avoided. The example of this case is the act of incest which is known as taboo so is the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">motherf**ker</span><span class="font2">that denotes incest activity. However, there are other words that are considered taboo while the action they denote is not considered taboo. When people talk about sex, it is often considered as taboo while the act itself is not</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">forbidden if it is done by the appropriate person in suitable place and time. Therefore, words that are related or linked to taboo act will automatically become taboo words (Allan and Burridge, 2006: 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Taboo word is a forbidden word in a culture, because such a word is not allowed to be uttered, and it includes sex, death, genitalia, intermarriage and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">many more on the use of offensive language. Kusuma (2013) stated that taboo words are usually used in daily conversations. It can be found when people express their emotions, such as emotion of anger like “fuck”; “shit”, or shocked feeling like “holy shit”;”damn it”. Taboo words are a unique phenomenon, because they may produce embarrassment, disgust, and social norm violation in the society concern.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of linguistic taboo are used in “Neighbors 2” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors influence the use of taboo words are found in “Neighbors 2” movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the linguistic taboo used in Neighbors 2 movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the factors influence of taboo words used in Neigbors 2 movie script.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this studywere taken from the movies entitled Neighbors 2.Neighbors 2 is directed by Nicholas Stoller and written by Andrew Cohen and Brendan O’Brien. The film stars by Seth Rogen, ZacEfron, Rose Byrne, Dave Franco and ChristoperMintz-Plasse. Neighbors 2 movies were released on May 20<sup>th</sup>, 2016. Thismovie was chosen as the data source because the dialogues of the movies use natural daily conversation and contain a lot of taboo words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected through observation method and documentation method. Observation is the first step method to collect the data before documentation method. Documentation method is the supporting method of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is one step to collect the data. First, downloading &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;movies &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.filmbagus21.com/neighbors2:sor"><span class="font2">http://www.filmbagus21.com/neighbors2:sor</span></a><span class="font2"> orityrising-2016.htmland then watching every scene in detail. Second, finding the taboo words from the script in the movie for every scene while watching the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A descriptive qualitative method was used toanalyze thelinguistic taboo and types of taboo words. After all the data collected, the data were classified based on the types according to Jay (1992) and the linguistic taboo according to Fakuade (2013).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study used the descriptive method in presenting the data related to the subject of this study. The data were categorized, depending on each scene. Furthermore, each scene was presented descriptively. The data from movie was presented based on the selected conversation movie scenes. There are 28 scenes of Neighbors 2 movie. From 28 data which were analyzed, linguistic taboo and the types of taboo words can be seen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Linguistic Taboo in</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Neighbors 2 Movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Morality-related Linguistic taboo.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Nora : Personally, i’ve made love to three man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shelby :Um, i’ve done like everything, but... Nora : But what?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shelby : Like evertything you can do, but that one thing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nora : You’ve never eaten out </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a guy’s ass </span><span class="font2">before?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shelby : Mmm...</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nora : Woah, i can’t believe that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">vulgarity </span><span class="font2">type. At night Nora and Shelby enjoy the night on the terrance, Nora tells the story with Shelby. At the time, in the middle of the story Nora is confessing that she’s made love with three man. Shelby responds and she said that she had done everything but she’s actually ashamed that she had never done that before. Nora was suprised by what she said. Shelby has done everything but one thing she never did. Nora said to Shelby that “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you’re never eaten out a guy’s ass before?”.</span><span class="font2"> Shelby did not just answer and then Nora did not believe her that Shelby never did that before. This term is vulgar because Nora said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a guy’s ass</span><span class="font2">she described a part of human beings. Based on the Oxford dictionary, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a guy’s ass</span><span class="font2">is a male organ.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Decorum-related linguistic taboos.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Mac &nbsp;&nbsp;: Fuck, they will come.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kelly &nbsp;: Clean it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mac : Stella, how do you keep findding mommy’s Dildo? Just put it away, okay?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stella : No</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mac : Fuck! She saying no all the time Kelly : Hide your bongs!. What’s that smell?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mac &nbsp;&nbsp;: It’s bongs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kelly &nbsp;: Threw away!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first scene is located in thehouse. There are1 type of taboo words found on this scene, namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">obscenity </span><span class="font2">type. The type is spoken by Mac. There is Macwho was cleaning his house because there would be guests who would come to his house. After that, he saw his daugther playing with an object called Dildo. Mac told Stella to put it away but Stella didn’t respond to his father’s words.The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fuck</span><span class="font2">was spoken by Mac. This context belongs to obscenity type. Mac said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fuck</span><span class="font2"> because, his daughter did not listen</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to him and kept playing with the dildo. This utterance is categorized as obcenity type.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Veneration-related &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;linguistic</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>taboos.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Teddy </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font2">That’s how you talk in front of your daughter</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mac </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font2">She’s a baby, she doesn’t retain any of shit</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Teddy :Well, yes she will.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mac : No, She doesn’t. Watch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fuck, fuck, fuck.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stella : Fuck.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Teddy : That’s </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">your daughter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation in scene 20, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">insult type </span><span class="font2">was found, spoken by Teddy. At first Mac said some bad words in front of his baby but eventhough teddy said that maybe she would retain the word that mac’s said but mac denied that his baby would hear what he said, and suddenly the baby said the bad words. Teddy said “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Your daughter”</span><span class="font2">to Mac. Cunt is female genital,Teddy’s statement is insult. He insulted Mac with verbal attack.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Factors Influencing the use of Taboo</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotional</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Emotion could cause someone to use taboo. Someone who often use taboo words to describe a situation which is restless against something. This could happen when someone releases a feeling of anger or lured by the emotional atmosphere. Indirectly, the use of taboo words depicting someone to express what is in his mind. Emotional feelings came when someone in anger, sad, worried, and dissapointed. At the time, the feeling of speaking becomes the determinant of the form of language we choose such as: fuck, shit, motherfucker ect. The words are classified in non formal language. Those words arise because of so much anger that the self cannot control not to say word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Confused</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This factor also influences the use of taboo word. When you feel yourself in a state</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">of confusion, the word is sometimes just blurted out. The cause is that confusion has no settlement or no other way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dirtyjoke</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The following mention of taboos relates to parts of human body which are not necessarily spoken openly only as a curse in order that the word taboo is not referring to the true meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The words vagina, penis, boobs in this category are not publicy spoken . The words refer to the private part of the women and is not well spoken.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Insulting</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The use of taboo words in this type is to insult someone like; pig, bighead, bitch. The word means when someone insults people. This word is considered taboo because it is not polite when it is said in front of the community. The taboo wordsare expressed for having an unhappy feel to someone and insult someone thatwe do not like. Trying to lower your opponent. This proves that the original is weak so it needs a reinforcement effort, which is not obtained from the raw wordsof the intellect. Futher weakness appears when not being able to control his tongue regardless of context, topic or situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Crused</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Taboo word appears when we are angry but there is no one. This is a cowardly attitude, because only dare to vilify people. When disliking the person and finally the cruse will be given with a word for that person.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In Neighbors 2 movie script, there are taboo words found in the conversations. Based on the analysis, linguistic taboos, types of taboo words and also some factors were found in Neighbors 2 Movie. There are 5 types of linguistic taboo. However, there were 5 types of linguistic taboo which had been identified in the movies, they are morality-related</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">linguistic taboo, veneration-related linguistic taboo, decorum-related linguistic taboo, religion-related linguistic taboo, fear-related linguistics taboo. There are 3 types of linguistic taboo are found in the Neighbors 2 movie, which are; morality-related linguistic taboo, veneration-related linguistic taboo with euphemisms and decorum-related linguistic taboo without euphemisms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to the theory of Jay, from 10 types of taboo word only found 7 types of taboo words, which are; cursing, profanity, vulgarity, obscenity, epithet, slang, and insult and slurs in the Neighbors 2 Movie. The factor influences the use of taboo words in this movie are: as a emotion, confused, dirtyjoke, insulting, crused and the shock feeling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Allan, Keith and Burridge, Kate. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Forbidden Words: Taboo and the Censoring of Language</span><span class="font2"> (online). International Journal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available on </span><a href="http://ebooks.bharathuniv.ac.in/gdlc1"><span class="font2">http://ebooks.bharathuniv.ac.in/gdlc1</span></a><span class="font2"> /gdlc4/Arts_and_Science_Books/arts /english/Linguistics/Books/Forbidde n%20Words.pdf (Cited on 8<sup>th</sup> July 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anggita, Fika Nur. 2015. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistic Analysis of Taboo Woords in Bad Teacher Movie</span><span class="font2"> (online).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Undergraduated Thesis. Yogyakarta: Yogyakarta State University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available on </span><a href="http://eprints.uny.ac.id/15998/1/Fika"><span class="font2">http://eprints.uny.ac.id/15998/1/Fika</span></a><span class="font2"> %20Nur%20Anggita%20102111440 20.pdf (Cited on 30<sup>th</sup> May 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakuade, Gbenga. (2013). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics Taboo in The IGBO Society: A Sociolinguistic Investigation </span><span class="font2">(online). International Journal. Nigeria: Universirty of Ilroin. Available from: http://www.language-and-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">society.org/journal/2-2/6_fakuade_article.pdf (Cited on 23<sup>th</sup> May 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolingustic: Second Edition </span><span class="font2">(online). International Journal. London and New York: Longman. Available on </span><a href="https://abudira.files.wordpress.com/2"><span class="font2">https://abudira.files.wordpress.com/2</span></a><span class="font2"> 012/08/full_summary_an_introductio n_to_sociolinguistics.pdf (Cited on 8<sup>th</sup> July 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jay, Timothy. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cursing in America: A Psychological Study of Dirty Language in The Courts, in The Movies, in The Schoolyards and on The Street</span><span class="font2"> (online). International Journal. Philadelphia: JhonBenjamins Publishing Co. Available on </span><a href="https://www.jbe-platform.com/content/books/978902"><span class="font2">https://www.jbe-platform.com/content/books/978902</span></a><span class="font2"> 7274052.pdf (Cited 8<sup>th</sup> July 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kusuma, Gede Aditya Widya. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Expression of Taboo Words and Their Expressions in Bad Boys Movie.</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mahamurah, Ranny Claudia. 2015. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">KataKata Makian dalam Film A Good Day To Die Hard oleh Skip Woods </span><span class="font2">(online). Undergraduated Thesis. Manado: Universitas Sam Ratulangi. Available on </span><a href="https://ejournal.unsrat.ac.id/index.ph"><span class="font2">https://ejournal.unsrat.ac.id/index.ph</span></a><span class="font2"> p/jefs/article/view/8821.html (Cited 8<sup>th</sup> July 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pilotti, Maura. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Taboo Words in Expressive Language: Do Sex and Primary Language Matter?</span><span class="font2"> (online). International Journal. United States of America: New Mexico Highland University. Available on </span><a href="http://www.aijcrnet.com/journals/Vol"><span class="font2">http://www.aijcrnet.com/journals/Vol</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">_2_No_2_February_2012/3.pdf </span><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font2">Cited 23<sup>th</sup> May 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Swannell, Julia. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Little Oxford Dictionary of Current English.</span><span class="font2"> Fifth Edition (online). International Journal. London: Oxford University. Available on http//lybyney.ru/hydyw.pdf (Cited 7<sup>th </sup>May 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wiadnyana, I Gusti Nyoman Agus. (2012). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Taboo words in Hollywood movie Bad Teacher.</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduated Thesis. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">310</span></p>