---
layout: full_article
title: "Psychological Aspects of the Main Character in the Movie “If I Stay”"
author: "Dewa Ayu Rengganis Wijayanti, I Nengah Sudipa, Putu Weddha Savitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i04.p01</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.4 Nopember 2018: 842-845</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Psychological Aspects of the Main Character in the Movie “If I Stay”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dewa Ayu Rengganis Wijayanti<sup>1</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Putu Weddha Savitri<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department - Faculty of Arts - Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayurengganis56@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ayurengganis56@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">nengahsudipa@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:weddha@fs.unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">weddha@fs.unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The paper entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Psychological Aspect of the Main Character in The Movie “If I Stay” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">aims to describe the psychological aspect of the main character and how this aspect affects the main character’s behavior or personality. The topic is interesting because this movie has some tragedies that happen and affect the main character’s life in terms of view of psychological aspect which made this movie have an agitation to be analyzed.The data of this study were taken from a movie entitled If I Stayby using the documentation method. The collected data were analyzed by using a qualitative method based on the theoretical framework. The data were categorized based on the Psychological theory proposed by Bernhardt (1953). The results of the interpretation of the data reveale that the main character has all the psychological aspects in her life and some of them mostly affect her behavior and personality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: main character, psychology analysis, behavior or personality</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi yang berjudul </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Psychological Aspect of The Main Character in The Movie “If I Stay”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan aspek psikologi dari karakter utama dan bagaimana aspek tersebut mempengaruhi kepribadian karakter utama. Topik ini menarik karena film ini memiliki beberapa tragedi yang terjadi dan mempengaruh ikehidupan karekter utama dalam pandangan aspek psikologi yang mana membuat film ini memiliki dayatarik untuk di analisis .Data pada pembelajaran ini di ambil dari sebuah film yang berjudul “If I Stay” dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi. Data yang telah di peroleh di analisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif berdasarkan pada landasant eori.Data di katagorikan berdasarkan pada teori psikolog ioleh Benhardt (1953). Hasildari interpretasi data tersebut mengungkapkan bahwa karakter utama mempunyai semua aspek psikologi di dalam hidupnya dan ada beberapa di antaranya yang paling mempengaruhi kepribadiannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci :karakterutama, psikologianalisis, kebiasaandankepribadian.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Wellek and Warren (1967:1), literature represents “life” and “life” itself in a large measure comes from a social reality, even though the natural world and the inner or subjective world of the individual have also been object of the literary imitation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to analyze a literary work separate parts that make it up are identified to determine the relationship among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole. Character is one important aspect because it carries the author’s message that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education and many others (Kenny, 1966:5).The character</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">basically can be divided into two kinds, main character and supporting character, depending on the role of the character in the story. The main character has an important rule in the story to tell about his or her experience. Some films or novels start the story with description of the main character. The problem in the story always has a connection with the main character and the main character is always appearing as the important character from the beginning to the end of the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Movie is interesting because by watching a movie we can see the real visualization of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of psychological aspects are found in the main character</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of psychological aspects are dominantly affecting &nbsp;&nbsp;the &nbsp;&nbsp;main</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">character’s &nbsp;personality &nbsp;along the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">story?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the psychological aspects of the main character in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">If I Stay.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe psychological aspect affecting the main &nbsp;&nbsp;character’s</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">personality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this writing, the research method consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this research were taken from the movie entitled “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">If I Stay”. </span><span class="font2">It was a 2014 American teen romantic drama film directed by R. J. Cutler and based on the novel of the same</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">name by Gayle Forman. The story was narrated by a 17<sup>th</sup> years old girl. The story centers on the ultimate decision between life and death of Mia Hall. The movie was released in New York on August 18, 2014.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">All data were collected using the documentation method, by watching the film, making sure the conversation, by reading the script of the movie repeatedly, understanding the content of the movie. The next step was taking notes of the part of the movie conversation that gives information about the characters, and analyzingthe data in detail based on the theory applied.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed using the qualitative method, in which each datum was presented and analyzed based on the theoretical basis for psychological aspect adopted in this study. The main theory applied in this study was the theory of psychology in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font2"> by Bernhardt (1953).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the following section, the analysis of this study is given.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Aspects of the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Main Character</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human motivation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Bernhardt (1953: 45-48) motivation can be divided into five classes of human motivation, those are; the appetites, the wants, the emotion, feeling and attitudes and social motivation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appetites</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Appetite of Mia was her family. To Mia family was everything. Family is a life for her without family she means nothing to live. She would like all of her survived over because she cannot live without her family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wants</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The want of Mia in this movie was that she wanted to know what happened to her family.She realized and got shock because of an accident about her car which was hit by a truck. Then she woke up with a confused mind. She kept asking and looking for her family. She did not realize that her spirit was out of her body. She asked the people around her but no one knew that she was existing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Emotion of Mia was mad. It could be seen in the story where she ignored to talk about Adam to her mom. She would not tell her mom what had happened to her and Adam.Mia survived for a complicated relationship with Adam because Adam did not agree if Mia moved from Portland because of Julliard.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and Attitude</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The feeling and attitude of Mia was pleasant experience, when she told her best friend, Kim, about Adam. She just finished her dating with Adam the day before she met Kim. It was a great time for Mia to be able to see a classical music with the one who she loves. It was the first time she went out with a guy and it was being a happy time for her and Adam.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social motives</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The social motive of Mia was social disapproval. When social disapproval happened between Mia and Adam, Mia had a big dream to continue her school to Julliard University but she</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">made a mistake by not telling Adam before she applied the scholarship. Adam felt that Mia was lying to him not to leave him alone as her promise. Mia tried to persuade Adam that it was just temporary until she finished her school and would back to Adam.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling and Emotion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Feeling and emotion meanthat feeling can influence the emotion. Every activity or experience is always coloring feeling</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Characteristic of Feeling</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The part of the story that show us the characteristic of feeling when Mia got mad and bored but she did not show her feeling to the people around her. Mia was attending Adam concert and that was the first time to be around the people who liked rock genre. She felt that she was not comfortable with the situation. She did not show the people that she was angry. She showed the people that she did not have any problem with anything. Her expression showed that she was fine even if she was not.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Characteristic of Emotion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The part of the story that showed us the characteristic of emotion is when Mia fought with Adam. Adam did not allow Mia to go to Julliard University because Adan did not want Mia to be far from him. Mia showed that she felt Angry with Adam. She attacked all the arguments that Adam said. She showed to Adam that he could not prevent her plan to continue her school. She yelled at Adam and showed up that she was Angry.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Most Influencial Psychological Aspect in the Main Character Personality</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Main Character’s Want</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Her want did not changeher personality at all to face the reality. She was being optimized again to go back to her life because of her want to be always beside Teddy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Main Character’s Emotion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In those scened Mia showed her pessimist personality.Mia had a happy life with her little family and she could not live without them. When she knew that her parent passed away she lost her power to keep struggle in her coma.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Mia had a complex psychological aspect in this story. Mia was a nice girl with a good attitude. Mia’s appetite was her cello and family she could not live without them, both of those things were her passion. What the main character wanted was mostly about her ambition to be a better person such as she wanted to know what had happened to her family, the second want was that she wanted someone tobe able to communicate with her; the third want was that she wanted Adam to give her comment; the fourth was that she wanted Teddy to keep alive; the fifth was that she wanted to continue her school to Julliard University; the sixth want was that she wanted Adam to touch her, and the last want was she wanted to end all of her life. She got mad and sad as her emotion. Mia’s feeling and attitude was filled by pleasant and unpleasant experience that all the things were about Adam. The social motives were social disapproval of Adam because she would like to reach her dream by continuing her school to Julliard University and she also did social approval of her family to come with her</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">family by doing some negotiation with her parents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mia wanted that she could change her optimized personality into a pessimistic one; she was optimistic that she could stay alive for her family but it changed after she knew that Teddy passed away. The last aspect that affected her personality was her emotion. She was an enclosed person and she did not like if everyone intervened her relationship with her boyfriend and also she loved her family so much</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font2">Toronto: McGraw – Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rene and Austin Warren.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1966.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rene and Austin Warren.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1967.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. New York: Harvest.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">845</span></p>