---
layout: full_article
title: "A Case Role of Verbs in the Movie Script Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret"
author: "Ni Nyoman Dewi Astari Putri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i02.p31</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.2 Mei 2018: 496-502</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>A Case Role of Verbs in the Movie Script </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Nyoman Dewi Astari Putri</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:yesungastari@gmail.com"><span class="font3">[yesungastari@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tulisan yang berjudul “A Case Role of Verbs in the Movie Script Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret” bertujuan untuk dapat mengidentifikasi jenis kata kerja, mengetahui struktur semantik serta kaitan antara kata kerja dan argumentnya. Data dalam tulisan ini berasal dari klausa dan kalimat dalam naskah film. Data tersebut dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan teknik mencatat. Data tersebut kemudian dianalisa menggunakan teori Case Grammar yang dikemukakan oleh Walter Cook (1979) dengan metode qualitatif. Hasil analisis kemudian dipaparkan menggunakan metode informal.Berdasarkan analisis yang telah dilakukan, ada tiga jenis kata kerja yang ditemukan yaitu kata kerja keadaan, proses, dan aksi. Struktur semantik dari sebuah kalimat ditunjukkan oleh case frame meliputi kata kerja keadaan, kata kerja proses, kata kerja aksi, kata kerja keadaan pengalaman,kata kerja proses pengalaman, kata kerja aksi pengalaman, kata kerja keadaan benefaktif,kata kerja proses benefaktif, kata kerja aksi benefaktif, kata kerja keadaan lokatif,kata kerja proses lokatif, dan kata kerja aksi lokatif. Selain itu, kaitan antara kata kerja dan argumentnya dalam struktur lahir/luar adalahsebagai agent, experiencer, benefactive, object, dan locative. Dalam struktur batin/dalam, kaitan antara kata kerja dan argumenya bisa sebagai lexicalized, coreferential, dan build in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: case grammar, case role, struktur semantik</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This writing entitled “A Case Role of Verbs in the Movie Script Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret” was conducted in order to be able to identify the types of verb, to find out the semantic structure and the case role between the verb and its cases.The data in this study were taken directly from clauses and sentences found in the movie script. Those data were collected using the documentation method and note taking technique. In analyzing the data, Case Grammar theory proposed by Walter Cook (1979) was applied by qualitative method. In addition, in order to present the data analysis clearly and neatly, informal method was used to describe and explain the data.The result shows that there were three types of verbs found in the movie script. Those verbs are state, process, and action verbs. In addition, the semantic structure of the data is shown by using case frames. The case frames of the data are basic state, basic process, basic action, state experiential, process experiential, action experiential, state benefactive, process benefactive, action benefactive, state locative, process locative, and action locative verb. Besides, the case role of the datain surface structure is as agent, experiencer, benefactive, object, and locative. Furthermore, the analysis of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">deep structure showed that there are three covert case roles found in the data namely lexicalized, coreferential, and build-in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keyword: case grammar, case role, semantic structure</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A verb is considered as the most important element within a sentence. The reason is that a verb is the core or the center of a clause and sentence as it presupposes a number of participants, i.e. one, two or three depending on the semantic concern (Dixon, 1991;9). This participant is called argument. It bears a specific grammatical or semantic relation to a verb and whose overt or implied presence is required to form a well-formedness sentence structure containing that verb (Trask 1993: 20).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In semantic, the relationship between the verb and its arguments is known as case role. Each of cases within a sentence is assigned a certain role that relates to its verb. In the Case Grammar, the argument is labeled as case.Each case that occurs with a verb is matched by a semantic feature in the verb itself. According to Cook (1979;52) there are five propositional cases required by semantic valence of the verb. They are Agent (A), Experiencer (E), Benefactive (B), Object (O), and Locative (L).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The relationship between a verb and its cases can be analyzed using Case Grammar theory. Cook (1979;28) defined it as “a system which views the deep structure of sentences as a set of relations between a verb and a series of case-marked noun phrases”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the explanation above, it is very interesting to analyze the case role found in movie script entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3"> by using Case Grammar theory proposed by Cook (1979) because by analyzing case role, it is possible to find out the role played by the cases of a verb within a clause or sentence in certain events or situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Therefore, it gives the reader a deeper understanding about the meaning and the relation between the verb and its cases by knowing “Who did what to whom” and also “When and where”. In addition, the analysis is shown by using case frame to make it easier to identify the types of verb, semantic structure and case role.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of verbs are found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the semantic structures of the verbs found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the case roles between the verb found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of verbs found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font3"> based on the verb classification in terms of vertical dimension which consists of state, process, and action verb.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the semantic structure of the verbs found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font3"> that can be shown by using case frame.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the case role played by each case in a clause or sentence found in the movie script </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Research method may be understood as all those methods that are used in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">conducting a research (Moleong, 2009). According to Kothari (2004;7), research method refers to “the behavior and instrument used in selecting and constructing research technique”. Therefore, it is considered as an important procedure for the validity of the research. It has four aspects, namely data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data as well as method and technique of presenting analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were taken directly from clauses and sentences in the movie script entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font3">. It is a 2002 British-American</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fantasy_film"><span class="font3"> fantasy film.</span></a><span class="font3"> The story is based on the second</span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Potter_and_the_Chamber_of_Secrets"><span class="font3"> novel by J. K.</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Potter_and_the_Chamber_of_Secrets"><span class="font3">Rowling </span></a><span class="font3">with same title. The reason for choosing this movie script as the data source is because it provides the relevant data for this study. There are many clauses and sentences that consist of one verb which can be used as data for this study. Moreover, this movie script provided various types of verbs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Documentation method was used in this study. According to Moleong (2009) documentation method is used to find out relevant data by using book, transcript, newspaper, magazine, ancient inscription, notes of a meeting, agenda, etc.This method was used because it can be made to examine and interpret something. In addition, there was no respondent or informant involved in this study because the data were collected from movie script which was downloaded from internet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The technique that was used in this study was note taking technique by the following steps; the movie script was downloaded, the script was read carefully in order to be able to find out the relevant</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">data, those relevant data were noted down, and finally all of the collected data were analyzed based on the theories applied in this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The collected data in this study were analyzed by using qualitative method which relies on narrative description. It means that the analysis was described in detail and was supported by the theory applied in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis was started by categorizing the collected data, then the surface structure of the collected data was firstly analyzed to find out the semantic structure and the overt case role, finally the deep structure of the collected data was analyzed in order to be able to find out the covert case role of those collected databy using Case Grammar Theory proposed by Cook (1979).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.4 Method and technique of presenting analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of this study was presented in informal method. Each problem in this study was presented descriptively by words and explanation. In addition, in order to support the method of presenting the data analysis, descriptive &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;technique &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;was</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">used.Therefore, the data can be explained in detail.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussions</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of types of verb</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the classification ofverb in vertical dimension proposed by Cook (1979;203),there are three types of verb found in the data sourceas presented below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;State verb</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-1]</span><span class="font3">Madam &nbsp;Sprout </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">has</span><span class="font3">a very</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">healthy growth of Mandrakes</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 00:47:16).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">has</span><span class="font3"> in the data above can be categorized as state verb since it specifies that the object of the data </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a very healthy growth of Mandrakes</span><span class="font3">is in a certain state or condition (Cook, 1979). On the other hand, the condition of the object of the data does not change as the activity </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">has </span><span class="font3">done by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Madam Sprout</span><span class="font3"> does not affect to the object. In addition, this data is unable to take both progressive aspect such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Madam Sprout is having a very healthy growth of Mandrakes</span><span class="font3">and command imperative like </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">has a very healthy growth of Mandrakes, Madam Sprout!</span><span class="font3">As proposed by Chafe (1970).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Process verb</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-2]</span><span class="font3">Harry </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">freezes</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of &nbsp;&nbsp;Secret</span><span class="font3">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">01:36:17).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In term of verb types, the data above belongs to process verb as the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freezes</span><span class="font3"> specifies that the Object case </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry</span><span class="font3"> undergoes a change of state or condition (Cook, 1979;63). On the other hand, the condition of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry</span><span class="font3"> changes from one into another. Moreover, this data is able to take progressive aspect, has progressive meaning and the nature of sensory perception as the characteristics of process verb argued by Chafe (in Cook, 1979;62) such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry is freezing</span><span class="font3">. In addition, this data is unable to take command imperative such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">freeze Harry!</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Action verb</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;monster &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;had</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">killed</span><span class="font3">someone(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;Potter</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 01:33:48).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Killed</span><span class="font3"> in the data above is an action verb that expresses an action done by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the monster</span><span class="font3">. By doing the action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">killed,</span><span class="font3"> it affects to the object of the data </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In addition, this data has the characteristics of action verb as proposed by &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cook &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(1979;203). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Those</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">characteristics are able to take both progressive aspect such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the monster had been killing someone</span><span class="font3"> and command imperative like </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kill someone, monster!</span><span class="font3">. Furthermore, a question proposed by Chafe (in Cook, 1979) that is used to test non-state verb is able to be answered by this data. That question is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“What happened?”</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“What’s happening”</span><span class="font3">. Therefore, this data can be categorized as action verb.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.2S urface structure analysis a. Semantic structure</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The semantic structure of a certain sentence can be analyzed through case frame. It is because all of the cases in a sentence are listed in the case frame. The semantic structure of the data found within the movie script are basic state, basic process, basic action, state experiential, process experiential, action experiential, state benefactive, process benefactive, action benefactive, state locative, process locative, and action locative verb. Below are some examples: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-4] </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">You</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">both receive </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Special Awards for &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Services &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">School</span><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 02:18:26).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Process benefactive verb is used to describe that a benefactor undergoes a change of state or condition with respect to a given object (Cook, 1979;65). In the data above, the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">receive</span><span class="font3"> needs the occurrence of Benefactive (B) and Object (O) case to accompany it. The Benefactive case of the data above is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you</span><span class="font3">. It is the one who gains something after doing certain action in a certain period. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Special Awards for Services to the School </span><span class="font3">is the Object case and the property which is gained by the Benefactor case after doing some effort. The semantic structure of the data above is + [___B-O].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-5] </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">We</span><span class="font3">'ll get </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">youa seat</span><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 00:22:44).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">get</span><span class="font3"> indicates action benefactive verb. It means someone does an activity that causes the possessor gains or losses an object. On the other hand, there is a transfer of property that causes the benefactor gains or losses something. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Get</span><span class="font3"> requires three cases in its semantic structure. The first case is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font3">. It is the Agent case (A) or someone who does the activity. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">You</span><span class="font3"> is the second case that bears the Benefactive case (B) who gains something from the activity done by the Agent case. The third case is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a seat</span><span class="font3"> that is also called Object case (O)</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> It is something transferred by the Agent case to the Benefactive case. Therefore, the semantic structure of the data above is + [___A-B-O].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-6] &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Hagrid</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">brought </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">mehere</span><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 01:46:51).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cook (1979;66) defined action locative verb as “an activity involving the change of place of an object distinct from the agent”. The verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">brought</span><span class="font3"> indicates that its object changes its location due to the activity done by the subject of the data above. The activity </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">brought</span><span class="font3"> requires three cases. The first case is Agent case (A) who does the action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">brought</span><span class="font3">. In this data </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hagrid</span><span class="font3"> is the Agent case. By doing an action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">brought</span><span class="font3">, the Object case (O), which is also the second case, moves to a different location or place. The Object case of the data above is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">me</span><span class="font3"> that movesto the third case, that is, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">here.</span><span class="font3"> The third case is called Locative case (L) which specifies where the object change its location after an action is done by the Agent case. Thus, the semantic structure of the data is + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-O-L].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">b. Case role</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the surface structure point of view, overt case role is found within the data. It means that all of the cases required by a certain verb are present both in surface and deep structures. It can be as agent, experiencer, benefactive, object, and locative. Here is the example of case role analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-7] </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">An owl</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">drops </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">a letterat uncle Vernon's feet</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 00:08:30).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the example above, it is known that the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">drops</span><span class="font3"> needs three cases to accompany it namely Agent, Object and Locative case. TheAgent case (A) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an owl</span><span class="font3"> refers to the doer of the action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">drops.</span><span class="font3"> In doing the action dropping, there must be something dropped, that is, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a letter</span><span class="font3"> which is also the Object case (O) of the data. In action locative verb, Locative case (L) is needed to describe to where the Object case is moved, that is, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">at uncle Vernon's feet.</span><span class="font3"> The case role between the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">drop</span><span class="font3"> and its cases is as agent, object, and locative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-8] </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">We</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">play </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">our game</span><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 01:35:33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Agent case (A) of the data above is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font3"> that specifies the one who do the actions </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">play.</span><span class="font3"> That verb needs the occurrence of Object case (O) as something that is affected in order to arrange a complete and meaningful sentence. The Object case of the data is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">our game.</span><span class="font3"> The case role between the cases and the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">play</span><span class="font3"> is as agent and object.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.3 Deep structure analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">After doing surface structure analysis, it is found that there are some cases absent from the surface structure; however, they are present in the deep structure. This is called covert case role that means the case is found after doing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">intuitively judgment. Furthermore, covert case role can be lexicalized, coreferential, and build in.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexicalized case</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-9]</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Madam Sprout</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">had bottled </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">it </span><span class="font3">yesterday </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 01:53:32).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Madam Sprout had pour the Polyjuice Potions into a bottle yesterday</span><span class="font3">. The Object case (O) of the data above is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font3"> that refers to Polyjuice Potions. The Agent case (A) is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Madam Sprout</span><span class="font3"> who does an action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bottled.</span><span class="font3"> The verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bottled</span><span class="font3"> in the data above means ‘put into a bottle’. The place where the Agent case puts the Object case is called Locative case (L), that is, into a bottle. Since Locative case is lexicalized into the surface form of the verb, the Locative case is symbolized as *L/L-Lex in the case frame to show that the Locative case is absent from surface structure, however, it is present in the deep structure (Cook, 1979;136). Furthermore, the deep structure of the data can be described as</span><span class="font0">+ </span><span class="font3">[___A-O-*L/L-Lex].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coreferential case</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-10]</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">He</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">reads </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">it</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 00:08:31).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Reads</span><span class="font3"> belongs to experiential verb. It means that there is someone who causes another experience something. In the data above </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">he</span><span class="font3"> takes role both as Agent case (A) and Experiencer case (E). It is because he is the doer of the action that causes himself to experience something. The content of their experience is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it </span><span class="font3">which is known as called Object case (O). Hence, the Agent case is coreferential with Experiencer case and they are written as A=E in the case frame as they refer to the same person and get one realization in the surface structure. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">addition, the Experiencer case is symbolized as *E in the case frame to show that the case is absent from the surface structure(Cook, 1979;136). Therefore, it can be written as </span><span class="font0">+ </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-*E-O/A=E].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Build in case</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5-11]</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Hermione</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font3">wears </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">a Slytherin robe.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret</span><span class="font3">, 01:20:25).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the example above, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hermione</span><span class="font3"> is the doer of the action </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wear.</span><span class="font3"> She is the Agent case (A) that affects the Object case (O). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Slytherin robe</span><span class="font3"> is considered as the Object case which changes its location since it was wore by the doer. Generally, it has been known where a robe should be worn. It enrobes to wrap around someone’s body (Locative case/L). In addition, it is only present in the deep structure. Thus, the Locative case is called build-in case and it is symbolized as *L/L Build in(Cook, 1979;136). The meaning of the example above is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hermione wears the robe to wrap her body</span><span class="font3">. As a result, the deep structure analysis can be shown as </span><span class="font0">+ </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-O-*L/L= Build in].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to the analysis conducted in the previous chapter, there were three points presented in this chapter as the conclusion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, all of the data in this study can be categorized into three types of verb based on vertical dimension point of view as proposed by Cook (1979;203). Those verbs are state, process, and action verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, the semantic structures of the data were shown by using case frame in form of + [___X-Y-Z]. The case frame of basic verbs are + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___Os] for basic state verb, + [___O] for basic process verbs, and + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-O] for basic action verb. In experiential verbs, the case frames are +</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___E-Os] for state experiential verb, + [___E-O] for process experiential verbs, + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-E-O] for action experiential verb. The case frame of benefactive verbs are + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___B-Os] for state benefactive verb, + [___B-O] for process benefactive verbs, and + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-B-O] for action benefactive verb. While in locative verbs, + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___Os-L] is the case frame of state locative verbs, + [___O-L] for process locative verbs, and + </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[</span><span class="font3">___A-O-L] is for action locative verbs (Cook, 1979).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The last, the case role found in the data was overt and covert. In overt case role, all of the cases of the data are present both in surface and deep structure. Theovert case role between the cases and the verb itself found in the data is as agent, experiencer, benefactor, object, and locative. In contrast, covert case roles are only present in the deep structure (Cook, 1979;136). The covert case roles found in the data are lexicalized, coreferential, and build-in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moleong, Lexy. &nbsp;(2009). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian &nbsp;Kualitatif</span><span class="font3">. Remaja</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rosdakarya, Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Trask, R. L. (1993). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Dictionary of Grammatical &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Terms &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;York,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Routledge, London.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Chafe, Wallace L. (1970). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning and the Structure of Language</span><span class="font3">.The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cook, Walter A, S. J. (1979). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Case Grammar: Development of the Matrix Model (1970-1978). </span><span class="font3">Georgetown &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Washington.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dixon, R.M.W. (1991). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A New Approach to English, on Semantic Principles.</span><span class="font3"> Oxford University Press, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kothari, C.R. (2004). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Research</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Methodology Methods and Techniques</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">International Publisher, Jaipur.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">502</span></p>