---
layout: full_article
title: "Types of Yes – No Questions Found in the Movie 500 Days of Summer"
author: "Apri Dita Rusanti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i04.p29</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 22.4 Nopember 2018: 1044-1048</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Types of Yes – No Questions Found in the Movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Apri Dita Rusanti</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">English Department - Faculty of Arts - Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:apridita22@gmail.com"><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font3">apridita22@gmail.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The paper entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Types of Yes-No Question Found in the movie “500 Days of Summer” </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">focuses on types of the English interrogative sentences especially yes-no question forms and their functions used in the movie 500 Days of Summer in 2009. The data were analyzed qualitatively in accordance with some relative theories. The theories used for this study are the theories of English yes-no questions taken from “Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language” by Quirk (1985) and “A Practical English Grammar” by Thomson A.J and A.V Martinet (1986). Then the data were presented descriptively by explaning the process and the result of discussion.Based on the findings there are five forms of English yes-no questions found in the data belonging to the Major classes of questions. Those English yes-no questions found in the data were possitive yes-no questions, negative yes-no questions, declarative questions, tag questions, yes-no questions with modal auxiliaries. The data were analyzed and some functions of the interrogative sentence were found: (a) Asking for request;(b) Confirmation; (c) Offering; (d) Asking for information; (f) Asking for permission .Mostly yes-no questions found in the data are asking for information and confirmation. However, suggestion and greeting do not exist in the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: interrogative sentences, yes-no question, function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Judulpenelitianiniadalah</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Types of Yes-No Question Found in “500 Days of Summer Movie</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, fokus kepada jenis kalimat tanya dalam bahasa inggris terutama bentuk dan fungsi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pertanyaan ya – tidak didalam film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer tahun 2009. Data dianalisis secara qualitatif sesuai dengan beberapa teori yang berhubungan. Teori – teori yang digunakan dalam makalah ini adalah teori pertanyaan ya – tidak dalam bahasa inggris di buku “Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language” dari Quirk (1985) dan “A Practical English Grammar” dari Thomson A.J and A.V Martinet (1986). Lalu data yang sudah terkumpul dipresentasikan secara descriptif dengan menjabarkan proses dan hasil dari diskusi. Berdasarkan temuan ada lima bentuk pertanyaan ya – tidak dalam bahasa inggris yang ditemukan dari data adalah pertanyaan kategori umum. Pertanyaan ya – tidak yang ditemukan adalah pertanyaan ya – tidak positif, ya – tidak negatif, pertanyaan deklaratif, pertanyaan tag, pertanyaan ya – tidak dengan kata bantu. Ditemukan beberapa fungsi dari data yang telah dianalisis: (a) Menanyakan permintaan; (b) Konfirmasi; (c) Menawarkan; (d) Menanyakan informasi; (f) Meminta ijin. Pertanyaan ya – tidak yang ditemukan biasanya menanyakan informasi dan konfirmasi. Tetapi ,fungsi saran dan salam tidak ada ada didalam data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kalimat tanya, pertanyaan ya – tidak, fungsi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A sentence is a grammatical structure composed of one or more clauses and minimally combined a subject and a verb, but it may also contain object compliment &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;adverbial,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">conventionally written with an initial capital letter and final full stop or other terminators (Jackson 2002:98). One of the components of language is sentence. According to its function, sentences are divided into four such as interrogative, imperative, declarative, exclamatory sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">One of the parts in sentence is interrogative sentence. An interrogative sentence asks a question and therefore ends with a question mark. There are two main subclasses of interrogative clause. i.e. the open interrogativesand closed interrogatives,(Huddleston, 1991:134). A yes-no question is a question that asks to identify whether P or not P is true (Hamblin 1973), and is minimally answered by an answering particle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Miles in Axelson (2006:3) emphasizes that the need to study contemporary popular film as a transmitter of attitudes and values of modern society. As a cultural critic she also understands film audiences as active interpreters of a film rather than as passive, helpless recipients of the information and values communicated through media.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of English yes-no question sentences are found in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the function of yes-no question type found in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe yes-no question sentence type in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Day of Summer.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the function of yes-no question sentence type in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The research method in this study consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analysing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study used the movie</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer’’</span><span class="font3"> as the data source. Then the data taken from the sentences used in the dialogue in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer</span><span class="font3"> and also the original script of the movie which has been published. This movie was chosen as the data source because there are a lot of sample of the type yes –no question used in the script and it tells us that love cannot control us, it will find us on a right time. 500 Days of Summerwas written by Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber, directed by Marc Webb. The data in this paper were taken from the movie entitled ‘’500 Days of Summer’’ (2009). The movie is presented in a nonlinear narrative, jumping between various days within the 500 days of Tom and Summer's relationship. This is a linear summary of the plot. This movie tells about Tom Hansen, a man who works at a greeting card company but trained as an architect. In this office the story begins, when Tom’s boss introduced Summer Finn as his new secretary. After that time, Tom is obsessed with Summer. Summer believes that women could enjoy and being free without being in a relationship, for her love is just a fantasy. But that what makes Tom fall in love with her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method used in collecting the data is the documentation method. The process included first watching the movie and listening to the conversation of the characters in the movie, second reading the script of the movie in the script in order to find out yes-no question and find out the function and meaning of interrogative sentence type that found in the movie, third note taking the data and ordering them into a list.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The study used descriptive-qualitative method in analyzing the data. The data were classified into 5 yes-no question types used the theory from Quirk et al (1985).The chosen data described in terms of the function based on the theory proposed by Thomson and Martinet (1986). The collected data were analyzed qualitatively in a descriptive way. The forms and their functions of the yes – no questions were analyzed by the theory mentioned above.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes – No Question and Its Function Found in the data</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This part consists of the analysis of yes – no question form and function in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">500 Days of Summer</span><span class="font3"> Movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes – No Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There were five colours appearing in “Pond's Age Miracle” advertisement. There were white, pink, red, black and grey.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative sentence functionsas stating information</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The function of the sentence as stating information whether Clarck flirting Tom or not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Clarck:”(reading) Uh, &quot;Roses are red, violets are blue.” “Fuck you, whore.&quot; “Now, most shoppers at Valentine's Day-“</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tom :”Mr. Vance, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">are you flirting me?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Clark :”No. No.” (00:55:43,506)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The form of the sentence “are </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you flirting me?”</span><span class="font3">belongs to yes-no question starting with the auxiliary </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">are</span><span class="font3">. The conversations occurred between two speakers; they were the first speaker (Clark) and the second speaker (Tom). This sentence needs a response. The response of the first speaker (Clark) is”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">No. No.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative sentence functions as asking for confirmation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tom :”Shh. Everyone's looking over here.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer:”I'm done. I'm done.” Tom </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">:”Are you done?” </span><span class="font3">Summer:”I'm done.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(00:52:02,995)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The example typed in italics above is yes – no question. It starts with the auxiliary </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">are</span><span class="font3">. The conversation involved 2 people as participants. Seen from the form of the sentence that it’s asking the information that the first speaker asks the second speaker about whether she is done. However, if we look up at the function of the sentence, the sentence above is asking for the confirmation. We can say it because the second speaker said “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I’m done. I’m done</span><span class="font3">.”. So the first speaker confirms it again.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative sentence functioning to ask for permission</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tom :”That would explain a lot actually.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alison </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">:”Can I ask you a question?” </span><span class="font3">Tom :”Yeah.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alison :”She never cheated on you?” (00:59:38,408)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Seen from its form, the question form above in the sentence “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can I ask you a question?”</span><span class="font3"> belongs to yes-no question starting with the modal auxiliary </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">can.</span><span class="font3"> The conversation occurred between the first speaker (Tom) and the second speaker (Alison). The interrogative sentence above functions to ask for permission. It shows that the second speaker (Alison) asks the permission to the second speaker (Tom) to ask him something.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative sentence functioning to state request</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tom :”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can you just be serious, for just a second?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer:”I am being totally serious.” Tom :“No, you're joking around.” Summer:“No, I am not joking around.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Octopus's Garden?” (00:34:42,664)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Seen from its form, the example above”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can you just be serious, for just a second?”</span><span class="font3"> belongs to yes-no question starting with the modal auxiliary </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3">. There are two participants involved in this conversation, the first speaker (Tom) and the second speaker (Summer). The conversation talks about Octopus’s Garden. Seen from the function of the example sentence”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Can you just be serious, for just a second?”</span><span class="font3"> functions to ask someone for something.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative sentence functioning to ask for confirmartion (tag question)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:”So why'd you dance</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">with me?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer &nbsp;&nbsp;:”Cause I wanted to.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">You just do what you</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">want, don't you?” </span><span class="font3">“You never wanted to be anybody's girlfriend, and now you're somebody's wife.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer :”Surprised me too.” (01:23:26,418)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Seen from the above example, the tag is negative with the positive statement. When the tag of a tag question is negative, it means the speaker hopes that it will be positive response. The form above has the function to ask the confirmation from the first speaker (Tom) to second speaker (Summer). We can see it from what the second speaker (Summer) saysthat”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cause I wanted to</span><span class="font3">.” Then, the first speaker (Tom) confirms again that she only does anything that she loved, followed with the statement “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">You never wanted to be anybody's girlfriend, and now you're somebody's wife.</span><span class="font3">” The response from the second speaker (Summer) is”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Surprised me too.</span><span class="font3">”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Declarative</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">interrogativequestionsfunctioning as offeringsomething</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer :”Please. I don't know anything about architecture.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">:”You want me to draw</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">you something?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer &nbsp;&nbsp;:”Yeah.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:”I don't have any paper.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Summer &nbsp;&nbsp;:”Well, use my arm.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(00:37:28,83)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The above form typed in italics belongs to the yes-no declarative</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">question. The declarative interrogative can be changed with a true interrogative sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Do you want me to draw you something?</span><span class="font3"> So it can be a positive yes-no question. Here two participants are involved, they are the first speaker (Summer) and the second speaker (Tom). The above example has the function to offer something to do with the first speaker (Summer). It can be seen that the second speaker asks it after the first speaker (Summer) says “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Please. I don't know anything about architecture.</span><span class="font3">” So it makes the second speaker offer to draw her something. The response of it is ”</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah</span><span class="font3">.” means she agrees with it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are five forms of yes-no questions found in the data source the movie“500 Days of Summer” , belonging to the major classes of the question. The yes-no question found in the data were (positive yes-no question, negative yes-no question, the yes-no question with modal auxiliary, tag question and declarative question). According to the theory mentioned one above, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;six</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">functions of the sentencea in the data were found; they are (a) Asking for request; (b) Confirming; (c) Offering; (d) Asking for information; (f) Asking for permission.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mostly yes-no question found in the data is asking for information and confirmation. However, the least occurrences are suggestion and greeting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Jackson, H. 2002. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Grammar and Vocabulary: A Resource Book for Students</span><span class="font3">. London: Paperback.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk, Randolph and Greenbaum. 1985.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of English Language</span><span class="font3">. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thomson A.J and A.V. Martinet. 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Practical English Grammar.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Huddlestone. 1991. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">English Grammar: An Outline.</span><span class="font3"> London: &nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Axelson. 2006. Movies, Mind and Meaning – Studying Audience and Favourite Films.Sweden.Uppsala University and Dalarna University 791 88 Falun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1048</span></p>