---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Shift From Balinese Into English in the Puppet Shadow Script Lubdaka"
author: "Sayani Sayani"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38112 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-38112"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-38112"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2018</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">p-ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 48. No. 25</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Shift From Balinese Into English in the Puppet Shadow Script </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lubdaka</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Ni Made Nunik Sayani</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Linguistic Program in Translation Studies Post Graduate Program Udayana University Jln. P.B. Sudirman Denpasar Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mobile Phone: 085737237063 </span><a href="mailto:sayaninunik@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">sayaninunik@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">—Balinese and English have different grammatical structure and English does not have speech level like Balinese. The condition may cause both linguistic and cultural shifts to make the translation equivalent. This difference becomes a challenge for translators in finding the closest natural equivalent of Balinese terms of address in English or vice versa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">This study analyzed types of shifts in translation occurred in the translation of the terms of address from Balinese into English in puppet shadow script ‘Lubdaka’. This study belonged to qualitative study approach and used descriptive method. The primary data is the translation of terms of address from Balinese into English directly taken from puppet shadow script and its translation into English of the Lubdaka story in the book The Invisible Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa (2008). Shifts in translation in the data occurred in grammatical (transposition) and in point of view (modulation). There are four types of shifts that belong to the grammatical: structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intra-system shift. Meanwhile, there are three types of shifts found that belongs to the shift in point of view: lexical dense shift, lexical loose shift, and emphasizing on 2<sup>nd</sup> person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: grammatical, point of view, shift in translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">—Bahasa Bali dan Inggris memiliki perbedaan dalam struktur gramatika. Selain itu, Bahasa Inggris juga tidak mengenal tingkatan bahasa yang ketat seperti dalam Bahasa Bali. Perbedaan ini dapat menyebabkan pergeseran terjemahan baik dalam linguistik maupun sudut pandang untuk membuat terjemahan yang ekuivalen. Perbedaa ini dapat menjadi tantangan bagi penerjemah bahasa Bali ke Inggris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masalah yang diteliti dalam penelitian ini adalah pergeseran terjemahan dari kata sapaan Bahasa Bali ke Inggris dalam skrip wayang kulit ‘Lubdaka’. Studi ini merupakan studi kualitatif dan menggunakan metode deskriptif. Data primer didapat dari skrip wayang kulit dan terjemahannya dalam bahasa Inggris berjudul ‘Lubdaka’ yang diambil dari buku ‘Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa (2008)’. Pergeseran terjemahan yang terjadi merupakan pergeseran dalam hal gramatikal dan sudut pandang. Pergeseran gramatikal yang terjadi ada empat jenis: pergeseran struktur, kelas, unit, dan intra-sistem. Pergeseran yang terjadi dalam sudut pandang ada dua jenis: pergeseran kepadatan leksikal, kelonggaran leksikal, dan penekanan pada orang kedua.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: gramatikal, sudut pandang, pergeseran penerjemahan</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">According to Larson (1998), translation consists of changing from one state or form to another, to turn into one’s own or another’s language. The goal of translator is to keep the meaning constant. The main objective of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">translation is to transfer the meaning from the source language to the target language. In transferring the meaning, a good translator should have the knowledge of source and target language, the grammar and cultures, and also the skills in translation. Skills and knowledge in translation are powerful means to produce better</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">works. The knowledge can be gained through reading and understanding while the skills can be further gained by more practices. Besides, according to Beratha (2000), the genre or the materials of the source text must be considered. Halliday (1985:40), for example, stated that “written language is used for traffic signs, product label, food recipes, phone, manual books, magazines, newspaper, fiction books, poems, plays, etc. and the main purpose of spoken language is to chat with other people, debate, lecture, sing, give speech, greet someone, give orders, and pray”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Balinese society is a society that emphasizes culture as a major asset. There are lots of cultural heritage of Bali, including some local wisdom that has actually been around since the days of pioneer ancestors of the island of Bali. The culture in Bali provides impacts to the use of language, especially terms of address. “Terms of address or term of address are words and phrases used for addressing someone. They refer to collocutors and thus contain strong elements of deixis” (Braun, 1988:5). The emotions, feelings, and even the cultural background of the participants can be seen from the terms of address used by the addresser (1<sup>st </sup>person) to address the addressee (2<sup>nd</sup> person) or the person being spoken (3<sup>rd</sup> person).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Granoka dkk. (1985) besides the dialect of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Aga</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Dataran</span><span class="font2">, Balinese language also have strict politeness system called </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anggah Ungguh Basa Bali</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sor Singgih Basa Bali,</span><span class="font2"> namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">basa alus</span><span class="font2"> (the highest form of language), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">basa madia</span><span class="font2"> (the ‘middle’ form, can be used in any social status), and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">basa kasar</span><span class="font2"> (the lowest form of the language). Arka (2003), also mentioned this strict politeness level called </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sor Singgih Basa Bali</span><span class="font2">. Therefore, when two Balinese begin a conversation, one of the opening questions in Balinese is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nunas antuk linggih?</span><span class="font2"> ‘What is (your) social position?’ (lit. ‘(I) beg your position’). The expected answer is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tiang anak jaba</span><span class="font2"> ‘I am a commoner’ or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tiang menak</span><span class="font2"> ‘I’m a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menak</span><span class="font2"> person’. (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Menak</span><span class="font2"> is a term for medium and high castes.) Such answer allows the speaker to choose the appropriate register,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">low register or high register (Arka, 2005:169). This also affects the terms of address they should use in the conversation. “The intra system cohesion has allowed the equivalent of the personal pronouns </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I – you- he/she</span><span class="font2"> to vary linguistically as far as attitude is concerned, with the following dimensions: (1) affect-appreciation: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">icang – cai/ia</span><span class="font2"> Non Honorific “rough” and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">titiang – iratu/ipun</span><span class="font2"> Honorific “humble refined”; and(2) judgement: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tiang – ragane / dane</span><span class="font2"> Honorific “middle”” (Brata, 2014).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This characteristic of Balinese language becomes a challenge for translators in finding the closest natural equivalent of Balinese terms of address in English or vice versa. English language does not use speech level like Balinese language that affect the use of address terms. This condition may cause shifts both in linguistic and cultural factors to make the translation equivalent. In translating the terms of address from Balinese into English which has different system and ‘sense’ in honorific – non honorific. Shifts in translation is unavoidable, specifically in grammatical and point of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shift represents some changes occurring in a translation process. Translation shifts occur both at the lower level of language, i.e. the lexicogrammar, and at the higher thematic level of text. Catford (1965: 73) states that “by shift we mean the departure </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">from formal correspondence</span><span class="font2"> in the process of going from the source language to the target language”. Further, he states that basically, in shift of translation, or transposition he says, it is only the form that is changed. In addition, he urges “the translation shift is done to get the natural equivalent of the source text message into the target text” (Catford, 1965: 76). Translation shifts also occur when there is no formal correspondence to the syntactic item to be translated (Machali, 1998: 3). According to Bell (1991: 33), “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to shift</span><span class="font2"> from one language to another is, by definition, to alter the forms”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nida and Taber (1969: 171) say that “some of the most common shifts in meaning found in the transfer process are modifications which involve </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">specific</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">generic meaning</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Such shifts may go in either direction from generic to specific or specific to generic. A shift may result from the difference of the system in both languages. The difference can be in the form of vocabulary or structure, the shift caused by the vocabulary results in a shift in meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is focused on analyzing what types of shifts occurred in translating terms of address from Balinese into English in a puppet shadow script and its translation into English of the Lubdaka story in the book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Invisible Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa</span><span class="font2"> (2008). This script is used because it contains many translations of terms of address from Balinese into English which is very interesting to analyze.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter gives more detail on research approach, data source, research instrument, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting the analysis.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Research Approach</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study belonged to qualitative study approach and used descriptive method. This study intended to understand the phenomenon about what has been experienced by the research subjects (text) in a holistic manner and descriptions in the form of words and language, in a specific natural context and by utilizing a variety of scientific methods.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study was conducted by adopting the theoretical approach to obtain sufficient understanding of the purposes of solving the problems of the study, related to the terms of address from Balinese into English in a puppet shadow script and its translation into English of the Lubdaka story in the book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Invisible Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa</span><span class="font2"> (2008). Descriptive qualitative approach was applied. First, the sense of power and solidarity semantics conveyed in the translation of the terms of address from Balinese into English in the text were analyzed, and next the types of shifts occurred in translating those terms of address from Balinese</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">into English in a puppet shadow script were analyzed.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study used primary data which was taken directly from the data source. Primary data is the data gathered by the researcher directly from the first source or the subject of the study by observation. The primary data was the translation of terms of address from Balinese into English that directly taken from puppet shadow script and its translation into English of the Lubdaka story in the book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Invisible Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa</span><span class="font2"> (2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The subject of this study is the translation of terms of address from Balinese into English. The data were gathered from a book entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Invisible Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa</span><span class="font2"> (2008) where the subject of this study is taken. The object of this study can be expressed as a social situation in the research subject that we want to know what happens in it. Object of the study is also can be said as what is the unit that is analyzed in the study. In this study, the object of the study is the translation of terms of address in Balinese and English found in the puppet shadow script.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Collecting data is the most important part. To collect the data, observation method and documentation method were applied in this study. The method was implemented through done a thorough observation to the data source in order to get the specific and authentic data (the translation of terms of address); scanned the terms of address in SL and their translation in TL, listed them, and then put them in a separated table. Documentation method is studying related documents in order to support the data obtained from the observation. To support the method, note taking technique was applied in this study. The data collected in this study are the translation of terms of address in the Balinese and English version in the shadow puppet script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lubdaka </span><span class="font2">in the book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mirror of Siwaratri Kalpa.</span><span class="font2"> Therefore, the shifts occurred in the translation of terms of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">address were analyzed according to the problems of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Several steps were done in collecting the data. Therefore, a certain procedure must be followed in order to obtain appropriate and sufficient data for the purposes of this study. The data was collected in some procedures in order to obtain appropriate and sufficient data for the study. First, the terms of address in the Balinese version and the English version were scanned and noted down along with the full part of the speech/sentence that contains the terms of address. The data then were sorted to get the corpus data. Next, the corpus data were noted down in the table and split into two, Balinese version and English version. This data then were analyzed using the theory of shift and appraisal theory to answer the problems of this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study applied the descriptive method in analyzing the data. The method of analysis, which was qualitative-descriptive in nature, was aimed at describing systematically, factually, and accurately the characteristics and correlation that occur among the phenomena (the translation of the terms of address). The data that have been obtained are analyzed qualitatively and described in descriptive form.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data analysis technique began with a summary, coding, searching themes, make groups, write memos and so with the intention of setting aside the data / information that is not relevant. The result of the reduction will become the corpus of the data that will be analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After determining the corpus, there are several steps that are done in analyzing the data. First, the data from source language and the target language are put side by side and the types of shifts occurred there were analyzed. Then, the data was classified into the same categories of shift and were presented two or three data in each category and the rest were put in the appendix Next, the shifts of translation were described below each presented data. The theory from Catford (1965) about shifts in translation were</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">used to analyze the shifts in translation occurred in the data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting the Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The results of the analysis were presented by using formal technique (Sudaryanto, 1993). By mean of this technique, the analysis of every data were described by adopting series of sentences and explanations in the form of paraphrases. This technique was done in order to give more explanation about the shifts of translation and the power and solidarity semantic in translating the terms of address; furthermore, the analysis was expected to give a complete picture of the translation process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Translation Shift from Balinese into English in the puppet shadow script </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lubdaka</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The closest natural equivalent of the Balinese terms of address in English is used by the translator; therefore this makes the word understandable to the readers in the target language, as well as conveying the sense of power and solidarity semantics between the participants of the conversation in the text. In translating the terms of address from Balinese into English which has different system and ‘sense’ in honorific – non honorific? It also can be seen from the data that shifts in translation is unavoidable because of these differences, specifically in grammatical and point of view. This section explains the types of shifts occurred in the translation of the terms of address and why it is occurred, especially in the relation with conveying the sense of power and solidarity semantic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The shifts found in the data can be classified into two: shift in grammatical and shift in point of view. There are four types of shifts that belong to the grammatical shifts: structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intra-system shift. Meanwhile, there are three types of shifts found that belong to the shift in point of view: lexical</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">dense shift, lexical loose shift, and emphasizing on 2<sup>nd</sup> person.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Grammatical Shift (Transposition)</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure Shift</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: Dong ja saja-saja kuning latig jeneng </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ci</span><span class="font2">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: You truly have all the color drained out of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">your </span><span class="font2">face!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation happened between Delem (a servant in hell, older brother of Sangut) and Sangut (a servant in hell, younger brother of Delem). Delem is examining his younger brother face because he looks so sick. He said that his brother’s face is really pale. Shift in structure happened in this sentence and the analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1: Structure shift (dialogue part 30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jeneng &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ci</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">HEAD &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MODIFIER</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Your &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">face</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MODIFIER &nbsp;&nbsp;HEAD</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The terms of address ‘ci’, refers to the 2<sup>nd </sup>person in the conversation or the addressee acts as the modifier with the head ‘jeneng’ or face in English. It is placed after the head. The word ‘ci’ is translated into ‘your’ as the modifier to the head ‘face’. In the TL, ‘your’ as the modifier is placed before the head ‘face’. Structure shift is occurred in the translation of the terms of address ‘ci’ into ‘your’. This shift occurred because of the difference in linguistic system or the grammatical structure in SL and TL. If it is translated in the same structure in TL, the phrase would become “face your” which is ungrammatical in the TL. The translation of ‘ci’ which is non-honorific into ‘you’ which is neutral also makes the power semantics in this sentence become disappeared. This happened because English does not have honorific-non honorific variations of the terms of address like in Balinese.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unit Shift</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SL: Men-men yen kakeneh baan anake buka </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">nanang</span><span class="font2">…..</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: So, so if that’s what you, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">my father</span><span class="font2">, think…..</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation occurred when Merdah and Twalen talked about the life in ‘Mercapada’ (earth). Merdah asked his father about what he thinks about people nowadays on the earth. In this sentence, there is a shift in unit from word into phrase. The analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Table 2: Unit Shift (dialogue part 7)</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark25"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Nanang</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">WORD</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark27"></a>TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">My father</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">PHRASE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In TL, the word ‘nanang’ (father) is translated into ‘my father’. There is the shift in unit in this translation, from the word ‘nanang’ to phrase ‘my father’. This shift occurred merely because the preference of the translator to add the word ‘my’ before ‘father’, which is translating it into ‘father’ only is still grammatical. However, this unit shift still occurred because the addition of the word ‘my’ emphasize that the ‘father’ is Merdah’s father, Twalen. The addition of ‘my’ also emphasize the ‘honorific sense’ said by Merdah to address his father in the phrase ‘you, my father,’ and give emphasis to the word ‘father’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Class Shift</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SL: Sabilang </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Melem </span><span class="font2">ngigel keto nyakitin timpal keto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: Whenever </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">you </span><span class="font2">dance like that you hurt the people around you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation occurred between Sangut and Delem, the brothers, when Sangut complained that whenever Delem dances he always hurts someone else because he always spinning around like crazy. In this sentence, there is a shift in class, from the noun/3<sup>rd</sup> person pronoun “Melem” which is translated into “you”, 2<sup>nd</sup> person pronoun. The analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">occurred in this translation, and the analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Table 3: Class Shift (dialogue part 28)</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark32"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Melem</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">NAME/ NOUN/ 3<sup>rd</sup> PERSON</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PRONOUN</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark34"></a>TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">2<sup>nd</sup> PERSON PRONOUN</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Table 4: Intra-system Shift (dialogue part 1)</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark37"></a>SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Widyadara,</span><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark38"></a>NO &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Widyadari</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">DETERMINER</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark40"></a>TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;angels</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">DETERMINER</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In Balinese language (SL), it is common to address the addressee by their name or in 3<sup>rd </sup>person pronoun. In this sentence, Sangut is talking to his brother Delem/Melem about his dance movement that always hurt others around him. Sangut addressing his brother by his name, Melem, and it is grammatical in Balinese language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">However, if it is also translated into 3<sup>rd </sup>person pronoun in the TL (English), the sentence will become ungrammatical. in this translation, 'Melem' is translated into ‘you’, the 2<sup>nd</sup> person pronoun to address the addressee to carried out the message in the TL, so that the message will not be distorted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In Balinese language, addressing the person we are talking to with 3<sup>rd</sup> person pronoun or his/her name considered as ‘polite’ or a honorific terms of address. In this sentence, Sangut addressing Delem with saying his name which carries an honorific sense. This is translated into ‘you’ which caused the honorific sense become neutral.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intra-system Shift</span><br><br><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark43"></a>SL: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Widyadara, Widyadari </span><span class="font2">pada sayaga sami.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">TL: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The angels </span><span class="font2">are all ready</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence in SL is a part of the song that sung by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sendon</span><span class="font2"> (the singer in shadow puppet show), explaining the event in the shadow puppet chapter when the angels all ready to the meeting established by Lord Siva. In the sentence in SL, the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sendons</span><span class="font2"> said ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">widyadara, widyadari’</span><span class="font2"> which is translated into ‘the angels’. Intra system shift is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this translation, determiner ‘the’ in TL is added before the noun ‘angels’ to show that the angels are Lord Siva’s angles from heaven and make it specific. However, in SL (Balinese), the language does not have determiner system. In English language, when we want to mark the word and refer it to the previous sentence, we add the determiner ‘the’ to make it specific. While in Balinese the determiner is not used/there is no such determiner. If the determiner ‘the’ is not added in the English translation, the sentence will become ungrammatical.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Besides the determiner, in the SL, the male angel is called ‘widyadara’ and the females are called ‘widyadari’. In the TL (English) there is no such differentiation, all angels are called ‘angel’ despite of their gender.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>Shift in Point of View</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Dense</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: </span><span class="font1">Kenken ya kali </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Batara </span><span class="font1">to?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: </span><span class="font1">How is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Lord Siva </span><span class="font1">calculate that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This dialogue is said by Delem when he and Sangut (his brother) talked about Lord Siva who wanted to take the soul of Lubdaka the hunter to heaven. Lubdaka killed so many animals when he was alive on earth that caused him lots of sins and should go to hell. However, Lord Siva wanted to take him to the heaven and this made Delem and Sangut confused.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this translation, the phrase ‘Ida Batara’ is translated into ‘Lord Siva’. The analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Table 5: Lexical Dense Shift (dialogue p</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">art 56)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Batara</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GENERAL</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Lord Siva</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SPECIFIC</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the SL, the phrase ‘Ida Batara’ is very general; it can refers to any Gods, can be Siva, Visnu, Brahma, or even Yamadipati, or the God itself. Without looking at the previous context, the reader would not know that ‘Ida Batara’ refers to Lord Siva. This phrase is translated into ‘Lord Siva’ which is specific that Delem is talking about Siva, not other Gods.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Loose</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SL: Sanguuuuuuuut! , Pesuang, pesuang, pesuang iban </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">caine</span><span class="font2">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sanguuut. Come out,</span><span class="font2"> come out!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation occurred between Delem and Sangut, when Delem called Sangut to come out and dance to start the day. Delem is the older brother of Sangut and he always placed himself as a ‘superior’ to his younger brother, even though they have same position and social status. As brothers, Delem and Sangut also have a very close relationship. That affects the way Delem talks to Sangut. In this conversation Delem used term of address ‘cai’ which is non honorific, and it is omitted in the TL. This caused lexical loose, and the analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Table 6: Lexical Loose Shift (dialogue part 24)</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font2">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pesuang &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Iban </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">caine!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ADRESSING 2<sup>ND </sup>PERSON</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come out! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NO</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ADDRESSING</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In SL, it is specific that Sangut (the addressee) is the one who is told to come out by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the addition of ‘cai’. However, in TL, the word ‘cai’ is not translated and the translation only become ‘come out’ which makes it not as specific as the sentence in SL, who is told to come out and who is Delem speaking to become unclear. Furthermore, by omitting the term of address ‘cai’, the power semantic in the term of address obviously disappeared and the context that Delem is ‘placing’ himself higher that his younger brother also omitted.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphasizing the 2<sup>nd</sup> Person</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">SL: Aduh </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ratu </span><span class="font2">titiang….</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: Yes </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">My Lord</span><span class="font2">, I am at </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Your </span><span class="font2">service….</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This dialogue is said by Twalen to his highest master, Lord Siva, when Lord Siva asked him to accompany him in the meeting with Lord Yamadipati regarding to Lubdaka’s case. In the TL, he refers Lord Siva using an honorific 3<sup>rd </sup>person pronoun ‘Ratu’, which is translated into ‘my Lord’ and emphasized with the addition of ‘Your’ which leads to emphasizing on 2<sup>nd</sup> person modulation. The analysis can be seen below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 7: Emphasizing on 2<sup>nd</sup> Person (dialogue part 134)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Aduh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ratu </span><span class="font2">titiang 3<sup>rd</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;person</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">pronoun Honorific</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Yes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">My Lord, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">I am at </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Your</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">3<sup>rd</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;person service</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">pronoun &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2<sup>nd</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;person</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Honorific &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pronoun</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Refers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">addressee</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">In the SL, the only term of address used is ‘Ratu’ which is the honorific terms of address and 3<sup>rd</sup> person pronoun in Balinese, used by Twalen in this conversation to address the addressee, Lord Siva, his master. In the SL, it is translated into ‘My Lord’ and emphasizes by the addition of ‘I am at </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Your </span><span class="font2">service’. The addition you ‘your’ give emphasis that the ‘Ratu titiang’ in the SL is the addressee or the 2<sup>nd</sup> person who is the speaker (Twalen) is referring to. This makes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the context become clearer in TL and makes the translation become more understandable.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Shifts in translation in the data occurred in grammatical (transposition) and in point of view (modulation). There are four types of shifts that belong to the grammatical shifts: structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intra-system shift. There are three types of shifts found that belongs to the shift in point of view: lexical dense shift, lexical loose shift, and emphasizing on 2<sup>nd </sup>person. In the translation, the power and solidarity semantics in the terms of address in SL becomes neutral in TL. This is because in SL (Balinese), terms of address used is following a strict politeness level and used from the honorific to non honorific based on the context, and in TL there is no such system. As a result, after the process of translation and shifting to make it equivalent in TL, the power and solidarity semantic in the terms of address in SL become neutralized after they are conveyed to their translation in TL.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Arka, I Wayan. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Balinese morphosyntax: A lexical-functional approach</span><span class="font2">. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Arka, I Wayan. 2005.”Speech Levels, Social Predicates, and Pragmatic Structure in Balinese: &nbsp;A Lexical Approach” in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Pragmatic Association Journal</span><span class="font2"> Vol. 15:2/3. page 169-203. America: John Benjamins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bell, Roger T. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Translating: &nbsp;&nbsp;Theory and Practice</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Beratha, Ni Luh Sutjiati. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Struktur dan Peran Semantis Verba Ujaran Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font2">. In Kaswanti Purwo (edr) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Serba Linguistik untuk Anton Moeliono Pereksa Bahasa</span><span class="font2">. 1<sup>st</sup> Edition. Jakarta: PT. BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brata, Frans I Made. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Application of Translation</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Braun, F. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Addess Problems of Patterns and Usage in Various Languages and Cultures</span><span class="font2">. New York: Mouton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Braun, F. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Addess Problems of Patterns and Usage in Various Languages and Cultures</span><span class="font2">. New York: Mouton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Catford, J.C. 1965. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Djajasudarma, T. Fatimah. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik: Ancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian</span><span class="font2">. Bandung : PT Eresco.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K. and Ruqaiya Hasan Language. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Context and Text: aspects of language in a social-semiotic perspective</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, L. Mildred .1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-based Translation.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;United &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;States &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">America:University Press of America Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Machali, Rochayah. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Redefining textual equivalence in translation: with special reference to Indonesian-English</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Translation Center, Faculty of Arts, University of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nida, Eugene &amp;&nbsp;Charles Taber. 1969. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The theory and practice of [Biblical] translation</span><span class="font2">. Netherlands: Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Granoka, IW Oka., IB. Udara Naryana, IW. Jendra, IN. Medra, IG.N. Putra Yasa, and IW. Bawa, 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Proyek Pengembangan Bahasa dan &nbsp;&nbsp;Sastra Indonesia dan &nbsp;Daerah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Tehnik Analisis Bahasa ( Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan secara Linguistik)</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta : Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>