---
layout: full_article
title: "Women’s Language Features in Summer McKeen’s Vlogs"
author: "Ketut Andriani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2018.v22.i03.p25 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 22.3 Agustus 2018: 735-741</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Women’s Language Features in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Vlogs</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ketut Andriani<sup>1</sup>*, Putu Lirishati Soethama<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>[12]</sup></span><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:andritan43@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[andritan43@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2">,<sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:lirishatinya@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[lirishatinya@yahoo.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The title of this study is Women’s Language Features in Summer McKeen’s Vlogs. This study is mainly aimed to find out and describe women’s language features found in Summer McKeen’s vlogs and to find out and explain the functions of women’s language in Summer McKeen’s vlogs. This study used Summer McKeen’s video blog as the data source. The data of this study were collected by using library research method by collecting the words or phrases uttered in Summer McKeen’s vlogs. The words found in the utterance indicated women’s language features. The collected data were organized into classification of women’s language features and the function of women’s language descriptively analyzed based on the theories applied in this study. The theories applied in this study were mainly based on the theory of women language proposed by Lakoff (1975). The findings showed that the features of women’s language found in Summer McKeen’s vlogs were lexical hedges filler, tag question, rising intonation on declaratives, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, super polite forms, avoidance of strong swear words, and emphatic stress. Moreover, the findings also found that the functions of women’s language were to show uncertainty, to intensify or emphasize an utterance, to get response, to express feeling and to soften an utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: women’s language features, women’s language functions, vlog</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Judul penelitian ini adalah “Women’s Language Features in Summer McKeen’s Vlogs”. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui dan mendeskripsikan fitur- fitur Bahasa Wanita yang ditemukan di dalam video blog Summer McKeen dan juga mengetahui dan menjelaskan fungsi- fungsi dari Bahasa Wanita yang ditemukan di dalam video blog Summer McKeen. Data penelitian ini diambil dari video blog Summer McKeen. Metode penelitian kepustakaan diaplikasikan dalam penelitian ini dalam pengumpulan data dengan cara mengumpulkan kata- kata atau frasa yang diucapkan di dalam video blog Summer McKeen. Data yang terkumpul dalam penelitian ini diorganisir ke dalam klasifikasi fitur- fitur Bahasa Wanita dan fungsi Bahasa Wanita tersebut yang di analisis secara deskriptif berdasarkan teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini. Teori utama yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori Bahasa Wanita yang dikemukakan oleh Lakoff (1975). Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa fitur-fitur Bahasa Wanita yang ditemukan di dalam vlog Summer McKeen adalah lexical hedges filler, tag question, rising intonation on declaratives, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, super polite forms, avoidance of strong swear words, and emphatic stress. Selain itu hasil analisis juga menunjukkan bahwa fungsi dari Bahasa Wanita antara lain untuk menunjukkan ketidakpastian, untuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mengintensifkan atau menekankan ucapan, mendapatkan tanggapan, mengungkapkan perasaan dan melembutkan ucapan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Fitur- fitur Bahasa Wanita, fungsi- fungsi Bahasa wanita, vlog</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Women have a different way of speaking from men, a way of speaking that both reflect and produce a subordinate position in society. Lakoff (1975, cited in Holmes, 2011, p.169) argued that women are generally lacking status in society because they are more subordinate than men. Therefore, women are more aware of the way they talk by hedging and boosting their utterance to attract the addressee’s attention. Lakoff (1975, cited in Holmes, 2001, p. 287) also stated that women are more careful to be correct when they speak, using better grammar than men. This certain way of using language by women is called women’s language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff (1975, p.7) argued that women’s language reflects the powerlessness of women, women tended to speak politely since they were status -conscious. They also used standard forms since they believe that the way they speak is a signal or indicates their social status in society. This fact makes them aware of their speech, even though their real status background is not coming from the high-class society. Since women are designed to have the roles of modelling correct behaviour in society, they will speak politely and standardly in daily interaction. Women’s role as mothers makes the society expect them to be politer in their acting and speaking. Women are the models of speech of their children. In society, women are categorized as subordinate group and women must avoid offending and they also have to speak politely.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The characteristic of women language can be found in our daily life and in social media such as a vlog. However, women language has wide</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">meanings and each feature of women language has their own functions. Therefore, it is important to understand women’s language in order to know the purpose of using it. The theory of women’s language is interesting to be studied as it is related to the variation of gender, which is the main parameter in the language use. However, this study is interested in analysing vlog postings by Summer McKeen on her YouTube channel by using women’s language features theory proposed by Lakoff (1975) as a tool of analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen’s vlog was chosen to be analysed since her vlogs can show the phenomenon of the features of women’s language more completely. Besides, based on the fact that Summer McKeen is a woman as the focus of this study, the employment of women’s language features must be used in her vlogs. Those are the reasons why this topic was chosen as the final research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What features of women’s language are found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2"> vlogs?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What functions of women’s language are found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2"> vlogs?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In accordance with the problems of the study formulated above, this study has two aims; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out and describe women’s language features in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2"> vlogs.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out and explain women’s language functions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2"> vlogs.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Research method deals with the methods used in analyzing this study and in this point, the discussion was about the point stated in the research method. The methods of research include some of major components as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study employed videos of YouTube by selecting nineteen videos in Summer McKeen’s YouTube channel. The reason of using Summer McKeen’s vlog as the data source is because the utterance contains women’s language features. Moreover, the video is also interesting, which tells about the women’s stuffs such as fashion, makeup tutorial, the daily routine of her and many more. The main data of this study are the utterances said by Summer McKeen in her vlogs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected by using library research method. First of all, choosing and downloading the videos in Summer McKeen’s YouTube channel. The second step was watching and listening intensively to Summer McKeen’s utterances in her vlogs, while looking for references of women’s language features. The third step was note taking of the utterance and the minute when the utterance was said and ordering it into list. Afterwards, the last step was selecting words or phrases as the data of this study related to Lakoff’s theory about women’s language features.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study used descriptive qualitative method as the method in analyzing the data. There were several steps used in analyzing the data. First, choosing the word and sentence in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">previous note which indicates the women’s language features. Second, analyzing the features of women’s language by explaining the situation in vlog first’; then describing and analyzing the features of women’s language. After that the functions of women’s language were analyzed. To analyze the first and the second problem, this study uses the theory of women’s language by Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Presenting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are several steps used in presenting data analysis. First, the data were numbered and then the data were presented in the form of words found in Summer McKeen’s speech. The word or sentence which were included into features of women’s language were presented in a bold. This study uses () bracket sign to state the minute of the utterances in vlogs in order to prove the time when women’s language features were used by the vlogger. Moreover, the bracket sign was also used to state the title of the vlogs. The purpose is to prove in which vlogs the statements were said.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed based on women’s language theory by Lakoff (1975) descriptively and with qualitative method. There are ten features of women’s language: lexical hedges fillers, tag questions, rising intonation on declaratives, empty adjective, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, super polite form, avoidance of strong swear words, and emphatic stress.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Women’s Language Features in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Vlogs</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the features of women’s language features found in Summer McKeen’s vlogs are discussed below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Hedges Fillers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(03:22) “also picks out this maroon bomber jacket and it’s </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">like </span><span class="font2">silky looking and has a couple zippers” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Back to school- try on clothing haul 2016</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance is indicated as part of lexical hedges. She does not know exactly the right material used in her maroon bomber jacket; thereby she used the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font2"> to hedge her statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tag Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(01:05) “this is my room. Welcome inside, it’s beautiful, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">isn’t it</span><span class="font2">?” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pinterest Inspired Room Tour 2017</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen used the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">isn’t it</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">isn’t it </span><span class="font2">is categorized as part of tag question feature since this word is showed up when Summer McKeen sought a confirmation to the viewer because she was uncertain with her own statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rising Intonation on</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Declaratives</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(03:17) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">am I normal</span><span class="font2">?” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rose Gold Makeup Look-Home Coming GRWM</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen gave stress and raised the intonation when she said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">am I normal</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">am I normal</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance is one of the examples of rising intonation feature since she tended to raise her intonation to get a clarification of response from the viewer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Empty Adjectives</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(02:22) “I got another </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thrasher</span><span class="font2"> shirt. I really like this one because of the colors tho, it’s </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">cute</span><span class="font2">” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Spring to Summer Haul! Clothes &amp;&nbsp;Skincare)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cute </span><span class="font2">towards the color of her new </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thrasher </span><span class="font2">shirt which indicated her approbation or admiration on her shirt. It can be seen that the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cute</span><span class="font2"> is one of the examples of empty adjectives used by Summer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McKeen as a representation of her admiration toward her new shirt.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Precise Color Terms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(03:23) “also picks out this </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">maroon </span><span class="font2">bomber jacket and it’s like silky looking” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Back to school- try on clothing haul 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">maroon</span><span class="font2"> is one of the color terms that Summer McKeen used in her utterance. Her vlog showed that Summer McKeen used specific terms in naming color. Deciding whether to name a color like </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">maroon</span><span class="font2"> is one such sop.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>5.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intensifiers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(07:10) “it’s </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">just </span><span class="font2">super fresh and it’s </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">just </span><span class="font2">smells great” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Back to school- try on clothing haul 2016</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">just</span><span class="font2"> employed by Summer McKeen is categorized as intensifiers since the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">just</span><span class="font2"> was showed up as a boosting device on her opinion. It could be seen that the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">just</span><span class="font2"> was used by Summer McKeen in emphasizing her assertion on her statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hypercorrect Grammar </span><span class="font2">(10:17) “I’m just </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">going to </span><span class="font2">apply a little bit of my mascara to blend my fake lashes of my real lashes” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Rose Gold Makeup Look-Home Coming GRWM)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">She used standard English form </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">going to</span><span class="font2"> than </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> which is the contracted word used to speak informally. Based on the data, it is classified as the hypercorrect grammar since the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">going to</span><span class="font2"> was showed up in Summer McKeen’s utterance to speak in formal form</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.1.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Super Polite Form</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(01:09) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">first of all</span><span class="font2">, I primary my skin” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Get Ready with Me- First Day of School)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">first of all</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance which indicated a polite</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">form. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">first of all</span><span class="font2"> was indicated as polite form since Summer McKeen used it in giving an introduction before she explained what she would be doing. Women are supposed to be particularly careful in speaking or when they want to say something.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>5.1.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Avoidance of Strong Swear</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Words</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(03:51) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">oh my gosh</span><span class="font2">, I have such sensitive skin” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(HAUL-Pacsun, Nike, Sephora, +more)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">oh my gosh</span><span class="font2"> indicated that Summer McKeen was avoiding strong swear words because she used softer form to strengthen her emotion. In considering an expression of strong emotion, women are not supposed to be like a man who more severely shows temper (Lakoff, 1975, p.50-51).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>5.1.10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphatic Stress</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(02:35) “it’s one of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Brandy’s</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> adorable band tee </span><span class="font2">and this is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the grateful death</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Winter Brandy Clothing (&amp;Makeup) Haul</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance indicated emphatic stress since Summer McKeen emphasized her information and showed her admiration to her new shirt. The emphatic stress </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2"> gave stronger effect which can make the statement more credible.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Women’s Language Functions in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen’s</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Vlogs</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Each feature of women’s language had their own function. The analysis of women’s language function is discussed below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Show Uncertainty</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the findings of the research, Summer McKeen shows uncertainty through three features. They are lexical hedges filler and tag questions</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">feature. The explanation on each employment is shown below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(06:15) “and I use my MAC stippling brush, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I think </span><span class="font2">this is called stippling brush, I don’t know” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Get Ready with Me- Everyday Makeup Routine</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She tended to reduce the absolute effect of her statement by using hedge </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I think</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance. The function of lexical hedges such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I think</span><span class="font2"> was used to convey the speaker’s uncertainty or that the speaker cannot vouch the accuracy of the statement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(01:10) “can we make this video to ten thousand thumbs up, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">can’t we?</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Natural Drugstore Makeup Tutorial for School)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used the tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">can’t we </span><span class="font2">since she was pretty certain that her statement would be accepted but she lacked of confidence. The function of the tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">can’t we</span><span class="font2"> was to show her uncertainty towardd her statement; therefore, she tended to avoid asserting herself in a strong way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Intensify or Emphasize an</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark53"></a>Utterance</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study found that there were some features used by Summer McKeen to make her utterance stronger. They were intensifiers and emphatic stress features. The explanation is presented below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(06:37) “I got two more things and it’s kinda random, but I’m </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">very excited </span><span class="font2">about both of them” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Back to school- try on clothing haul 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used the intensifier feature </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font2"> to emphasize her strong emotion toward something. The intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very </span><span class="font2">functions to emphasize strong emotion and assertion to something. Summer McKeen gave stronger effect to the statement by emphasizing the information with the intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(02:48) “oh my god, this is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">the best moisturizer I’ve ever tried</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Best Beauty Product Ever</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She gave the stress mark to the main statement and directly showed her impression toward something by employing </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the best</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ever tried</span><span class="font2"> to strengthen her statement. Here, the function of emphatic stress in the utterance above was to emphasize and strengthen certain parts of Summer McKeen’s statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Get Response</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen used two features of women’s language as a way to get response from her addressee. They are tag question and rising intonation on declarative feature. Below are the examples and explanation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(01:05) “this is my room. Welcome inside, it’s beautiful, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">isn’t it?</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pinterest Inspired Room Tour 2017</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used the tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">isn’t it </span><span class="font2">since she lacked confidence and she was not sure whether the viewer would agree or not. She did this because she did not want to assert herself strongly. The tag question functions to ask one’s opinion in discussing personal feeling because Summer McKeen’s wanted the viewer confirm her statement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(03:17) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">am I normal?</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rose Gold Makeup Look-Home Coming GRWM</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She used rising intonation on declaratives to get an agreement from the viewer because Summer McKeen was hesitant about her statement. The use of rising intonation indicated that there was unwillingness to be very assertive in carrying an opinion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark56"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark57"></a>5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Express Feeling</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study found that there were two features which functioned to express</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the speaker’s feeling; they are empty adjectives and precise color terms. The data and the explanation of this function are presented in the following part:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(07:38) “shout out to make babes of the week. you guys are </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">awesome</span><span class="font2">” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">My Summer Morning Routine</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Summer McKeen expressed her admiration by employing the empty adjective </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awesome</span><span class="font2"> to her viewer who already sent her appreciation posts. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awesome</span><span class="font2"> was employed only to express the speaker’s emotional reaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(06:45) “now I’d like to take a little bit color to my face. I’m just taking some like </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">berry pink </span><span class="font2">blush” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">No Makeup_Makeup Look_Chit Chat GRWM</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Since women are regarded more expressive than men, deciding whether to name a color had led women to being more expressive in several ways than men in conversation. In her vlogs showed that Summer McKeen used more specific terms in naming color.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark58"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark59"></a>5.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Soften an Utterance</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study found that there were some features used by Summer McKeen in her vlog to soften her utterance. Those features were hypercorrect grammar, super polite forms, and avoidance of strong swear word features. The explanation of this function is discussed below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(04:26) “so, you know </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I’ve been using </span><span class="font2">the Becca champagne pop highlighter like a decade” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">My Coachella Makeup 2017</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Her utterance used present perfect continuous tense, the rule is: S + have + been + V-ing. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ve been using</span><span class="font2"> meant </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have been using</span><span class="font2">. She used hypercorrect grammar in her utterance to show politeness to the viewer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(06:13) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I hope </span><span class="font2">you having a good day and if you not I really hope this video made you happy” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Brandy Melville and Urban Outfitters</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to give less offensive and forceful effect, Summer McKeen used super polite form feature by exaggerating politeness in her utterance. If the utterance “I hope you having” turned into the non-polite form, it would be “I want you to have” which tended to force someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(03:51) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">oh my gosh</span><span class="font2">, I have such sensitive skin” (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">HAULPacsun, Nike, Sephora, +more</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">She strengthened the particle in her utterance to show how annoyed she was. She tended to use the weak expletive </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">oh my gosh</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">oh my gosh</span><span class="font2"> here functioned to show how strongly she allowed herself to feel about something and to soften her utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark60"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark61"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis and discussion, there are ten features of women’s language found in Summer McKeen’s vlogs such as: lexical hedges filler, tag question, rising intonation on declarative, precise color term, empty adjective, intensifier, hypercorrect grammar, super polite form, avoidance of strong swear word and emphatic stress. This means that all of women’s language features were found in Summer McKeen’s vlogs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis also shows that the women’s language functions used to show uncertainty were employed through lexical hedges fillers and tag questions feature. The function of intensifying or emphasizing an utterance was employed through intensifiers and emphatic stress feature. Followed by the function which to get response employed through tag question feature and rising intonation on declarative feature. The functions used to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">express feeling were expressed through empty adjectives and precise color term feature. The last function which was intended to soften an utterance was employed through hypercorrect grammar, super polite form and avoidance of strong swear words feature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark62"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark63"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. (1992). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Publisher, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. (2011) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2<sup>nd</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ed)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Routledge Publishing, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, R. (1975). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman's Place: Language in Society</span><span class="font2"> (Vol. 2, pp. 5580). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, R. (2004). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Women’s Place: &nbsp;Text and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Commentaries</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McKeen, Summer. (2012). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Summer McKeen Vlogs</span><span class="font2"> [Internet]. YouTube. Available from: </span><a href="https://m.youtube.com/summermckeen"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://m.youtube.com/summer</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://m.youtube.com/summermckeen"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">mckeen</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed July 12 2017]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">741</span></p>