---
layout: full_article
title: "EXISTENTIAL STRUGLE OF GERMAN LANGUAGE TOU GUIDE IN PT. NUSA DUA BALI TOUR AND TRAVEL, TUBAN, BADUNG"
author: "Made Artajaya, I Gede Mudana"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-58352 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-58352"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-58352"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">August 2019 Vol. 12, Number 3, Page 13-17</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">EXISTENTIAL STRUGLE OF GERMAN LANGUAGE TOU GUIDE IN PT. NUSA DUA BALI TOUR AND TRAVEL, TUBAN, BADUNG</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Made Artajaya<sup>1</sup>, I Gede Mudana<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>Politeknik Pariwisata Bali, <sup>2</sup>Politeknik Negeri Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">email: <sup>1</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">a</span><a href="mailto:rtajayamade10@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">rtajayamade10@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2igedemudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>igedemudana@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;18-03-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;26-06-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;31-08-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The growth of new tour and travel agents in Bali targeting the tourist market from Germany has created intense competition among travel bureaus. This causes a decrease in the number of German tourists who use the services of a travel agency PT. NDBT. The purpose of this study was to analyze the existential struggle that occurred at PT NDBT conducted by German-speaking guides. The research problems are 1) how the hegemony and counter hegemony that occurred in PT. NDBT, the factors causing and the implications for the PT NDBT. This study uses a qualitative method. Data collection techniques used were observation, interviews, and documentation studies. The theory used is the theory of hegemony, social practice theory and the theory of communicative action in an eclectic manner. The results showed that the existential struggle carried out by German guides on the corporate hegemony practice of PT. NDBT against guides as a coordinated party is a counter hegemony. Supporting factors for the German-speaking touristic licensing struggle is the decline in the number of German tourists using PT.NDBT services in Bali. As a result, the implication posed by the existential struggle is the desire to stimulate themselves in carrying out scouting work. In addition, guides must also increase knowledge of the German language and knowledge of the field of guidance. Existential struggle also has implications for the meaning of communication for fellow German tour guides,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: existential struggle, German tour guides, tourists, Germany, travel agency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tourism has become one of the important sectors in the development and development of the island of Bali. Bali can become famous and attractive to tourists as it is today because it has something very special and interesting. This has led to a growing number of Germanspeaking tourists coming to Bali. The increasing number of German-speaking tourists visiting Bali in the past six years has made Bali one of the world's tourist destinations. The increasing number of German-speaking tourists visiting Bali was also followed by the growth of new tour and travel agents targeting the German tourist market. The growing number of travel agents</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">is also influenced by the existence of a free market (global market) which gives authority to travel agents in Germany to be free to choose travel agents that can be invited to work together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The decline in the number of German-speaking tourists using PT. NDBT, automatically causes a decrease in the intensity of the scouting work provided by PT. NDBT to German tour guides. Therefore, travel agents are also required to develop new tourism markets in addition to tourists who speak German. Formulation of the problem, what is the form of the German guides' existential struggle, what factors support the existence of German guides' existential struggle, what are the implications of the German guides' existential struggle. The general aim of the research is to know the German tour guides' activities. The specific objective is to obtain answers to the problem formulation. Research is expected to provide theoretical benefits to increase academic insight in scientific development for universities. Practical benefits are taken into consideration for people who are interested in becoming German-speaking guides, as contributions of ideas to the government, and tourism practitioners in Badung regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To analyze this problem, three theories are used eclectically, namely the theory of hegemony, the theory of social practice, and the theory of communicative action. The hegemony theory is used to analyze the form of existential struggle carried out by Germanspeaking guides and the factors supporting the struggle, social practice theory is used to sharpen the analysis of the causes of existential struggle, while the communicative action theory is used to analyze the implications of German-speaking existential guides on Nusa Dua Bali Tours and Travel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study uses qualitative and interpretive methods in cultural studies, with data collection techniques through observation, interviews, and documentation. The determination of the informants in this study was carried out purposively. The data obtained are sourced from primary data and secondary data. Then the data is analyzed by presenting the results of data analysis and to further draw conclusions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The results showed that the existential struggle carried out by German-speaking guides was the existence of hegemony on the part of travel agents who supplied German-speaking</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">tourists to PT. NDBT. Furthermore, the hegemony of the corporation PT. NDBT to German speaking guides as a subordinate party in handling German-speaking tourism as stated in the tour packages that have been packaged by PT. NDBT starts from pick-up on arrival, tour, meeting service, or when sending German-speaking tourists back to their home country. This is where the hegemony theory works put forward by Gramsci. PT. NDBT with their knowledge in the form of knowledge about tour packages and organizing the work of guides who have already set scouting scenarios in advance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">With the hegemony carried out, both by the travel agents in Germany against PT. NDBT, as well as the hegemony carried out by PT. NDBT to German-speaking guides creates counter-hegemony for guides to fight for their work as guides to continue working as German-language tour guides, in response to German-speaking guides by working professionally according to the rules and ethical codes applied by HPI and the rules Guidance applied by PT. NDBT. In addition, the guides also build new properties in the form of good communication to German-speaking tourists who are being guided, as well as communications made to other companies with the aim is if PT. NDBT assigns Germanspeaking tour guides to reduced guides, guides continue to work to guide German-speaking tourists from private property guides that have been built or German-speaking tourists provided by other tour and travel companies that also have the same tourist market as PT. NDBT. Another effort undertaken by tour guides in their efforts to maintain their work is to continually increase their knowledge in the form of German language knowledge, knowledge of tour guides, and other knowledge in the form of knowledge about Balinese culture and other general knowledge which would be useful in carrying out their work by attending training good training conducted by DPD HPI or by other similar organizations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The supporting factors for the existential struggle are (1) the development of an increasingly globalized world tourism market and also the existence of a free market (global market), so that the development of world tourism is increasing. Besides this, the supporting factors for the struggle carried out by German-speaking guides are (2) German language market share, (3) German-speaking countries, (4) German-speaking guides' abilities and (5) characteristics of German tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the above review it shows that there is a link between ideology, cultural life and social formation. These are nothing but forms of social practice, the determination of positions in the form of ideological struggles or battles between interest groups that culminates in the form of a power that is taken over voluntarily by the dominated ones which Gramsci claims</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">as hegemony and ways to defend it ( Simon, 2004: xix). Likewise, the view of Bourdieu (Fasri, 2007: 96) the group that controls and wins the ideological struggle means that they will gain mastery, this victory is called the victory of cultural capital which will determine its social relations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The implication of the existential struggle is its implication for guides in the form of awareness of German-speaking tour guides about the importance of working as a professional German-speaking tour guide, knowing and understanding ethics and guiding norms and being proficient in using German to remain employed as German-language tour guides at PT. NDBT, for the economic survival of the German-speaking tour guide and his family. In addition to the aforementioned impacts, another implication is the implications for the development of Balinese culture which is increasingly increasing by the existence of a tour guide that leads German tourists to a tourist attraction. With the German-speaking tourists visiting a tourist attraction that is guided by German-speaking guides automatically awakens the passion of the arts and culture practitioners because it is a supporter of the development of tourism in the area of attractions being built.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">While other implications arising from the existence of existential struggle is the development of the meaning of communication from German-speaking guides who work to guide German-speaking tourists with the aim of achieving communicative welfare, as stated by Max Weber (Hardiman, 1993: 74) that rationalization aims at formal ways in which people who work with this rationalization are only concerned with ways to achieve goals and do not heed the values that are lived as the core of awareness of ethical, aesthetic, and religious values. The concept of purposeful rationality proposed by Weber is very suitable with the situation of modern society with a measure of one's achievement based solely on the material alone. Another implication is the meaning of cultural transformation between Germanspeaking tourists who come to the area of attractions, and vice versa between people who are in the area of attractions to German-speaking tourists who come to these areas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The increasing number of German-speaking tourists visiting Bali, was also followed by the growth of new travel bureaus that also targeted the German-speaking tourist market share. Under these circumstances, PT. NDBT no longer relies solely on corporate revenues from German-speaking tourists, which causes the travel agency PT. NDBT must look at the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">new tourism market share to remain operational. Reduced number of German tourists using PT. NDBT in conducting tourist visits also influences German language tour guides</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suggestions to the government through the tourism service are expected to regulate German-speaking tour guides and provide protection for the tourism profession. To PT. NDBT employs German-speaking guides to provide protection both in terms of their profession and economic life. To German-speaking guides to always prioritize professionalism in carrying out their role.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thank you to Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Sirtha, SH., M.S as the supervisor I, Dr. I Gede Mudana, Msi. as a supervisor II. All leaders and employees of PT. NDBT, and German-speaking guides who work at PT. NDBT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2009. Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktik. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bocock, Robert. 2007. Pengantar Komprehensif untuk Memahami Hegemoni, terj. Ikramullah Mahyuddin. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fashri, Fauzi. 2007. Penyingkapan Kuasa Simbol : Apropriasi Reflektif Pemikiran Pierre Bourdieu. Yogyakarta : Juxtapose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foucault, Michel. 2002. Pengetahuan dan Metode (Karya-Karya Penting Foucault). Bandung: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ginaya, Gede. 2010. “Pergulatan Kepentingan Antara Representatif Asing dan Pramuwisata dalam Penanganan Wisatawan Rusia pada PT. Tiga Putrindo Lestari, Nusa Dua Bali ”. (Tesis) : Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Habermas, Jurgen 2009. Teori Tindakan Komunikatif. Rasio dan Rasionalisasi Masyarakat (terjemahan). Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hardiman, Budi. 1994. Menuju Masyarakat Komunikatif: Ilmu, Masyarakat, Politik dan Postmodernisme menurut Jurgen Habermas. Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muljadi, A.J. 2009. Kepariwisataan dan Perjalanan. Jakarta: Rajawai Pers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muzairi,H.2002. Eksistensialisme Jean Paul Sartre. Sumur tanpa Kebebasan Manusia.Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Udoyono, Bambang .2008. Sukses Menjadi Pramuwisata Profesional. Jakarta: Kesaint Blanc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">17</span></p>