---
layout: full_article
title: "Conficts In Condon’s Movie “Beauty and the Beast 2017”"
author: "Putu Jesa Putri Yasari, I Ketut Wandia, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2019.v23.i01.p01</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 23.1 Pebruari 2019: 1-6</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Conficts In Condon’s Movie “Beauty and the Beast 2017”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Putu Jesa Putri Yasari<sup>1*,</sup> I Ketut Wandia<sup>2</sup>, Isnu Maharani<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font4"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department - Faculty of Arts - Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:jesaputriyasari@gmail.com"><span class="font1">[</span><span class="font4">jesaputriyasari@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup> [wandia57@yahoo.com.au]<sup>2 </sup>[isnu.maharani@yahoo.com]<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The title of this paper is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Conflicts in Condon’s Movie “Beauty and the Beast 2017”</span><span class="font4">. It is aimed at finding out kinds of conflict faced by the main character and the sources of the main character’s conflict, and analyzing the way the main characters solve the conflict. The data of this study were taken from a movie entitled “Beauty and the Beast 2017”. This study focuses on describing external and internal conflicts. The conflict is analyzed based on the theory of conflict proposed by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kenney</span><span class="font4"> who divides conflicts into two types, external and internal conflicts. The description of the presentation of the characters is analyzed based on the theory proposed by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson</span><span class="font4"> who divides it into two, those are the source of conflict and resolution of conflict. The result of this study shows that the main character faces two conflicts; external and internal conflict. The sources of the main character’s conflict are incompatible goals, and different opinions. In managing the conflict, the main character uses avoidance strategy, competition strategy and pacification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Conflict, Internal Conflict, External Conflict, Source of Conflict, Resolution of Conflict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Judul penelitian ini adalah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Conflicts in Condon’s Movie “Beauty and the Beast 2017”</span><span class="font4">. Hal ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis-jenis konflik yang dihadapi oleh karakter utama dan sumber-sumber konflik karakter utama, dan menganalisis cara karakter utama menyelesaikan konflik. Data penelitian ini diambil dari film berjudul “Beauty and the Beast 2017”. Penelitian ini berfokus pada menggambarkan konflik eksternal dan internal. Konflik dianalisis berdasarkan teori konflik yang dikemukakan oleh </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kenney </span><span class="font4">yang membagi konflik menjadi dua jenis, konflik eksternal dan internal. Deskripsi penyajian karakter dianalisis berdasarkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson</span><span class="font4"> yang membaginya menjadi dua, yaitu sumber konflik dan resolusi konflik. Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa tokoh utama menghadapi dua konflik; konflik eksternal dan internal. Sumber dari konflik karakter utama adalah tujuan yang tidak kompatibel, dan opini yang berbeda. Dalam mengelola konflik, karakter utama menggunakan strategi penghindaran, strategi persaingan dan pengamanan</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Konflik, Konflik Internal, Konflik Eksternal, Sumber Konflik, Resolusi Konflik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Literature is a word that is arranged in a way. Indirectly, literature can represent a person's feelings because literature is an outlet of the soul. The height of the imagination can not be separated from the personality of each soul. What is the proof? If each imagination is the same and programmed, then all literary and non-literary works will have the same features. Therefore, all writers must have the style of language, the topic of the story raised, the point of view, even the atmosphere of the story will be different. The indirect meaning of literature. Film also regarded as a powerful communication medium against the targeted masses, due to its audio-visual nature, ie live images and sounds. With pictures and sounds, the film is able to tell a lot in a short time. When watching a movie audience as if it can penetrate the space and time that can tell the life and even can affect the audience. There are many elements of fiction like Plot, Setting, Character, Conflict, Symbol, and Point of View. The main elements which fiction writers use to develop a story and its Theme. Conflict is the best part of plot in the essence of all stories. The exposition should set up a situation in which there is conflict and from which suspense arises. The conflict may be one of man against nature, man against man, or, in the mind of the chief character, man against himself. The conflict may be simple or complex, as when a whole tangle of relationships results in a situation very difficult to unravel. This study focused on the conflicts as portrayed in the movie Beauty and the Beast film. This concern to kind of conflict which occurs in the film Beauty and the Beast . The story tells an arrogant young prince (Dan Steven) and his castle’s servant fall under the spell of a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">wicked enchantress, who turns him into the hideous Beast until he learns to love and be loved in return. The spirited, headstrong village girl Belle (Emma Watson) enters the Beast castle after he imprisons her father Maurice (Kevin Kline).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds and source of conflicts are faced by the main character in the movie Beauty and the Beast 2017 ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are main character in the movie Beauty and the Beast solve the conflict ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the kinds and source of conflicts were faced by the main character of the movie Beauty and the Beast.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the way of the main character solve the conflict.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The research method in this study consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data of this study were taken from the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and the Beast 2017 </span><span class="font4">movie’s dialogue directed by Bill Condon from a screen play written by Stephen &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chbosky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Evan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Spiliotopoulos, and co-produced by Walt Disney that is a romantic genre. The story told an arrogant young prince (Dan Steven) and his castle’s servant fall under the spell of a wicked witch, who turns him into the hideous Beast until he learns to love and be loved in return. The spirited, headstrong village girl Belle (Emma Watson) enters the Beast castle after he imprisons her father Maurice (Kevin Kline). From this condition, he must learn to love someone to break the spell from the witch. This data was</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">chosen because provide with enough information to analyzed the conflicts that taken from </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and the Beast</span><span class="font4"> film.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data were collected and selected using the documentation method. The process is, by watching and understanding the content of the movie and relate them to the topic. It is followed by reading the script movie at the same time to make a clear understanding about the conversation of each other. Afterwards, finding out the statement that belong to the intrinsic study, in this case, the elements of fiction especially about the conflicts were selected by note taking technique.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The conflict of the main character was analyzed. In analyzing the data, descriptive – qualitative method was applied. First, identifying and also classifying in accordance with their type of conflict of the main character. Then, knowing the source of conflict and the way of main character solve the conflict found in the movie, then it was analyzed based on the theory of conflicts found in the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis Of Conflicts in Condon’s Movie “Beauty and The Beast 2017”</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Types of Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">External Conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Conflict Between Belle and Beast</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DATA 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The first conflict between Belle and Beast when Belle's father was captured by Beast. At that time his father was going into the woods, on his way to go home while a storm was occurring. Then he was confronted by some wild animals in the forest, but fortunately he managed to escape. When he manages to escape, he finds a castle that looks out of place, then enters the palace. Inside the palace he was struck by some talking things, but he tried to fight his fear, until he finally decided to go home because he felt the place was very scary. However, while into his way to go home and still in the courtyard area of the palace, Belle's father saw a rose plant. When he saw the plant he remembered by Belle who wanted to bring roses when his father came home, then he decided to pick it. From a distance he had been overseen by Beast. When Beast learned of it, he assumed that Belle's father stole a rose in his yard. Then Beast locked up Belle's 30 father. This is where conflict begins between Belle and Beast. Belle was eager to free her father. It can be seen in the (28:51 – 29:29 ) :</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Who are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Who are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I've come for my father.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Your father is a thief.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Liar!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: He stole a rose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I asked for the rose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Punish me, not him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maurice &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No! He means forever.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Apparently, that's what happens around here when you pick a flower.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: A life sentence for a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">rose?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I received eternal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">damnation for one. I'm merely locking him away. Now, do you still</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>wish to take your father's place?</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Data above shows that Beast was very angry with Belle's father. He thought of his father as a thief, so he wanted to imprison his father forever in the palace, but Belle would not be willing if his father was imprisoned forever. This is not the end, Belle is still negotiating with the Beast.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Source of External Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Source of Conflict between Belle and Beast</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>DATA 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The first conflict occur because of </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">different opinions </span><span class="font4">between them. Beast assumes that Belle's father has stolen the roses that reside in his palace, but Belle brushed it off because it was the result of her act, she asked for roses when her father returned from the forest. It can be seen in the (28:51 – 29:29) : Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Who are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Who are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I've come for my father.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Your father is a thief.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Liar!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: He stole a rose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I asked for the rose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Punish me, not him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maurice &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No! He means forever.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Apparently, that's what happens around here when you pick a flower.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: A life sentence for a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">rose?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Beast &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;I received eternal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">damnation for one. I'm merely locking him away. Now, do you still wish to take your father's place?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From data above shows that they are arguing over different of opinion. Beast was very sure that her father had stolen the rose, while it happened</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">because Belle asked for the rose, then Belle also wanted him to be punished instead of his father.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Internal Conflict</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Internal conflicts could happen between one idea and another idea or the conflicts of own mind. Internal conflict exists within him or herself. Personal conflict is struggle that takes place in the character’s mind. For example, a character may have to decide between right and wrong or between two solutions to a problem.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>DATA 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The first internal conflict arrise on her mind and have dilemma. When every people in that town call her an odd woman and Belle confused and have a dilemma in her mind. Also she ask her father, am her an odd woman? It can be seen in the (12:40-12:58) :</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Papa, do you think I'm</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">odd?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maurice &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Odd? My daughter?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Odd? Where did you get an idea like that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I don't know. People talk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maurice &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: This is a small village,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">you know. Small minded as well. But small also means safe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Source of Internal Conflict</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>DATA 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The internal conflict accour because </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">different opinion</span><span class="font4">. The people around Belle think of her as a strange woman because Belle is very confident and does not often listen to the others, she is not afraid of speaking her own thoughts. She is a very independent woman and does not like to be controlled by any man. But, she did not feel that way. It can be seen in the (12:40-12:58):</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Belle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">: Papa, do you think I'm odd?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Maurice</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">: Odd? My daughter? Odd? Where did you get an idea like that?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Belle talk.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">: I don't know. People</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Maurice</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: This is a small village, you know. Small minded</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">as well. But small also</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">his father. It can be seen in the (28:51 –</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">29:29 ) :</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Belle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: Who are you?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Beast</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: Who are you?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Belle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: I've come for my father.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Beast</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">: Your father is a thief.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Belle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">: Liar!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Beast</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: He stole a rose.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Belle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: I asked for the rose.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Punish me, not him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">means safe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Conflict occurs because of differences of opinion between Belle and society. The above conversation proves that Belle feels that everyone has talked about her and says that she is a strange woman, but she does not feel strange and Belle's father always gives support to her daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution to Conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of External Conflict Resolution of Conflict between Belle and Beast</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Compromise is an approach with a desire to keep everyone a little happy, perhaps not as happy as they would have liked, but happier than they would have been lose. The actual working of compromises, however, does not maximize the collective satisfaction. Instead, it equalizes dissatisfaction of the participants. It works to make sure no one is unhappy than others rather than to assure happiness. Compromising tends to reduce the moral of participants in the relationship rather than invigorate the relationship, solve problems, compromise tends to reduce energy and evoke passivity.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>DATA 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The resolution of first external conflict between Belle and Beast is </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Compromise. </span><span class="font5">S</span><span class="font4">he compromises with Beast so that she is punished instead of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Belle thought of her father's happiness and therefore did not want her father to be punished. After he compromised with Beast, and Beast did not allow it, she kept trying to swap his father's position with her, she pushed his father out of the cage and she was finally locked up.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The result of this study shows that the main character faces two conflicts; external and internal conflict. The sources of the main character’s conflict are incompatible goals, and different opinions. In managing the conflict, the main character uses avoidance strategy, competition strategy and pacification.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Alberstein, Michal. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict Engagement and Resolution. </span><span class="font4">Eleven International Publishin, Paleisstraat 9.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font4"> Toronto: McGraw – Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bill Condon. 2017. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and the Beast. </span><span class="font4">Walt Disney Pictures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Burns, J. 1978. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Leadership</span><span class="font4">. Harper Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Deetz, Stanley A &nbsp;and Sheryl. L.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Stevenson. &nbsp;1986. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Managing</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Interpersonal Communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">New York: Chapter &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kenny, William. 1966. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font4"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kenneth W. Thomas. 1986. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict and conflict management.</span><span class="font4"> Naval Postgraduate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;School,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Monterey, CA, U.S.A</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">K. L. Knickbocker and H.W. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature. </span><span class="font4">New York: Holt Renehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Morner, Kathleen and Rausch Ralph. 1991. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms.</span><span class="font4"> McGraw-Hill Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p>