---
layout: full_article
title: "Language Style in the Advertisements Broadcast in Cassanova Bali Radio"
author: "Dewa Ayu Made Nadya Puspa Priani, A.A. Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi, I Gede Budiasa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 23.2 Mei 2019: 90-94</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2019.v23.i02.p02</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Language Style in the Advertisement Broadcast in Cassanova Bali Radio</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Dewa Ayu Made Nadya Puspa Priani<sup>*</sup>, Anak Agung Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi, I Gede Budiasa</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:nadyapspriani@gmail.com"><span class="font2">nadyapspriani@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The study entitled Language Style in the Advertisements Broadcast of Cassanova Bali Radio is aimed to identify the types of language styles used and to analyze the linguistic features applied in Cassanova Bali radio advertisements. The data of this study were taken from six advertisement scripts of Cassanova Bali radio broadcast from August 1<sup>st</sup> until August 30<sup>th</sup> 2017. These data were collected using documentation method and analyzed using qualitative method based on the theory proposed by Holmes (1992) and Grey (2008). After analyzing the data, vernacular language was the most common language style used by Cassanova Bali radio and found in five advertisements (17 sentences), meanwhile the standard language was rarely used by Cassanova Bali radio and only found in one advertisement (3 sentences). It was also found that Cassanova Bali radio used five linguistic features to attract more consumers and the most common feature was familiar language (24 words), followed by the use of imperative (15 words), hyperbole (6 words), repetition (3 words) and simple vocabulary (3 words).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">language style, linguistic features, advertisements</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian berjudul Language Style in the Advertisements Broadcast of Cassanova Bali Radio bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi penggunaan tipe gaya bahasa dan menganalisa pengaplikasian fitur linguistik pada iklan di radio Cassanova Bali. Sumber data pada penelitian ini diambil dari enam naskah iklan di radio Cassanova Bali yang disiarkan dari tanggal 1 Agustus sampai 30 Agustus 2017. Data ini dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif berdasarkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Holmes (1992) dan Gray (2008. Setelah menganalisa data, bahasa vernakular adalah gaya bahasa yang paling umum digunakan oleh radio Cassanova Bali dan ditemukan dalam lima iklan (17 kalimat), sedangkan bahasa standar jarang digunakan oleh radio Cassanova Bali dan hanya ditemukan dalam satu iklan (3 kalimat). Ditemukan juga bahwa radio Cassanova Bali menggunakan lima fitur linguistik untuk menarik lebih banyak konsumen dan fitur yang paling umum adalah familiar language (24 kata), diikuti dengan penggunaan imperative (15 kata), hyperbole (6 kata), repetition (3 words) dan simple vocabulary (3 words).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1">gaya bahasa, fitur linguistik, iklan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Communication in this modern era is very important because by communication we can share our feelings, thoughts, experiences, ideas, suggestions and as well as feedback. Communication is a process where two or more people exchange information and create an intelligibility about the information (Rogers &amp;&nbsp;Lawrence: 1981). There are many ways to get the information needed nowadays, one of the ways is mass media either print or electronic media. Print media can be newspapers, tabloids, magazines, brochures and banner while the electronic media can be television, internet, social media and radio.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another way to communicate and exchange information is through an advertisement. The advertisement is becoming an effective way to introduce and advertise a product in the form of goods, services, events or ideas of a company to people. Advertisement is a form of communication used to persuade an audience (viewers, readers or listeners) to take some action with respect to products, ideas or services. While according to Effendy (in Suhandang, 2004:192) advertisement is publication or broadcasting in the form of advertisement, announcement, statement or writing by hiring something with the intention to introduce or tell something through mass media. People can find an advertisement in the television, internet, newspaper, magazine or in the radio.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language and the style of the language play an important role in the advertisement to convey message. The language of advertisement is used to attract attention, improve imagination, and to make it easy to remember. Keraf (2006:113) mentioned that the style of language is a way of expressing feelings through language typically showing the soul and personality of a writer or speaker itself. The language of advertisement is compact, persuasive,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">friendly and as well as communicative, for example, “don’t forget to bring all your fellas to Happy Puppy Denpasar at Jalan Teuku Umar 104-110 Denpasar”. It could be categorized as a vernacular language because the use of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dunno</span><span class="font2"> is not acceptable in standard language since it is an informal contraction of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">don’t know</span><span class="font2">. Furthermore, Keraf (1984) states that language style can be analyzed based on the linguistic contexts which are divided into word choice, tone, sentence structure, as well as direct and indirect meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The style of the advertisement also deals with the stylistics, especially linguistic features. Instead of the whole text, stylistic approach is concerned with smaller parts such as words, phrases, or sentences and then are separated to some features. For example “because Happy Puppy Family Karaoke is here for you!” In this case, the word ‘you’ is inclusive for showing a friendly attitude to the listeners and make the listeners feel like they are involved in the advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems that can be analyzed in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of language styles are used in the advertisements of Cassanova Bali radio?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What linguistic features are applied in the advertisements of Cassanova Bali radio?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems above, the aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of language styles used in Cassanova Bali radio advertisements.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the linguistic features applied in Cassanova Bali radio advertisements.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method applied in this study consists of three aspects, including data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data and method, and technique of presenting analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The main data in this study were taken from six advertisement scripts on Cassanova Bali radio. In this study, there are two kinds of advertisements analyzed; they are event advertisements and business advertisements. This study took advertisements broadcast from August 1<sup>th</sup> until August 30<sup>th</sup> 2017. Those six script advertisements were chosen because they are similar in the language style used, involved the listeners and also represented the most commonly broadcast advertisements.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used to collect data in this study was documentation through the advertisement scripts used in Cassanova Bali radio. In collecting the data, the technique of taking note of six advertisements were applied.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Qualitative method was applied in this study by taking the following steps: a. Organizing the data by inserting the selected sentences from the advertisements into a table.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. Classifying the sentences into six table of the language style proposed by Holmes (1992) and twelve tables of the linguistic features proposed by Grey (2008).</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Presenting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The current study used the informal one which is descriptively written to make it easy to understand. First, in order to answer the first and second problems, the data were classified into the types of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language style and linguistic features used in the advertisement broadcast in Cassanova Bali radio. Last, the analysis was descriptively explained by showing the words taken from the selected advertisements and then followed by the explanation about what indicates them as a certain language style and linguistic features.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two main theories used and related to the problems presented in this study. They are the theory about type of language style by Holmes (1992) called vernacular and standard language and the theory about linguistic features proposed by Grey (2008) called hyperbole, familiar language, repetition, use of imperative, and simple vocabulary.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language Style</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As stated by Holmes (1992:76), there are two types of language style used in the advertisements of Cassanova Bali radio, they are vernacular language and standard language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vernacular Language</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Vernacular language generally refers to a language which has not been standardized or codified and which does not have official status (uncodified or standardized variety).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Advertisement A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Do you want to </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">hang out </span><span class="font2">with your friends but </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">dunno </span><span class="font2">where to go?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this example, the informal word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dunno</span><span class="font2"> was found. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dunno</span><span class="font2"> was used to represent an informal way of saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">don’t know</span><span class="font2"> and it is also known as informal contractions. The usage of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dunno</span><span class="font2"> is not acceptable in standard language since it is a casual way to say </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">don’t know</span><span class="font2">. Another informal word found in this example was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hang out</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hang out</span><span class="font2"> is the informal expression of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">spend time with someone</span><span class="font2">. It usually implies an informal relationship such as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">friendship, and refers to a favorite place that people often visit. The use of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dunno </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hang out</span><span class="font2"> in this example show that the advertiser used the informal expression or expression commonly used by the listener to make the advertisements more attractive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standard Language</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Standard language is generally written, and has undergone some degree of regulation or codification (in a grammar and a dictionary).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Advertisement B</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goodway Hotel &amp;&nbsp;Resort Bali </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">would like </span><span class="font2">to offer you a best place for many events such as meeting, outbound and graduation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence shows that Advertisement B used formal style or standard language to promote product. It could be stated as a standard language because there are some words acceptable in formal language such as in this example, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">would like</span><span class="font2"> was found. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Would like</span><span class="font2"> cannot be translated one by one, it is a phrase used to express politeness when making offers and has a higher politeness word than </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">want.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistic Features</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter also discusses the findings to answer the second research question using a theory proposed by Grey (2008). There are five linguistic features; they are hyperbole, familiar language, repetition, simple vocabulary and use of imperative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3-1 Advertisement A)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">best </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">largest </span><span class="font2">karaoke place than any other place in Bali with affordable price</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence could be categorized as hyperbole. It can be seen from the prominent sentence compared to the other sentences in advertisement A. This is also supported by the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">best</span><span class="font2"> and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">largest</span><span class="font2"> also known as superlative degree, the third degree of comparison. Through these words, the advertiser wanted to emphasize that there was no best and largest karaoke place in Bali compared to Happy Puppy, so the listeners would feel interested in visiting this place.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Familiar Language</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3-2 Advertisement B)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Enjoy </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">your </span><span class="font2">stay with us at Goodway Hotel &amp;&nbsp;Resort Bali!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As shown in the sentence above, advertisement B also used familiar language feature. Listeners would really enjoy the broadcast advertisement if they felt involved in the advertisement because the use of the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">your</span><span class="font2"> in inclusive way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition and Simple</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Vocabulary</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3-1 Advertisement A)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Happy Puppy</span><span class="font2">, Happy </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Family</span><span class="font2">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The example above is the slogan of the advertisement and could be classified as a rhyme repetition. It was related to the sound of accented vowels of the words ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">happy’</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">puppy’</span><span class="font2"> and ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">family’</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Because they made it as a pattern, the listeners would be easier to remember the advertisement. This example could also be categorized as simple vocabulary feature because the advertiser used attractive words and it could make the consumers remember the advertisement although they see it at a glance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Use of Imperative</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3-4 Advertisement D)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Let’s join us and give them a thousand of love!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this example, the imperative word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let’s</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let us</span><span class="font2"> was found. In an imperative sentence arrangement, the use of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let us</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let’s</span><span class="font2"> is to convey or share invitations. With the use of the imperative sentence, the advertiser wanted to invite the listener to show their concern for</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">children with cancer in Bali by joining the event. And with the exclamation mark </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“!”</span><span class="font2"> at the end of the sentence is a general characteristic of the imperative sentence could strengthen that this example was an imperative sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study discussed about the types of language style and linguistic features in the advertisements. There are six advertisements in Cassanova Bali radio taken as the data in this study and analyzed using the theory proposed by Holmes (1992) who divides language style into two parts; they are standard and vernacular language and also the theory proposed by Grey (2008) who divides linguistic features into five parts, they are hyperbole, familiar language, repetition, simple vocabulary and use of imperative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, it could be concluded that the broadcast advertisementd in Cassanova Bali radio used two language styles when they promoted their products. The two language styles are standard language or formal style and vernacular language or informal style. As a result, vernacular language or informal style are the most common language styles used by Cassanova Bali radio and found in five advertisements &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(17 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sentences).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile, the standard language is a style that was rarely used by Cassanova Bali radio and was only found in one advertisement (3 sentences).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the findings, it could also be concluded that Cassanova Bali radio used five linguistic features to attract more consumers. As a result, the most common feature is familiar language (24 words), followed by use of imperative (15 words), hyperbole (6 words), repetition (3 words) and simple vocabulary (3 words)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Grey, D. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language in Use</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Fourth Edition. United States of America: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jawas, Nurul Muthiah. 2015. Language Style Used by Fangirls in Japanese Idol Online Community (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keraf, Gorys. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Diksi dan Gaya Bahasa</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rohim, Syaiful. 2009. Teori Komunikasi Perspektif Ragam dan Aplikasi. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saksono, S.T. &nbsp;2008. Arguments &nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernard Shaw’s Major Barbara: Exploring &nbsp;Literature through a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stylistic Approach. Bahasa, Sastra dan Studi Amerika, XI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Santosa, R. 2009. Register and Language Style. Bahasa, Sastra dan Studi Amerika, XI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suhandang, Kustadi. 2004. Pengantar Jurnalistik: &nbsp;&nbsp;Seputar Organisasi,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Produk &amp;&nbsp;Kode Etik. Bandung: Nuansa</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, R. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Fifth Edition. UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, George. (1985). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language. An &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Australia: &nbsp;Cambridge University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Press.</span></p>