---
layout: full_article
title: "The Natural Tourism Development Model and Its Contribution to Local Community Economy at Peliatan Village, Ubud Bali"
author: "Ni Putu Ratna Sari, Anak Agung Putri Sri"
categories: jsgs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-58888 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/id-58888"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-58888"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">Journal of A Sustainable Global South, Vol. 3 No. 1, February 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">13</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Natural Tourism Development Model and Its Contribution to Local Community Economy at Peliatan Village, Ubud Bali</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Ni Putu Ratna Sari<sup>1</sup>, Anak Agung Putri Sri<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The research is located at Peliatan Village Ubud Bali. The purpose of this research is 1) to identify the potential of natural tourism at Peliatan Village Ubud, 2) to examine contribution of the development of natural tourism to the local community's economy at Peliatan Village Ubud, 3) to formulate the natural tourism development model at Peliatan Village Ubud.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results showed that the potentials of natual tourism at Peliatan Village are a natural panorama, river, springs, rice fields, flora and fauna. Natural tourism activities that can be developed are tracking, cycling, rural tourism, outbound tours, camping tours, natural education tours, flora and fauna observation tours. The contribution of natural tourism to the local community economy is to directly open new jobs for the community, such as tour guides, ticket guards, parking attendants, Balinese food and beverages sellers, business men on food stalls / restaurants, lodging, making souvenirs, Balinese food, making camping, other outbound activities. It is directly improving the ability of the community to save, sending children to a higher level education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It indirectly could increase income of local community, attract investors to build hotels and inns. Natural tourism development model at Peliatan Village is a SO Strategy: developing new tourist attraction, cooperating with Balinese investors from outside the area to develop natural tourism attraction, penetrating foreign tourist market on special interest in nature, developing potential market of foreign tourists being interested in natural tourism, establishing cooperation with travel agent / wholesaler of special interest tourist market, developing tourism event, and developing micro business.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">WO Strategy: improving the quality of the natural environment by maintaining the cleanliness of the natural environment, training natural tourist guides, providing broader and more interesting natural tourism information, designing exciting natural tourism packages, developing private-community partnerships, providing and mapping potential diversity data at tourist destination. Strategy ST: reforestating, controlling erosion, analyzing the influence of the behavior of number of tourist, waste generated, developing plans, protecting regional agreement, cooperating with tourism actors and stakeholders, ensuring the security of Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">WT Strategy: counseling, formulating, and implementing Code of Conduct (COC) product of marketed natural attraction, strengthening organization or association of entrepreneurs and tourism professionals, establishing and / or strengthening of organization of village organization to prevent environmental degradation, coaching community on green tourism, and doing research on natural tourism and its impact on local communities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Index Terms</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">— Environmental Dispute, Procedural Law, Class Action lawsuit</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>1</sup></span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Peliatan Village has a very beautiful tracking path, springs that can be used as tracking path for tourists, and rice fields that can be a place for a tour. This is done to reduce tourist saturation with monotonous tourism products, so that natural tourism is very promising to create a new source of income for local communities in Peliatan Village. Because of this phenomenon, research about natural tourism development model and its contribution to local community in Peliatan Village is important to do. The purpose of this research is 1) To identify the potencial of natural tourism in Peliatan Ubud, 2) developing natural tourism on the local community's economy in Peliatan Village Ubud, 3) Formulating natural tourism development model in Peliatan Village Ubud</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark5"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Reseacrh method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research is located in Peliatan Village, Ubud District Gianyar Regency Bali. It is quite close to the cultural center of Ubud. It can be reached approximately 45 minutes from the city of Denpasar. Qualitative and quantitative data were used with primary and secondary data sources. Samples taken in a random way, 50 people who visit the village and 100 people from local community respondents. Informants were those of local community and tourism agents in Peliatan Village, and Head of the village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, data were collected by techniques of observation, interview and questionnaire distribution. Data were analyzed with Likert scale to know the attitude of tourists and local people to the development of natural tourism in Peliatan Village, from 1 to 4 . The use of scale 1 -4 for each respondent answer was then divided into four categories namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strongly Agree (SA) given a score of 4</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agree (A) is given a score of 3</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Disagree (D) is given a score of 2</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strongly Disagree (SD) is given a score of 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The Result of data analysis was presented either formally (in tabular form) or informally (in narrative form). The SWOT analysis by using SWOT diagrams and matrices produced natural tourism development model and its contribution to local community economy in Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark7"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Characteristics of tourists who provided assessment of Their attitude towards the natural tourism development in Peliatan Village, are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sex</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The number of tourists visiting Peliatan Village surveyed by sex was 40% male and 60% female, so that based on the data collected it can be concluded that most of the tourists</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">who visited Peliatan Village were female dominantly coming from America, England, Australia, Sweden, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the number of tourists visiting Peliatan Village surveyed by age classification was &lt;&nbsp;20 years old was 2%, 20-29 years old was 22%, 30-39 years old was 42%, 40-49 years old was 28%, 50-59 years old was 6%th and no tourists surveyed over the age of 60 years. It can be concluded that most tourists who visited Peliatan Village aged between 30-39 years. this is because most of the tourists want to find a quiet atmosphere, away from the noise and beautiful nature is supported by a unique culture. Peliatan Village then became their target.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Education</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on surveys conducted, the types of education of tourist coming to Peliatan Village were: 62% college education (Bachelor, and Master Degree), 36% High School (HS), and 2% Junior School. It can be concluded that the recent education of tourists visiting Peliatan Village was dominantly in higher education.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Work</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on surveys conducted, the analysis of the number of tourists visiting Peliatan Village based on the type of work was: 20% students, 52% entrepreneurs, 2% government employees, 18% teachers / lecturers, and 8% work in the sector plantations (Farmers). Based on the information obtained it can be concluded that the dominant tourists who came to Peliatan Village work on entrepreneurship sector (Business).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">E. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frequency of visit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on surveys conducted, the analysis of the number of tourists visiting Peliatan Village based on visiting frequency was: 36% visited only 1 time, 54% visited twice, and 10% had visited more than 2 times. So based on the information obtained it can be concluded that the dominant frequency of tourists who came to Peliatan Village was only 2 times. so it is expected to village government officials and villagers to think together how to attract tourists to be able to increase the frequency (number) of their visit in Peliatan Village</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">F. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Length of visit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the survey conducted, the analysis of the number of tourists visiting Peliatan Village based on the length of visit was: 16% only visited 1-2 days, 56% visited for 3-4 days, 28% for 4-7 days. So based on the information obtained it can be concluded that the dominant frequency of tourists who come to Peliatan Village only visit for 3-4 days. so it is expected that village government officials and villagers to think together how to attract tourists to be able to increase the length of their visit in Peliatan Village. perhaps by providing entertainment packages, Tour and Traveling, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">G. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reason to Visit Peliatan Village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on interviews conducted on tourists who came in Peliatan Village, tourists responses were because of some reasons: the natural tourism reason was equal to 98% and the cultural tourism by 2%. So dominant tourists who came to Peliatan Village were looking for a tranquility, supported by rural nature (tracking path through beji in banjar pande), paddy fields, and away from urban hustle bustle. Besides that in Peliatan Village precisely in banjar Tebesaya there is a place of Yoga (her name: Yoga Barn), one of tourist attraction to visit Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">H. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Natural Tourism Suitable to Be Developed</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on interviews conducted on the tourists who came in Peliatan Village, their response on the suitable kind of natural tourism developed in Peliatan Village included: Tracking was 31%, Cycling was 39%, natural education tour was 1%, Nature-based rural tourism was 19%, and ATV tours by 5%. So it can be concluded: that natural tourism that needs to be developed in Peliatan Village is cycling and tracking tour. This is supported by the track for tracking and cycling with views and social activities of people around the track. But the track needs to be rearranged in order to be optimally developed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Natural Tourism Purchased</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the interview conducted to the tourists coming to Peliatan village, their response to the types of natural tourism that has been purchased: tracking was 31%, Camping was 8 %, cycling was 21 %, natural education tour was 8 %, natural-based village tour was 6%, Natural Adventure was 11 % and ATV tour was 15 %. So it can be concluded that natural tourism that were mostly purchased was tracking so that they expected that there must be natural tracking tours developed in Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Motivation of Visitor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Motivation of visitors to Peliatan Village: recreation was 88 &nbsp;%, physical and mental refreshment, experience,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">knowledge, and skill was 4 %, and exploring tourist objects was 9%. Based on the response given, the community should then cooperate with government officials in order to manage areas having potentials to be natural tourist destination in Peliatan village, so that the number of visiting tourist can be increased next year.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">K. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reason to Visit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Reasons of tourists visiting Peliatan village: 93 % was because of beautiful views and fresh air and 7 % was because of harmoniously social life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark9"></a>IV.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The perception of tourists towards the natural</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN PELIATAN VILLAGE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results showed that the perception of tourists to natural tourism as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Perception of Tourists to the Potential of Nature</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural Tourism Is Suitably Developed in Location of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Peliatan Village</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Most of the tourists welcome the development of natural tourism in Peliatan Village. This is seen from the data collected in the survey of 24% of tourists strongly agreed with the development of natural tourism, and 76% agreed. Therefore, some of the tourists hoped the cooperation between the government and the community in order to develop natural tourism in Peliatan Village, both in terms of infrastructure improvements, as well as in terms of its promotion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Overlay of rice fields, rivers, flora and fauna can be natural tourism potentials in Peliatan Village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The results showed that tourists who come in Peliatan Village, 8% strongly agreed if the rice fields, flora and fauna can be naturals potential in Peliatan Village, while 92% agreed. It was hoped that the community could cooperate with the village officials to re-arrange the natural potentials in Peliatan Village, so that it could become a tourist attraction factor coming to Peliatan Village. In addition there weree also tourists who suggested that there must be a package of natural tourism combined with cultural tourism in Peliatan Village. such as: tracking package along with viewing the rice fields, then seeing the activities of the community in the fields, irrigation system, so that tourists coming to Peliatan Village became more satisfied, because beside refreshing mind, they could also get knowledge about Balinese culture, especially the community tradition in Peliatan Village</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist Perception on Infrastructure and Tourism Facilities</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public road to Peliatan Village can be easily passed</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on interviews conducted on tourists who came in Peliatan Village, 8% was strongly agreed if the public road to Peliatan Village can be passed easily, while the rest of 92% agreed. However, many tourists complained that the roads leading to Peliatan Village, especially in the juction of Banjar Kalah to Peliatan and pengosekan, and in Arjuna Statue in the junction of Banjar Ambengan there was frequently a traffic jam so that it can disrupt the access of tourists. Fortunately, there was no complain about the road quality</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public transport to Peliatan Village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In terms of public transport availability, tourists gave responses of 10% strongly agree, 86% agree as well as 8% disagree. Unfortunately tourists complained about freeland taxi operating around Peliatan Village, no standardization of taxi costs, so the drivers were free to offer the price to tourists. Besides the decline of public transportation such as bemo , mikrolet also become a complaint of tourists who come to Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peliatan Village provides restaurant and restaurant facilities</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">With the increase of tourist visit to Peliatan Village, both natural and cultural tourism increased community initiative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">in Peliatan Village to make restaurant and food stalls. This can be seen in Banjar Tebesaya, as well as in Peliatan Village square. Restaurants and food stalls increased in number so that it can support tourism in Peliatan Village, the tourists can choose the variety of food, both Balinese foods and Indonesian foods and western foods. In this case, 84% of tourists agreed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peliatan Village provides facilities available place to stay.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">With the increasing of tourist visit to Peliatan Village, both natural tourism and cultural tourism, increased community initiative in Peliatan Village to make accommodation effort such as hotel, villa, Guest House etc. It can be seen in Banjar Tebesaya, accommodation business increased in number, so that people no longer got confused in looking for temporary places to stay during their tour in Peliatan Village. It was 76% agreed to this</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Peliatan Village provides facilities to carry out worship for visitors</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Most of the tourists, it was 72%, agreed to this, that the hotel has facilitated them to carry out the worship, but some got complaint that there were no other places of worship in Peliatan Village, except for the temple, so that tourists got a bit difficult to pray. They also proposed to make a special place for tourists to pray like Puja Mandala in Nusa Dua. Peliatan Village provides parking facilities for visitors' vehicles</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the results of research that has been done, it was found that 6% strongly agreed, 76% agreed and 18% disagreed to providing parking facilities. Tourists were still disappointed in the arrangement of parking area in Peliatan Village. The lack of parking lots available might cause guests to park car carelessly. This might cause traffic jam then. This needs to be coped with by the village government. e. Service to Tourists</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">People are friendly to tourists visiting Peliatan Village. Tourists in the amount of 78% agreed to local communities in Peliatan Village who are very friendly. They even keep the tradition and ancestral culture. This became one of the attractions of tourists to visit Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">People always provide the needs of tourists. According to the survey conducted, it was found that 82% of tourists think that people have been able to meet their needs during the trip to Peliatan Village, while the rest of 18% still responded that the community has not been able to meet the needs of tourists during a trip in Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;People are willing to be a guide</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">84% of tourists give very good appreciation to the people of Peliatan Village, because they think Peliatan villagers are very helpful to them as guides if they got problems of destination, guides were able to tell the history of the tourist attractions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;People participate in maintaining security in the area of tourism for the convenience of the visitors</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It was found that 90% of tourists think that people have participated in keeping the tourist object by involving the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">village security unit (Pecalang) in some tourist objects. However, they hope for the cooperation between security of tourist destination and the pecalang in maintaining the security and comfort of visitors to the object and destination.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perceptions of public attitudes towards the Natural Tourism Development in Peliatan Village Ubud</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Peliatan Village community agreed more than 50% towards the natural tourism development in Peliatan Village. The results showed that:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the promotion aspect, 76% of people came to introduce Peliatan Village to tourists. 59% of the community introduced Peliatan Village during the exhibition. In promoting Peliatan Village, 67% of people agreed to the cooperation between the government and the community. 68% of people thought that promotion should be done by utilizing other meetings. Peliatan Village has been introduced in the event of exhibition, such as: PORDES Exhibition which is annually held People gave response that there has been cooperation between government, both at village and regional level with society in terms of promoting Peliatan Village through travel agents, village web and others. Promotions are usually discussed in Village meetings. Peliatan Village development, both in terms of life, social economy, and about the development of tourism were also taken into account.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On the economic aspect it was found that the natural tourism development would be able to contribute to the family economy. In detail the results of the study showed that 79% of people thought that there was no problem to live along with the development of tourism. 84% thought that the natural tourism could increase the family income. 78% thought that it could meet the daily needs of the community. 82% thought that it could get a permanent job. 88 % could send to higher education</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On the aspect of employment, people of Peliatan Village agreed that the development of natural tourism could increase employment for them. Results of the study showed that the development of natural tourism opens new jobs for them. 81% thought that they would be tour guides, 82% thought that it would add local income either in the form of taxes so as to increase development and open employment. 88% said it would open opportunities for them to open dinning / restaurant business. 83% said it would give them an opportunity to open businesses of accommodation. 84% said it would create job opportunities. 87% said it would increase souvenirs, create job opportunities in making Balinese food business, create jobs in making camping business , other outbond 84%, creating jobs of making business of selling natural tourism packages 84%.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the aspect of development of economic activity, people also agreed. The results showed that the development of natural tourism in Peliatan Village increased</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the wheels of the people's economy in which 85% agreed and only 1% disagreed. The development of natural tourism could attract investors to build hotels and inns were also obtained 83% agreed and only 6% disagreed. The development of natural tourism could increase people's income so that people's ability to save increases 86% and 6% disagreed and totally disagreed 2%. This shows that the development of natural tourism could drive the economy of local communities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark11"></a>V.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The potential of natural tourism in peliatan</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">VILLAGE UBUD</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Activities that can be developed to support Natural tourism in Peliatan Village:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tracking Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Natural panorama of Peliatan Village can be enjoyed by tourists who do tracking. Tourists can explore the path along the village, see the river, rice fields, water springs, see the flora and fauna. They could even stop over at the local residents to see such cultural activities as: sculpting, dancing, beating gamelan, painting, making crafts and so forth. Tracking path in Peliatan Village are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The southern boundary of Peliatan Village (north of Pura Tirta) - subak soca rice field - beji springs - rice field – residents in banjar Kalah - banjar Kalah. It takes about 2 hours</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From bale banjar Teges Kawan Yangloni to the northen part to sees natural utilization for rural villages - rice field - Bedugul temple of Subak Santian – to the west to bale banjar pande – cross the bridge - Selatan Panti Pande temple- to the south to Puri Agung Peliatan. It takes 2 -3 hours.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The office of Peliatan Village to the north - bale banjar truna to the west - up to Belong – to the west through the making of typical betutu ayam - belong springs - tebesaya kelod – to the north north to banjar tebesaya residence to the north – up to Pura Dalem Puri. It takes 2 -3 hours</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From Puri Peliatan to the north – up to banjar pande- to the eastern part of the pande temple – rice field - bedugul temple of subak santian to the north - Gunung sari street -Pura Gunung Sari - Pura Alas Arum. It takes 2 - 3 hours</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From Puri Peliatan to the north – up to the banjar Pande-to the eastern part to Panti Pande temple - rice fields -Bedugul temple of subak santian to the north – Gunung Sari street – to the west - intersection of Ubud Tegallalang - to the west to Pura Dalem Puri. It takes 2 -3 hours.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flora and Fauna Sightseeing Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Geographically Peliatan Village is located in 8036'30 &quot;LS and 1150 21'05&quot; BT and 350 m above sea level.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Topographic condition of Peliatan Village resources in the form of plain land of: rice field: 246 ha; moor: 103,76 ha; yard: 25,76 ha, settlement: 78,56 ha, grave: 2,90 ha and for other purpose 36.02 ha. This can be used as tourist</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">destination and objects of the flora and fauna in Peliatan Village. This type of tour can be more specifically the joy of flora and fauna of different types of medicine plants, local vegetables, such as paku vegetable that can be found in rice fields, kelor vegetables, katuk vegetables, keladi vegetables and others, plants for ceremony and offering in Bali, spices ingredients of Balinese cuisine. A butterfly tour and firefly tour could also be developed accordingly</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural Education Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Some tourism activities associated with education could be developed in Peliatan Village Ubud. Some of them: teaching domestic and foreign tourists how to plant rice, plough the rice fields using traditional tools. So tourists could learn while travel in.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Outbound Tour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The utilization of moor in Peliatan Village might lead to an outbound games tour packages, such as flying fox, ATV and so forth</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">E. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tour of the Village</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism activities that can be developed in Peliatan Village is a rural tour. This type of tour can be done by collaborating tracking activities, flora and fauna sightseeing, education and outbound tours. Rural Tourism can be enjoyed by tourists who want to observe and learn how to live the local community. They are invited to the village tour to know the types of vegetables, ingredients of Balinese cuisine, types of livestock, so at this stage tourists are invited to learn cooking Bali cuisine directly in traditional Balinese kitchen. Tourists can be shown how to make a typical chicken betutu of Peliatan Village, vegetable urab, lawar Bali, chicken tum and so forth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">F. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eco-Cycling</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tourists are invited to explore pollution-free villages using bicycles, see the natural beauty along the way, see the life of the villagers. Finally, tourists are treated to traditional food and entertained with traditional Balinese dance. Before going home, foreign tourists are given the opportunity to buy handicrafts, do cycling, see the life of villagers with fresh air into memories</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">G. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Camping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This tour can be done in the courtyard area of Gunung Sari temple, banjar Ambengan Peliatan Village Ubud. In this tourist activity tourists can perform activities such as enjoying the atmosphere of the night under the sky.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">VI.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">ontribution of </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">n</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">atural </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">t</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">ourism </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">d</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">evelopment to </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">l</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">ocal </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">C</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">ommunity </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">E</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">conomy in </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">P</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">eliatan </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">V</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">illage</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">, U</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">bud</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The development of natura ltourism in Peliatan Village would certainly be able to run well if there is support from all sectors, companies related to tourism services, suppliers, marketing intermediaries, consumers, competitors, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">society. All of these components are very supportive of a destination to attract tourists. Some of the things that need to be analyzed in the marketing environment are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Company</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are several industrial companies in the Peliatan Village. Most of them are: the commodity-making industry of religious ceremonies, food stalls, workshops and shops. While the industry engaged in tourism consists of Art Studio both dance art, art tabuh, and painting, Homestay, Hotel, guest house, Restaurant, coffe bar, and cafe. There are at least 100 hotels, homestays, guest houses and inns with an average price of Rp. 180,000 per night for non AC, and Rp.250,000 per night for AC facilities. There are 50 restaurants, food stalls and cafes. Besides, the tourist attractions to visit in Peliatan Village are a legong and kecak dances, customs, and religious ceremonies. Today, however, tourists are not so much interested in watching the dance due to the unfair price and PATREM (permit) prevailing from Distibia Regency.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Supplier</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Most of the suppliers to hotels, villas, homestays, restaurants, cafes come from outside Peliatan Village area. Only few of local people Peliatan Village became suppliers to hotels, villas, homestays, restaurants, and cafes located in Peliatan Village area. However, most of local people tend to be supplier to handicrafts sold in artshop.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marketing intermediator: the marketing of tourism industry in Peliatan Village, can be conducted directly (personally) between industry owner and consumer under coordination of village officials / village administrators. It can be done by distributing brochures to travel agents, as well as through websites on the internet.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Consumer</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The visitors of Peliatan Village come from foreign tourists such as China, America, Australia, Japan, Korea and others. The dominant tourists come from China. They are interested in seeing typical Balinese dances such as kecak and legong dances. Besides, there are also domestic tourists, who come from the island of Java, Kalimantan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Competitor:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are a lot of competitiors coming from Ubud village, which is very closed to Peliatan Village, Petulu village, Mas village, Tegalalang village, and Pejeng village. Ubud village has Ubud market serving and offering various kinds of art goods and a number of supporting tourism infrastructures, such as hotels, restaurants, homestays, cafes and others, Besides, Ubud has frequently performed kecak dance and legong dance, making it the most serious threat to Peliatan Village, although it sometimes does not match with PATREM issued by DISTIBIA regency. Meanwhile, Petulu Village is famous for its eco-like birdwatching and kokokan. Mas Village is famous for its unique sculptures. Tegallalang Village has beautiful natural scenery and as a handicraft supplier as well. Many villas are built in Pejeng village and it has the potential of natural tourism very much. Many</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">tourists often do cycling while enjoying the beauty of rice fields.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Until now Peliatan villagers are still lacking in getting empowerment and coaching guidance from the village government, district and provincial governments, so it is expected the people can have a coaching, especially in handling the problems of tourism, so it can support the tourism life in Peliatan Village area . Peliatan Village people are always involved in decision making concerning tourism, in order to avoid misunderstanding and unconformity between the village government and the community. Each will have a development or any plan related to the village, village officials always communicate to the community through village meetings. In the house regulation of the village it is stipulated that there are some rules about the development of tourism in Peliatan Village, where the development of tourism in Peliatan Village should be in line with Tri Hita Karana, and not threaten the harmony of nature and society, and the prohibition to the community to traded customary land (PKD ) as well as village wasteland (AYDS).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All of the above components can support the activities of natural tourism that will be developed in Peliatan Village. Local people not only as the owner of homestay, the owner of arshop, but also can develop natural tourism products as an attraction to come to visit Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The contribution of natural tourism to the economy of local communities is as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The natural tourism activities must be directly supported by supporting facilities such as accommodation facilities, transportation, restaurants or food stalls.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism opens new jobs for the community, such as tour guide, ticket guard, parking attendant, selling typical Balinese food and drinks and so forth. So that the income earned by the local community can be useful for daily life as part of the community that is in the tourism destinations.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism can give the opportunity to open a food stall/ restaurant, to give the opportunity to open a businesses of lodging / accommodation, &nbsp;souvenirs making, Balinese foods,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">camping, other outbound, selling natural tour packages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism in Peliatan Village drives the wheels of the people's economy. It can attract investors to build hotels and inns.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism can increase people's ability to save money. This shows that it can drive the local people's economy.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism can meet the daily needs and can send their children to the higher level of education.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism can make people to have no problem in earning and living</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural tourism can increase family income, meet the daily needs, result in getting a permanent job, send their family members to a higher education.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Indirectly:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. The tourism activities can increase the local income of the village. It can improve the development and open new job vacancies. People are commiited to obey &quot;Tri Hita Karana&quot; conceptions: maintaining good relationship with God, environment and between humans. If three are no harmony, there is no balance then. Besides, people believe that even though tourism has been growing fast, they would not forget the tradition and customs that have been inherited by our ancestors. This is unvaluable heritage.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The development of natural tourism can attract investors to build hotels and inns. They think that investors can accelerate the development of tourism in Peliatan Village, but they are also restless if investors keep buying and making use of the land in Peliatan Village indiscriminately that can disrupt the social life of society and environment in Peliatan Village. Meanwhile, there are people being disagreed with the intervention of investors in the development of natural tourism in Peliatan Village.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">INTERNAL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">EKSTERNAL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Strenght</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Location Peliatan Village adjacent to Ubud Art Center 2. Have the natural potential of the paddy fields, natural scenery, flora and fauna, the river to be developed into natural tourism</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourists love trekking, nature-based rural tourism, cycling tours</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accessibility is very good 5. Public transport available 6. Spacious parking lot in the square</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are facilities and infrastructures supporting nature tourism that is accommodation, restaurant, health facility</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Community support for the development of nature tourism</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Weakness</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;1. People have not</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">seen natural tourism opportunities in Peliatan Village</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. 2. SDM &quot;guide&quot;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">nature tour is still minimal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;3. Cleanliness is less</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">awake.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;4. The beauty of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">telebakan less awake</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;5. Concretization is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">increasing</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;6. Understanding</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">about the environment is still lacking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">7. 7. RTHD (Green</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Village Open Space) is getting smaller.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">8. &nbsp;8. The character of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">the village shifts along the main road of the village: formerly the dominant Bali view, now the dominant &quot;external cultural&quot; view</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">9. &nbsp;9. Information of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">tourism attractions is minimal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10. Purchase of land in large scale, among others, for tourism accommodation facilities</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Potential data The diversity of flora-fauna has not been recorded</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Opportunities</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">a. Nature lovers b.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Diversification of tourism products, among others: trekking, camping, naturebased rural tourism, cycling, nature-based education tourism c. cooperation with travel-travel area outside d. Economic improvement of Peliatan Village communit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">SO Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Develop a unique natural attractions / unique attractions.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cooperate with Balinese investors from outside the region to develop natural tourism attractions</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Penetration of foreign tourist market with focus on special interest tourists that is nature</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of foreign tourists market potential that is interested in nature tourism</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Establish cooperation with travel agents / wholesalers who have a market of special interest tourists</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Development of tourism events by involving local</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">WO Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Improving the quality of the natural environment by maintaining the cleanliness of the natural environment</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Train competent natural guides</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Provide information of nature tourism more widely and interesting</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compose a package of natural tour packages more interesting</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Develop a privatecommunity partnership pattern in the provision of tourism supporting natural tourism facilities.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Provision &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">communities as organizers 7. Development of micro business for local</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">mapping of potential data on diversity in DTW.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Threat</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengaruh alam : banjir, tanah longsor</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengaruh perilaku wisatawan yang tidak ramah lingkungan</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pencemaran lingkungan alam masyarakat sendiri</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Banyaknya saingan destinasi</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sebagai pesaing yang bisa mengembang kan pariwisata alam</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adanya kebijakan kebijakan desa yang merugikan lingkungan alam</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Masuknya investor asing yang tidak memperhatika n lingkungan alam</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">SStrategy ST</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perform greening, erosion control for the natural well preserved</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conduct analysis on the influence of behavior, the number of tourists, waste generated</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The development of natural tourism attractions is done in a planned manner by referring to a holistic / holistic review.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Make various agreements with various parties in the framework of development of nature tourism and area protection</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Raising cooperation with tourism stakeholders and related stakeholders in formulating and developing nature-based tourism;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ensuring the security of Peliatan Village with natural tourist program program to touriststrategi ST</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Melakukan penghijauan, pengendalian erosi agar alam terjaga dengan baik</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Melakukan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;analisa</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">tentang &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengaruh</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">perilaku, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;jumlah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">wisatawan, limbah yang dihasilkan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengembangan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;atraksi</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">wisata alam &nbsp;&nbsp;dilakukan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">secara terencana dengan mengacu pada kajian yang menyeluruh/holistik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Membuat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;berbagai</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">kesepakatan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">berbagai &nbsp;pihak &nbsp;dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">rangka &nbsp;&nbsp;pengembangan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">wisata &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;alam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">perlindungan kawasan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Menggalang &nbsp;&nbsp;kerjasama</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">dengan pelaku pariwisata dan stakeholder terkait dalam merumuskan dan mengembangkan pariwisata berbasis alam;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Menjamin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;keamanan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Desa &nbsp;Peliatan &nbsp;dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">program program wisata alam kepada wisatawan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">StrategWT Strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conducting tourism counseling to provide an understanding of the community about nature tourism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formulating and implementing code of conduct (CoC) for each product of nature tourism attraction that is marketed</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strengthening of employers' organizations or associations and tourism professionals, such as Gahawisri, PHRI, ASITA, HPI, etc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Establishment and / or strengthening of village organizations to prevent environmental degradation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standardization of human resources capacity of tourism through certification for tourism sector workers.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Community development to better understand environmentally friendly tourism for tourism sustainability.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conduct research on nature tourism and its impact on local communitiesi WT</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">SO Strategy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Program</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">1. Developing new unique tourist attractions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">developing unique tourist attractions</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2. Cooperating with Bali investors of outside the areas to develop natural tourist attractions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">developimng new tourist attractions in collaboration with local investors</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">3. Penetrasi pasar wisatawan mancanegara dengan fokus pada wisatawan minat khusus yaitu alam</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Melakukan promosi ke wisatawan mancanegara yang tertarik pada wisata alam</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4. Developing tourist market potentials for foreign tourists who are interested in natural tourism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">promoting to foreign tourists who are interested in natural tourism</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">5. Cooperating with travel agencies of specific interest of market segments</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">cooperating with travel agencies of specific interest of market segments (natural tourism)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">6. Developing tourist events of which performer is local people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">making tourist events in Peliatan Village</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">7. Developing micro business on tourism for local people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">helping local people to open business on tourism of small scale</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">WO Strategy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Program</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">1. Improving the &nbsp;natural</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">environment quality by keeping the cleanliness of the environment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">doing counseling regarding nturL ENVIRONMET IN Peliatan Village</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2. Training tourist guides to be a competent ones</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">training tourist guides</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">3. Providing &nbsp;&nbsp;information</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">about a wider and more attractive &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;natural</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">tourism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">making information system of tourism consisting of ourist natural attractions through printed and electronic media</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4. Designing &nbsp;&nbsp;a &nbsp;&nbsp;more</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">interesting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;natural</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">tourism packages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Making unique and interesting natural tourism packages</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">5. Developing cooperating system &nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;providing</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">supporting &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">infrastructures</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">developing joint-venture model, local people shares</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">6. Providing and mapping various potential data in tourist destinations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">doing research through educational institution to document various natural potentials</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">ST Strategy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Program</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">1. Doing reboitation, erosion control, in order that nature &nbsp;can be &nbsp;well</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">maintained</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">doing activity of community service by reboitation of useful plants in order to avoid the flood</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">1. Analyzing the influence of attitudes &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;tourist,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">number of tourists, and waste produced</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">doing researches on the impact of natural tourism to local people</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">2. Developing aomprehensively &nbsp;well-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">planned attractions of natural tourism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">making natural tourist attractions that be in line with local culture</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3. Making MOUs with other</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">making house regulation</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">parties for natural rourism development and areas conservation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">regarding conservation of environmnt</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">4. Cooperating with the doer of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tourism &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">stakeholders &nbsp;regarding</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">designing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">developing nature-based tourism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">cooperating with stakeholder in developing natural tourism</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">5. Keeping the security of Peliatan village for the sake of natural tourism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">making Code Of Conduct regarding natural tourism</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark13"></a>VII. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The potential of natural tourism in Peliatan Village is the natural panorama, River, water spring, rice terrace field, Flora and fauna. Natural tourism activities that can be developed in the Peliatan Village are tracking, cycling, rural tourism, outbound tours, camping tours, natural education tours, sightseeing tours of flora and fauna</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The contribution of natural tourism to the economy of local communities is:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The direct development of natural tourism opens new jobs for the community such as tour guides, ticket guards, parking attendants, Bali food, beverages, opens opportunities for establishing food stalls / restaurants, giving people the opportunity to open businesses such as accommodation, employment opportunities to create souvenirs, create jobs in making Balinese food-making businesses, create jobs in making camping businesses, outbound others, create jobs such as making businesses selling natural tour packages, increasing the ability of people to save, to increase the revenue of an area to increase the development and can open employment for the surrounding community, the development of natural tourism can attract investors to build hotels and inns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural tourism development model in Peliatan Village: SO Strategy: Developing new tourist attractions, especially the unique one; working with Balinese investors from outside the area to develop natural tourism attractions; working with Balinese investors from outside the region to develop natural tourism attractions; Penetrating of foreign tourist market with focus on tourists special interest that is nature; developing potential foreign tourist market that is interested in natural tourism; build cooperation with travel agent / wholesaler which has special interest in tourist market; developing tourism event by involving local community as organizer; developing micro business on tourism for local society.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">WO Strategy: Improving the quality of natural environment by maintaining the its cleanliness; train competent natural tourist guides; providing information of natural tourism more widely and attractively; preparing a more attractive natural tourism packages;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">developing private-community partnership patterns in the provision of natural tourism supporting facilities; providing and mapping the potential data on diversity in tourist destination areas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ST Strategy: Performing reforestation, erosion control for the well preserved nature; conducting analysis on the influence of behavior, the number of tourists, the waste generated; developing the well-planned and holistic study on natural tourist attraction; making various agreements with various parties in the framework of the development of natural tourism and the protection of the area; raising cooperation with tourism actors and related stakeholders in formulating and developing nature-based tourism; ensuring the security of Peliatan Village with natural tourist programs</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">WT Strategy: Conducting tourism counseling to give understanding to the community about natural tourism; formulating and implementing code of conduct (CoC) for each product of marketed natural attraction; strengthening the organization or association of entrepreneurs and tourism professionals, such as Gahawisri, PHRI, ASITA, HPI, etc.; establishment and / or strengthening the village organizations to prevent environmental degradation; standardizing the human resources capacity through certification for tourism sector workers; developing the community for a better understanding on environmentally friendly tourism sustainability; conducting research on natural tourism and its impact on local communities</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Acknowledgment</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">A deeply thank is addressed to Udayana University which through LPPM that has given a fund this research, as well as for those who have material and formal help so that this research can be completed in time.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">[1]</span></p>