---
layout: full_article
title: "MIXED CODE THAT ENTERENCHED IN THE LEARNING PROCESS BY CHATHOLIC JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL GONZAGA TOMOHON"
author: "Mayske Rinny Liando, Tirsa Vira Rondonuwu"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-58547 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-58547"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-58547"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MIXED CODE THAT ENTERENCHED IN THE LEARNING PROCESS BY CHATHOLIC JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL GONZAGA TOMOHON</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mayske Rinny Liando<sup>1</sup>,Tirsa Vira Rondonuwu<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>12</sup>Universitas Negeri Manado</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">email: <sup>1</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">m</span><a href="mailto:ayske_liando@unima.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ayske_liando@unima.ac.id</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2rondonuwutirsa29@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>rondonuwutirsa29@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received Date : &nbsp;&nbsp;05-07-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Date : &nbsp;&nbsp;18-08-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Published Date : &nbsp;&nbsp;30-11-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The teaching of second language or the third make sociolinguistic problem. For most Indonesian people, Indonesian language is the second or third language. The teaching of of Indonesian language is integrated in Indonesian language subject that starts from elementary to high school. Indonesian language is a main language in Indonesian especially in education institutes. It is undebieble fact that students use another language at Gonzaga Junior High School Tomohon because of the influence of social and culture background. Code mixing is caused by some factors, namely (1) subject, (2) describing, (3) daily routine in teaching and learning activities in Junior High School Catholic Gonzaga Tomohon has been the main issue in their research.This research is aimed to explain about kinds of code mixing and factors that cause the code mixing in teaching and learning activities by Junior High School Students Catholic Gonzaga Tomohon.Theories used for this research is the theory of speech community, bilingual theory , theory of code and code mixing. This research is a descriptive qualitative. The research data is done with the following method of observation technic. The data in this research is the student speech that contains code mixing. The data analysis that use is qualitative analysis with equal method.The result of this research shows that speech act of the students in Gonzaga Junior High School of Tomohon found code mixing. The form of code mixing that using are Indonesian, English and Manado Malay. Based on the result of this research can concluding that kinds of code mixing are code mixing in lexical form, frasa form and clausa form. The factors of code mixing are namely, describing and daily routine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key words: code mixing, teaching and learning activities, Indonesian language, sociolinguistic</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PRELIMINARY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesia as a developing country is an example of a multicultural country, where different community groups live side by side with diversity in terms of religion, group, ethnicity, profession, politics. In interaction with one another often occurs the use of different languages. Nababan (1984: 32), explains when people mix two or more languages or language variations in a language act (speech act or discourse) without realizing it and there</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">is a prior desire to understand something, speakers of both languages can learn elements from other languages unknown before. The ability to understand until you can actively use other languages gives birth to a condition called bilingualism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesian functions as a unifying tool for a sense of unity and national unity. As a national language, Indonesian functions as a symbol of national pride, national identity, a means of unifying various ethnic groups and also functions as a means of communication between regions and among regional cultures. Indonesian must be able to strengthen national identity and personality. As part of a global society, Indonesian must also be flexible and flexible in accepting the influence and change of civilization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Language is one of the characteristics of humans. There is no way for humans to not use language in their daily activities, even if they are not consciously aware of it. It is different with the views of some cultural researchers who find that language functions important and is fundamental to human life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Pateda (1987) language is one of the communication tools used by humans to achieve goals. When communicating, the speaker uses more certain languages to clarify the meaning that is difficult to understand or accept the other person. Therefore, it cannot be denied that the bilingual community in communicating will make language choices and code. Furthermore, it is also explained that the form of code switching or code mixing can be in the form of the transfer of words, phrases, clauses or sentences from one language to another language (Chaer, 1995: 154). Usually code switching talks will always be followed by code mixing. Ohoiwutun (1996: 72) states that, the presence of code switching and code mixing is a result of the ability of members of the language community to speak more than one. Code switching and code mixing are not forms of language errors due to weak mastery of the speaker in the language used. Code switching and code mixing often in various community conversations, code switching and code mixing can occur in all walks of life. A person's social status cannot prevent code switching or code mixing or is often called multilingual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A multi-lingual society arises because the speech community has or masters more than one different language so that they can use these language choices in communication. In sociolinguistic studies, language choices become an important aspect that is studied in a linguistics. Indonesian society which consists of various types can be referred to as a bilingual society, where the community in addition to being able to speak the region can also speak Indonesian and even foreign languages, especially English. Foreign languages, in this case</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English that is able to be mastered by the people of Indonesia because it has been studied since elementary school level even starting at an early age. The problem of language contact as part of sociolinguistic problems in a bilingual or multilingual society like this so often happens that the problem of code mixing is often done as a result of mastery of more than one language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the observations of researchers that Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students in teaching and learning interactions in schools, use languages other than Indonesian, namely the Malay language Manado and English. This is strongly influenced by the position of the Manado Malay language as Lingua Franca of the people of North Sulawesi who have a variety of regional languages. Thus it needs to be traced through a study entitled &quot;The Use of Code Mixing in Teaching and Learning Activities by Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School Students: A Sociolinguistic Study&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, researchers examined the use of code mixing in teaching and learning activities by Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students because there were still many students who often used mixed codes when they were supposed to use Indonesian language properly and correctly. Examples of code mix expressions found at school include: Let's quickly make assignments because somo break; make it a habit to come on time; this is a market-class classroom; don't play while learning; this is hard to work at home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;what types of code mixing are used by students in teaching and learning activities at Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;what factors are causing the code mixing in students' teaching and learning activities in Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research method used in this study is a qualitative method. In this case a systematic and accurate description of the data examined is made. This descriptive method was chosen because the research conducted aims to clearly describe the object under study naturally (Djajasudarma 1993: 8-9). In observing the interactions that occur, researchers apply the method of direct observation of students' language behavior carried out by Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School in and outside the classroom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research was conducted at Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School. This school is located at Jalan Raya Tomohon, Paslaten II Sub-District, Tomohon Timur District, Tomohon City. The data obtained in this study were sourced from spoken language spoken by Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students, there were three grade levels, namely seventh, eighth and ninth grade but only seven and eighth grade were studied.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data collection techniques carried out by the method of listening, by listening to the use of language and. The method of listening is the method used to obtain data regarding the use of spoken and written language. The term listening here is not only related to the use of written language. tapping technique.The tapping technique is referred to as the basic technique in the listening method because essentially listening is realized by tapping. Furthermore, the note taking technique is an advanced technique that is carried out when applying the listening method. note that note some forms that are relevant for his research from the use of written language. (Mahsun, 2007: 92.94). The method of study or analysis used in the analysis is inductive analysis. Inductive analysis is the determination of the truth of a matter or general formulation of a phenomenon by studying the case for specific events related to it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The interaction between the teacher and students in teaching is also called the teaching and learning process (Ibrahim, et al 1992: 8). In the teaching and learning process, of course there are those who are taught and those who teach. Learning is one of the vital human needs for sustaining life and developing oneself in social life. Teaching and learning process is a process that contains a series of actions of teachers and students on the basis of reciprocal relationships that take place in educational situations to achieve certain goals.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Interaction or reciprocal relationship between teacher and student is a major requirement for the ongoing teaching and learning process. Interaction in teaching and learning events has a broader meaning, not just the relationship between the teacher and students, but in the form of educational interactions. In this case not only the delivery of messages in the form of subject matter, but the inculcation of attitudes and values in students who are learning.The use of Indonesian as the language of communication in communication plays an important role in various fields, such as government, family, religion, ethnicity, and education. In the realm of education, Indonesian is an introduction in the teaching and learning process (PBM). Language becomes a medium used by teachers in delivering subject</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">matter. Through language, students can understand what is conveyed by the teacher. Through language as well, students can overcome difficulties in the learning process. Thus the importance of Indonesian as a language of instruction in learning so that it needs to be maintained in various levels of education both elementary, junior high, and high.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The existence of the use of Indonesian as a language of instruction in learning does need to be maintained. But there are some things that we must remember that based on linguistic aspects, &quot;Indonesian society is a bilingual (bilingual) community that masters more than one language, namely regional languages, Indonesian languages and foreign languages&quot; (Nababan, 1989: 27). A bilingual community will experience language contact, giving birth to mixed codes. Nababan (1989: 28) explained that &quot;code mixing is the mixing of two (more) languages or languages in one language act without something in the language situation that requires mixing languages&quot;. Mastery of two or more languages by a language speaker allows for an impact , i.e. transfer of language elements, both negative and positive transfers. Positive transfer results in integration which is beneficial for both languages because the absorption of elements from a language can be integrated with the absorbing language system. Conversely, negative transfer will give birth to interference, namely deviations from the norms of language as a result of the introduction of other languages</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sociolinguistics according to the Big Indonesian Dictionary (KBBI) Online is the science of the language used in social interaction; branch of science about the relationship and the interplay between language behavior and social behavior. The problem of language contact as part of sociolinguistic problems in bilingual and multilingual societies such as this is very common so that the problem of code mixing is often done as a result of mastering languages in more than one language. The study of language has been widely carried out by linguists, both pure and interdisciplinary studies of science. One of the interdisciplinary studies of language is sociolinguistics. Sociolinguistics is a combination of socio and linguistics which are two fields of empirical science that have very close links.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kridalaksana (1984: 2) argued that sociolinguistics is the study of the characteristics and various variations of language, as well as the relationship between linguists and the characteristics of the language's function in a language society. As for the essence of what is stated by Kridalaksana is the probability of the emergence of language uniformity so that the birth of language studies involving the community. Language studies involving the language community, especially regarding the characteristics or variety of languages called linguistic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As the name implies, studies in sociolinguistics are the use of language in society. Broadly speaking, the term Tutur Community or also called the Linguistic Community is used by linguists to refer to communities based on language (Hudson, 1996 : 24). Actually there are many definitions that explain the term speech society. The simplest term to describe speech society is that put forward by Lyons (in Hudson, 1996: 24) states that 'speech society is everyone who uses a certain language (dialect)'. This definition similar to the definition given by Bloomfield (1993, Indonesianized by Sutikno (1995: 40) in his book titled &quot;Language&quot;. He introduced the term language society with the definition of a group of people using the same speech system in interacting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sociolinguistics generally examines bilingual and multi-linguistic societies. Understanding Bilingualism was put forward by Bloomfield (1958: 56) who said that bilingualism is a symptom of mastering a second language with the same degree of ability as native speakers as formulated as native-like control of two languages. This means that a bilingualist (bilingualist) is a person who masters two languages equally well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Hartman and Stork (1972: 115) interference is a mistake that occurs as a result of carrying habits of speech in the mother tongue or dialect into a second language or dialect (Abdul Chaer and Leonie Agustina (2004: 121). In bilingual societies, the use of languages that they control interchangeably is greatly influenced by many factors. According to Hymes (1972), the characteristics of the socio-cultural dimension that affect the use of the language of a speaker can be classified into eight components called the Speech Component. So called because the embodiment of the meaning of a speech or utterance is determined by the speech component. The eight speech components can be synchronized with speaking: Settings and Scene (background); Participants; Ends (results); Act sequence (mandate); Key (way); Instrumentalities (facilities); Norms (norms); and Genres (types) (Suhardi and Sembiring, 2005: 51-53). Wardhaugh (1986) refers to code as a system used to communicate between two or more speakers in the form of a particular dialect or language. &quot;... that the particular dialect or language one chooses to use on any occasion is a code, a system used communication between two or more parties&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Wardhaugh, bilingual or multilingual communities are faced with the problem of choosing a particular code (biased in the form of dialects or languages) when they speak, and they may also decide to switch from one code to another or mix the codes. Thus, in a multilingual society there are a variety of codes, including in the form of language, dialect, sociolect, and the style used in communication. With the existence of these codes, speakers</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">in the speech environment will use the code in accordance with the factors that influence it by changing the variation in language use. Code switching can be interpreted as a general term to refer to a change (transition) in the use of two or more languages. Sobarna (1994: 28) states that code experts can occur between local languages in a national language that is, code switching into or between native languages (regions or Indonesian ) in a foreign language called exit code transfer. Code Transfer is the use of one language on one purpose and using another language on another, while code mixing is the use of a particular language mixed with other languages (Chaer, 1995: 203).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The convergence of two different cultures will lead to bilingual contact. This situation will cause language contact (language contact) of two cultures that have two different languages. (Suwito, 1985: 39). This condition is possible if a speaker uses more than one language in the speech community, will use one language purely and is not affected by other languages while within the speech community itself there are various languages and also within the speaker there are already different abilities language, conditions like this can cause symptoms of code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Code mixing (CK) is one aspect of language dependence in a bilingual / multilingual society. This dependency characteristic is characterized by a reciprocal relationship between the functions and roles of language. The role shows who uses the language, which is marked by the social background of the speaker, the level of education, and so on, while the function shows what the speaker is trying to achieve by mixing codes and the extent to which the language used provides opportunities for code mixing. According to the large Indonesian dictionary online (2005: 190), code mixing is the use of language units from one language to another to expand the style of language or language variety, where the use is in the form of words, clauses, idioms, greetings and so on. Scotton (1979: 65) explains that mixing codes as a choice of code or language related to the use of language or more in the same sentence or conversation. Furthermore it is said that the form of code mixing can be a change from words, phrases, clauses or sentences from one language to another language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In a situation of other languages is when people mix two languages or various languages in a language action requires mixing the language. In such circumstances only the slowness of the speaker or his habits are obeyed. Acts such language we call mixed code. In Indonesia this code mix is often present in a state of conversation which is mixed with Indonesian with regional languages. If the person is &quot;educated&quot;, we can also see mixed codes between Indonesian (regional languages) and foreign languages (Nababan, 1984: 32). Based</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">on the uptake element that causes the code mixing, mixed code is divided into three types (Jendre, 2001). Mixed exit code is mixed code that absorbs foreign language elements (Jendre, 2001). Mix code into is a type of code that absorbs elements of regional languages which are related. For example symptoms of code mixing in Indonesian speech events are contained within the elements of regional languages. Mixed code is mixed code which in (maybe clause or sentence) has absorbed the elements of regional languages and foreign languages (Jendra, 1991: 132).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the restrictions as mentioned in this study, the researcher discusses and analyzes the types of code mix namely lexical / words, phrases and clauses. As well as discussing the causative factors for the three factors namely role identification, desire to explain / interpret and habits. Based on the linguistic elements involved in it, Suwito (1996: 92) distinguishes mixed code into several types namely lexical (word) is the smallest element in the formation of sentences which is very important role in grammar, the meaning of words is a unit of language that stands alone , consisting of a single morpheme or a combination of morphemes. Phrases are a combination of two or more words that are not predictive in nature, the combination can be dense and can be tenuous (Harimurti, 2001: 59). The clause as a grammatical unit in the form of a group of words consisting of at least a subject and a predicate and has the potential to become a sentence .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suwito (1983) explained several factors underlying the occurrence of code mixing, namely the role factor is the social status, education, as well as the class of speech participants or speakers of the language. Variety factors are determined by the language used by the speaker when mixing codes, which will occupy the social status hierarchy. The willingness to explain and interpret factors included in this factor is evident in the event of code mixing that marks the attitudes and relationships of the speaker with others, and the relationship of others towards them. The data obtained in this study indicate that Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students mixed code in their speech. In accordance with the findings during the research, language mixing / code mixing was given based on classes in Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School. In this study, researchers discuss and analyze the types of code mixing and also discuss the factors that cause code mixing. The type or form of code mixing can be in the form of mixing or displacement of words / lexicals, phrases, clauses or sentences from different languages. one to another language. And the factors that cause code mixing are (1) identification of roles, (2) desire to explain and interpret, and (3) habits.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, only Indonesian, English, and Malay Malay are limited. From the research findings, examples of the types of code mixing and the factors causing the code mixing occurred during the events of Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the results of the research and discussion presented previously, it can be concluded the following matters: Types of mixed codes found in the research on speech events in teaching and learning activities of Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students are mixed lexical type codes, phrases, and clause. Lexical / word is the smallest element in the formation of sentences which is very important role in grammar, what is meant by words is a unit of language that stands alone, consisting of a single morpheme or a combination of morphemes. Phrases are a combination of two or more words that are not predictive, the combination can be meeting and can be tenuous. Clause is a grammatical unit in the form of a group of words consisting of at least a subject and a predicate and has the potential to be a sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factors that cause code mixing in the situation of speech in teaching and learning activities of Gonzaga Tomohon Catholic Middle School students are the factors of role identification, factors of desire to explain or interpret, and habits. If the speech shows an indication of social status, education of the speaker or authority authority, it can be categorized that the code mix is a result of the role identification factor (IP). If the speech shows an indication that the speaker has direct contact with the interlocutor and tries to explain or interpret something, then it can be categorized that the code mix occurs due to factors explain and interpret (M). What is meant by code mixing events is because of the habit factor (K), which is code mixing that occurs only as a result of association between speakers of a language without having a specific purpose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bloomfield, Leonard. 1958. Language, Twelfth Impression. Great Britain :Cox and Wyman Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Djajasudarma. T. Fatimah. 1993. Metode Linguistik Ancangan Metode Penelitiandan kajian.Eresco. Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fasold, ralph. 1984. Sociolinguistics of Society. New York: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2019 Vol. 12, Number 4, Page 40-49</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hartman E dan L. Stock. 1972. Reading in Sociology of Language. Dalam Fishman, J.A. Editor. Paris: Mouton</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hudson, Richard A. 1996. Sociolinguistics. Second Edition Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, D. 1972.’’The Ethography of Speaking’’, dalam Readings in the Sociology of Language, edited by Joshua A. Fisman. Paris: Mouton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jendra, I Wayan. 1991. Kedwibahasaan Campur Kode, Proyek Peningkatan dan Pengembangan Perguruan Tinggi (P3T). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kridalaksana, Harimurti. 1984. Fungsi Bahasa dan Sikap Bahasa.Yogyakarta : Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">M.S.Mahsun. 2007.Metode Penelitian Bahasa. Jakarta: Rajawali Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nababan, P.W.J. 1984. Sosiolinguistik : Suatu Pengantar. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Umum</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ohoiwutun, Paul. 1996. Sosiolinguistik; Memahami Bahasa dalam Konteks Masyarakat dan Kebudayaan. Jakarta : Kesaint Blanc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pateda, Mansoer. 1987. Sosiolinguistik. Bandung : Angkasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Scotton, C.M. 1979. Code switching as a Safe Choice in Choosing a Lingua Franca</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sobarna, Cece. 1994. Ahli Kode dan Campur Kode di Kalangan Remaja Kota Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Laporan Penelitian. Bandung : The Toyota Foundation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sugiyono. 2005. Memahami Penelitian Kualitatif. Bandung : Penerbit CV.Alfabeta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suhardi, B dan Sembiring Cornelius. 2005. Aspek Sosial Bahasa, dalam Kushartanti., Yuwono, Untung., Lauder, Multamia RMT. Pesona Bahasa Langkah Awal Memahami Linguistik. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suwito. 1985. Pengantar Awal Sosiolinguistik ; Teori dan Problema. Edisi ke-2.Surakarta : Henry Offset</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Troike Saville, M. 1982. The Ethnography of Communication.Oxford : Basil Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wardaugh. 1986. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">49</span></p>