---
layout: full_article
title: "Preliminary Phitochemical Analysis  Of Guava Leaves (Psidium guajava L.) Extract As Antidiarrheal In Calves"
author: "I Wayan Sudira, I Made Merdana, Suci Nur Qurani"
categories: atbes
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/atbes/full-49860 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/atbes/id-49860"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/atbes/full-49860"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">Advances in Tropical Biodiversity and Environmental Sciences 3(2): 21-24, September 2019 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISSN : 2622-0628</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">DOI: 10.24843/atbes.v03.i02.p01 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available online at</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ATBES/article/view/49860"><span class="font3">: https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ATBES/article/view/49860</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">21</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Preliminary Phitochemical Analysis of Guava Leaves (</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font5">.) as Antidiarrheal in Calves</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Wayan Sudira<sup>1</sup>, I Made Merdana<sup>1*</sup>, Suci Nur Qurani<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Veterinary Pharmacology and Pharmacy Laboratory, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University </span><span class="font4"><sup>1 </sup></span><span class="font3">Profession Degree in Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University</span><span class="font4"><sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font3">Jl. P.B. Sudirman, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">*Corresponding author </span><a href="mailto:imade_merdana@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">: imade_merdana@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abs tract. </span><span class="font3">Guava plants (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font3">) are fruit plants originating from South America and can thrive in the territory of Indonesia. Now the biggest center for guava cultivation is spread in DKI Jakarta, West Java, Central Java, East Java, Yogyakarta, Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, Sumatra and Kalimantan. In addition to taking the fruit, guava leaves are also used as a traditional medicine for the treatment of diarrhea in human and animals. This study aims to identify active compounds in guava leaves. There are several secondary metabolites with pharmacological effects as anti diarrhea such as flavonoid, alkaloid, tannins and essential oils. The leaves sample used in this study were taken from farmers in the West Denpasar area, Bali. Extraction of guava leaf leaves was done using 96% ethanol, and phytochemical analysis was carried out to detect the presence of active compounds. The data obtained is presented and analyzed descriptively qualitatively. The results showed that the ethanol extract of guava leaves contained active compound included steroid, triterpenoid, phenolics, alkaloids, flavonoids, saponins and tannins. It can be concluded that guava leaf extract contains active compounds that are potential antidiarrheal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keyword</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font3">: antidiarrheal, guava leaves extract, phytochemical</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Indonesia is a tropical country that has a large collection of plants with medicinal potential, which has been used as a traditional medicine for generations. The use of phytopharmaca tends to increase with the issue of back to nature and the financial crisis which results in weak purchasing ability [1]. This condition is supported by the understanding of people who consider traditional medicine to be safer without side effects and also easier to obtain without a prescription [2]. Traditional medicine is widely used by the middle to lower classes, especially in efforts to prevent, promote and rehabilitate. At present, one of the plants that is widely cultivated and has medicinal properties is a guava [3].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Guava plants were first grown in South America. The distribution of this plant has been found worldwide, especially tropical countries including Indonesia [4]. In Indonesia, the largest guava cultivation center covers the area of DKI Jakarta, West Java, Central Java, East Java, Yogyakarta, Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, Sumatra and Kalimantan. As it is known, these tropical plants are planted for fruit, but the leaves can be used for medicine [5]. Review article mentions this plant shows a variety of biological activities such as antidiarrheal, antimicrobial, antioxidant, hepatoprotective, anti-allergic, anti-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">spasmodic, anti-diabetic, anti-inflammatory and antitussive activity [6].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Guava fruit contains many nutrients, vitamins and antioxidants compound. It has been reported that there are 100 mg ascorbic acid in 100 g of ripe guava fruit. Both active ingredients are reported to play a role in immunostimulants [7]. While the leaves are reported to contain flavonoids, alkaloid, triterpenoid, tannins and essential oils [8]. Flavonoids especially quercetin, alkaloids and tannins act as antidiarrhea [9]. Essential oils have the potential as antibacterial [10]. Other studies revealed guava leaf extracts can increase the number of platelets [11] and accelerate the healing of open wounds in mice [12-13]. Ascorbic acid, flavonoids and tannins are reported to have a potential to increase platelets in patients with dengue fever [14].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study phytochemical screening was carried out to determine the active compounds of guava leaves taken from the West Denpasar sub-district, Bali. This extract will be used for research as antidiareous candidates in Balinese calves. Calf diarrhea is a disease commonly reported in neonatal to young animals [15]. Some causes of diarrhea in calves include metabolic disorders, poor quality nutrition, infectious agents and non-infectious agents [16]. Infectious agents include enteropathogenic bacteria [17] viruses [15][18] and protozoa [19]. Diarrhea causes</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">economic losses for farmers, in the form of medical expenses, care workers, disruption of growth and risk of death. The morbidty is very high reaching 62% with mortality case 39% [16].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Handling of calf diarrhea is generally based on clinical symptoms. The technology for controlling diarrhea in livestock has experienced development such as vaccines and synthetic drugs. But the treatment of diarrhea using herbal medicine such as guava leaves is potential to be developed, considering this plants also acts as an immunomodulator and the farmer can easily be cultivated around the enclosure garden.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Preparation of guava leafs extract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dried simplicia of fresh guava leaves was blended into powder. The powder weighed 1500 gram, was then processed by maceration method with 96% ethanol for a week at room temperature. The macerated are then filtered with a filter paper. The supernatant was evaporated in a rotary evaporator at temperature 40 ºC. Ethanol extract of guava leaves can be stored until further examination. Phytochemical screening was carried out to identify the class of active compounds contained in the extract.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Phytochemical analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phytochemical screening procedure was conducted according to Harborne (1987). This inclauded examination of steroids and terpenoids, phenolic, tannins, flavonoids, alkaloids, and saponin [20].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Steroids and terpenoids test; guava leaf extract was mixed with anhydrous acetic acid and sulfuric acid (Liebermann Burchad) each of 2 drops. The blue discoloration will indicate the presence of steroids and if the colour change to purple, will indicate the presence of terpenoids.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Phenol test; guava leaf extract was added by 2 drops of FeCl3 solution, blue to black color showed phenol content in the extract.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tannin test; guava leaf extract was added by 2 drops of solution of FeCl3 and H2N4 into the test tube. The positive results of the tannin on the extract will show a yellowish color.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flavonoids test (Wilstater Reagent); 1 ml of guava leaf extract was added by 2 drops of concentrated HCl and added 0.2 milligram Mg powder, the positive reaction will show a yellow discoloration. Flavonoids test (NaOH Reagent); 1 ml of guava leaf extract was added by added 2 drops of 10% NaOH reagent, a positive reaction will show an orange or red color change.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alkaloids test (Mayer reagent); 1 ml of guava leaf extract was added by 2 drops of chloroform and 2 drops of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">meyer reagent, a positive reaction of the alkaloid showed the formation of white deposits.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Saponin test; guava leaf extract was added by 2-3 drops of distilled water hen shake the test tube slowly, the positive results of saponin content are indicated by the presence of foam in the test tube. Addition of HCl solution aims to stabilize the foam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Data analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data obtained is presented and analyzed by descriptively qualitatively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The results of screening test of guava leaf extract showed that guava leaf contained secondary metabolites included steroids, terpenoids, flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, phenols and saponins (Table I).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">TABLE 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">PHITOCHEMICAL SCREENING OF GUAVA LEAFS EXTRACT</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Type analysis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Reagent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Discol-ration</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Test result</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Steroid /</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample +</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Blue</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Steroid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Terpenoids</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Anhydrous acetic acid + sulfuric acid (Liebermann Burchard)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Purple</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Terpenoid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Fenolics</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample + FeCl</span><span class="font1">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Dark blue</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Fenolic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Tannins</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample +</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">FeCl</span><span class="font1">3 + </span><span class="font2">H</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font2">N</span><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Yellow</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Tannin</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Flavonoids</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample + Mg/HCl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Yellow</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Flavonoid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Flavonoids</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample +</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NaOH 10%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Red</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Flavonoid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Alkoloids</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample + kloroform +</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">meyer</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">White sediment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Alkaloid</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Saponins</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sample + aquades + HCl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Stable foam</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">(+) Saponin</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Steroids and terpenoids tests using the Liebermann-Bouchard method showed positive results, marked by changes in color to blue-green (steroids) and red-purple discoloration (terpenoids) This is due to the ability of terpenoid and steroid compounds to result colors by sulfuric acid in anhydride acetic acid solvents [21].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Examination of phenol compounds on guava leaf extract showed positive results. Phenolic compounds that react with FeCl3 cause discoloration to purple, blue and deep black. This is due to the reaction between FeCl3 and the -OH aromatic group on phenol compounds [22].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Examination of tannin compounds by adding guava leaf extract with a solution of FeCl3 and H2N4 (hydrazine) showed a positive result marked discoloration to yellowish [10]. Tanin in celery leaves is reported as an antioxidant</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">that can reduce total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol in hyperglycemic mice. The mechanism of tannin in reducing total cholesterol levels by inhibiting LDL oxidation [23]. Tanin has scavenger activity of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), thereby reducing the formation of free radicals and lipid peroxidation [24].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flavonoid test used two methods, namely Wilstater reagent and 10% NaOH reagent. Both methods showed positive results of guava leaf extract containing flavonoids. Wilstater reagents were carried out by adding concentrated Mg and HCl to the sample. The addition of concentrated HCl was used to hydrolyze flavonoids into their aglycones by hydrolyzing O-glycosyl. Glycosyl will be replaced byH+ from acid because of its electrophilic nature. Reductions with concentrated Mg and HCl can produce complex compounds that are red or orange in flavonol, flavanone, flavanonol and xanton. Based on previous study phytochemical screening of alcoholic extract root bark of guava. Flavonoids have been reported to have free radical scavenger properties. Flavonoids existing in the extracts could play an important role and are phenolic compounds widely distributed in the plant kingdom and have several pharmacological properties such as spasmolytic and antidiarrhoeal activities Flavonoids are secondary metabolites that act as exogenous antioxidants [25][26].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alkaloid test with Mayer reagent showed positive results marked white crystal sediment. In this reaction a bond is replaced where nitrogen which has a free electron pair on the alkaloid forms a covalent coordinate bond with a K+ ion from potassium tetraiodobismutat to produce a precipitate of potassium-alkaloid complex.. Other studies reveal alkaloids as powerful antioxidants that are good for protecting cells from damage caused by free radicals and toxicity [22].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The saponin test showed a positive result because of the foam formed after the shaking of the sample and distilled water, with the addition of HCl foam solution stabilized [20]. Saponins have glycosyl as a polar group and steroids as nonpolar groups, which are surface active and will form micelles when shaken with water [27]. The study report that saponins have antioxidant and antibacterial effects [22][25][28].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Multiple pathogens are known to contribute to the development of calf diarrhea. Other factors that influence the severity of the disease include the environment and management practices. This multifactorial nature makes calf diarrhea difficult to control [15]. The morbidity and mortality are very high in newborn cows and young animals. This causes high economic losses due to calf deaths, high medical costs and stunted growth [29]. Non-infectious calf diarrhea is triggered by a bad environment, cold temperatures, a changing feed program, overcrowding facility or other mechanical causes [16]. Infectious</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">diarrhea may be caused by bacterial, viral and protozoan infections [15-16].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The results of this study, analysis of revealed that guava leaf extract contained phytochemicals that are known to have pharmacological activity. Flavonoids are hydroxylated polyphenolic compounds that have a response to microbial infections [15]. Tannin is a polyphenol compound with anti-bacterial activity, which is capable of binding a lot of proline protein [30]. Both of these activities are able to form complex bonds with intracellular and extracellular proteins and lyse bacterial cell walls. Other reports mention terpenoids, saponins and essential oils also effectively inhibit bacteria [10][31]. Secondary metabolites in guava leaf extract showed immunostimulatory [24-25][28] activity such as; increasing platelet [11][14] in protecting grouper liver from viral nervous necrosis (VNN) infection [18].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The in vitro antimicrobial activity of guava leaf extract is indicated by the ability to inhibit gram-positive bacteria (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bacillus aureus</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Staphylococcus aureus</span><span class="font3">) [12], </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Escheresia coli</span><span class="font3"> [10], </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pseudomonas aeruginosa, E. coli, S. aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Klebsiella pneumonia</span><span class="font3"> [31], </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Aspergillus niger</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Candida albicans </span><span class="font3">[30], and viral nervous necrosis [18]. All of these abilities of guava leafs extract have the potential to be developed as anti-diarrhea in calves.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The phytochemical analysis the ethanol extract of guava leaves contained active compound inclauding steroid/triterpenoid, phenolics, alkaloids, flavonoids, saponins and tannins. Thus the guava leaves extract has the potential to treatment of diarrhea in calves.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ACKNOWLEDGMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The authors thanks to The Rector of Udayana University, The Dean of Faculty Veterinary Medicine and The Head of Research and Community Service for research grant (PNBP PUPS 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">REFERENCES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wibisono, W.G. 2011. Tanaman Obat Keluarga Berkhasiat. Vivo publisher, Jawa Tengah</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mustofa, F.I., N. Rahmawati. 2018. Studi etnofarmakologi tumbuhan obat yang digunakan oleh penyehat tradisional untuk mengatasi diare di sulawesi selatan. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Tumbuhan Obat Indonesia,</span><span class="font2"> 11(2): 17-32.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nugraha, A.S., P.A. Keller. 2011. Revealing indigenousIndonesian traditional medicine: anti-infective agents. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Natural Product Communications</span><span class="font2">, 6 (12), 1953-1966.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barbalho, S.M., M.V. Flávia M. Farinazzi, D.A. Ricardo, A. Cláudia, S. Brunnati, A. Maria, B. Ottobon, C. Nicolau. 2012. Metabolic Profile of Offspring from Diabetic Wistar Rats Treated with Mentha piperita (Peppermint) Evid Based Complement. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Alternat Med</span><span class="font2">. pp 1-6.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Trubus. 2013. 100 Plus Herbal Indonesia. Vol.11. Trubus, Depok. Issn 0216-7638.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sanda, K.A., H.A. Grema, Y.A. Geidam, Y.M. Bukar-Kolo. 2011. Pharmacological Aspects of Psidium guajava: An Update. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Pharmacology</span><span class="font2">, 7: 316-324.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Puspaningtyas, A.R. 2012. Evaluation of the effect of red guava (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava</span><span class="font2">) fruit extract on tyrosinase activity by pectrophotometry, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Current PharmaceuticalJournal</span><span class="font2">, 1(5): 92-97.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agustina, E., F. Andiarna, N. Lusiana, R. Purnamasari, M.I. Hadi. 2018. Identifikasi senyawa aktif dari ekstrak daun jambu air (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Syzygium aqueum</span><span class="font2">) dengan perbandingan beberapa pelarut pada metode maserasi. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Biotropic</span><span class="font2">, 2(2): 108-118.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fratiwi, Y. 2015. The potential of guava leaf (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajavaL</span><span class="font2">.) for diarrhea. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal Majority</span><span class="font2">, 4(1): 113-118.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maysarah, H., R. Apriani, Misrahanum. 2016. Antibacterialactivity test f ethanol extract of white and red flesh from guavaleaf(</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava.</span><span class="font2"> L) againts Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Natural</span><span class="font2">, 16(1): 51-56.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arifin, H., Agustina, Z. Rizal. 2013. Pengaruh pemberianjusjambu biji merah (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font2">.) terhadap jumlah sel eritrosit, hemoglobin, trombosit dan hematokrit pada mencit putih. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Sains dan Teknologi Farmasi</span><span class="font2">, 18(1): 43-48.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biswas, B., K. Rogers, F. McLaughlin, D. Daniels, A. Yadav. 2013. Antimicrobial activities of leaf extracts of guava (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font2">.) on two gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Int J of Microbiology</span><span class="font2">, Vol 2013 (746165): 1-7.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Desiyana, L.S., M.A. Husni, S. Zhafira. 2016. Uji efektivitas sediaan gel fraksi etil asetat daun jambu biji (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font2">inn) terhadap penyembuhan luka terbuka pada mencit (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mus musculus</span><span class="font2">). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Natural</span><span class="font2">, 16(2): 23-32.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prasetio, J.N. 2015. Potential red guava juice in patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal Majority</span><span class="font2">, 4(2): 25-29.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cho, Y., K.J. Yoon. 2014. An overview of calf diarrhea - infectious etiology, diagnosis, and intervention. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Sci</span><span class="font2">. 15(1), 1-17.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rahayu, I.D. 2014. Identifikasi penyakit pada pedet perah pra-sapih di peternakan rakyat dan perusahaan peternakan. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Gamma</span><span class="font2">, 9(2): 40-49.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Muktar, Y., G. Mamo, B. Tesfaye, D. Belina. 2015. A review on major bacterial causes of calf diarrhea anf its diagnostic method. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Med and Animal Health,</span><span class="font2"> 7(5): 173-185.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amelia, N., S.B. Prayitno. 2012. Pengaruh ekstrak daun jambubiji (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava</span><span class="font2">) untuk menginaktifkan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Viral Nervous Necrosis </span><span class="font2">(vnn) pada ikan kerapu bebek (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Epinephelus fuscoguttatus</span><span class="font2">). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J Of Aquaculture Management &amp;&nbsp;Tech,</span><span class="font2"> 1(1): 264-278.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wisesa, I.B.G.R., F.M. Siswanto, T.A. Putra, I.B.M. Oka, N.A. Suratma. 2015. Prevalence of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Balantidium sp</span><span class="font2"> in bali cattle at</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">different areas of bali. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Int J of Agr, For. and Plant.</span><span class="font2">, Vol. 1 (Sept.): 49-53.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Harborne, J.B. 1987. Metode Fitokimia Penuntun Cara Modern Menganalisis Tumbuhan. Penerbit ITB. Bandung.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marliana, S.D. and Saleh, C. 2011. Uji Fitokimia dan Aktivitas Antibakteri Ekstrak Kasar Etanol, Fraksi n-Heksana, Etil asetat, dan Metanol dari Buah Labu Air (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lagenari Siceraria</span><span class="font2">). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Kimia Mulawarman</span><span class="font2"> 8(2): 39-63.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Haryati, N.A. and Erwin, C.S. 2015. Uji Toksisitas dan Aktivitas Antibakteri Ekstrak Daun Merah (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Syzygium mytifolium</span><span class="font2"> Walp) terhadap Bakteri Staphylococus aureus dan Escherichia coli. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Kimia Mulawarman.</span><span class="font2"> 13(1): 35-39.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[23] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Umarudin, Susanti, R and Yuniastuti, A. 2012. Efektivitas ekstrak tannin seledri terhadap profil hiperkolesterolemi lipid tikusputih. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Unnes Journal of Life Science</span><span class="font2"> 1(2): 78-85.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[24] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aripasha A., D. Andriana,Y. Purnomo. 2015. Efek dekok daun pulutan (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Urena lobata</span><span class="font2">) terhadap kadar SOD (Superoxyde dismutase) dan MDA (Malondialdehyde) serum tikus model diabetes mellitus tipe II. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Kedokteran Komunitas</span><span class="font2"> 3(1): 304311.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[25] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hu. Y., Xu, J. and Hu, Q. 20013. Evaluation of antioxidant potential of Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis Miller) extracts. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Agriculture and Food Chemistry</span><span class="font2"> 51: 7788-7791.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[26] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ramya, Kuber., M. Rajya, Lakshmi., E. Deepika., P. Yamini. 2013. Phytochemical screening invitro anti-bacterial and antioxidant activity of the Psidium guajava root bark. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci, 2(10): 238-248.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[27] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sangi, M., Runtuwene, M.R.J., Simbala, H.E., and Makang, V.M.A. 2008. Analisis Fitokimia Tumbuhan Obat di Kabupaten Minahasa Utara. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chem. Prog</span><span class="font2">. 1(1): 47-53.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[28] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Akinpelu, B.A., O.A. Igbeneghu, A.I. Awotunde, E.O. Iwalewa, O.O. Oyedapo. 2014. Antioxidant and antibacretial activities of saponin fractions of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Erythropheleum suaveolens</span><span class="font2"> (Guill andPerri) stem bark extract. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Science Research Essays</span><span class="font2"> 18(9): 826-833.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[29] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Malik, S., A.K. Verma, A. Kumar, M.K. Gupta, S.D. Sharma. 2012. Incidence of Calf Diarrhea In Cattle and Bufallow Calves in Uttar Pradesh, India. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Asian Jornal of Animal and VeterinaryAdvadences</span><span class="font2">. 7 (10): 1049-1054.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[30] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mailoa, M.N., M. Mahendradatta, A. Laga, N. Djide. 2016. Antimicrobial activities of tannins extract from guava leaves (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font2">) on pathogens microbial. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. ofSci. &amp;&nbsp;Tech. Res</span><span class="font2">, 3(1): 236-241.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[31] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kenneth, E., T. Paul, N. Istifanus, U. Uba, A. Rejoice, O. Victor, S. Mohammed. 2017. Phytochemical analysis and antibacterial activity of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psidium guajava L</span><span class="font2">. leaf extracts. GSC </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bio andPharm Sci</span><span class="font2">, 01(02): 013–019.</span></p></li></ul>