---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Code Switching Found In the Novel “Critical Eleven”"
author: "A.A. Tri Anggarukma K D, I Made Winaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2019.v23.i01.p10</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 23.1 Pebruari 2019: 57-64</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Code Switching Found In the Novel “Critical Eleven</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>A.A. Tri Anggarukma K D<sup>1</sup>*, I Made Winaya<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:anggarukma@gmail.com"><span class="font3">anggarukma@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:made_winaya@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">made_winaya@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This paper is entitled “The Analysis Code Switching Found in The Novel “Critical Eleven”. The aims of this study are to describe the types, function and to the analyse reasons of code switching used by the novelist. The data in this study were taken from all chapters of the novel entitled “Critical Eleven”by Ika Natassa. Firstly, the code switching that occurs in novel were identified and then they were classified and analyzed based on their types, function, and reasons of code switching. The collected data were analyzed using three theories; first the theory by Poplack as the main theory used in this study; this theory was used to analyze the three types of code swtching, they are: Tag Switching, Inter-Sentental Switching, Intra-Sentential Switching. The second theory proposed by Apple and Muyken was used to anlyze the function of code switching. They divided the functions into six categories, which are: Referential Function, Directive Function, Expressive Function, Phatic Function, Metalinguistic Function, Poetic Function. The theory proposed by Grosjean was used to analyze the reason of code switching. There are ten reasons of code switching; they are: To Fill A Linguistic Need For Lexical Item, Set Phrase, Discouse Marker Or Sentence Filler,To Continue Last Language Used (Triggering}, To Qoute Someone, To Emphasize, To Spesify Speaket Addressee, To Qualify Message: Amplify Or Emphasize, To Specify Speaker Involvement, To Mark And Emphasize Group Identity (Solidarity), To Convey Confidentially, Anger, Annoyance, To Exclude Someone From Conversation, To Change Role Of Speaker: Rise Status, Add Authority, Show Expertise.But from the six functions of code switching applied, there are only five functions of code switching found in the novel; they are Referential Function, Expressive Function, Phatic Function, Metalinguistic Function And Poetic Function. And based on the reasons of code switching, there were only seven which were found in the novel”Critical Eleven”; they are To Fill A Linguistic Need For Lexical Item, To Continue The Last Language Used (Triggering), To Quote Someone, Specify Addressee, To Specify Speaker Involvement, To Mark And Emphasize Group Identify (Solidarity) And To Convey Confidentially, Anger, And Annoyance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Code Switching, Types of Code Switching, Function of Code Switching, Reasons of Code Switching</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul &quot;Peralihan Kode Analisis yang Ditemukan dalam Novel&quot; Critical Eleven&quot;. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mendeskripsikan jenis, fungsi dan untuk menganalisa alasan-alasan pengalihan kode yang digunakan oleh novelis. Sumber data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari seluruh bab novel berjudul “Critical Eleven” oleh Ika Natassa. Pertama, peralihan kode yang terjadi dalam novel</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">diidentifikasi dan kemudian diklasifikasikan berdasarkan jenis, fungsi, dan alasan pengalihan kode menganalisis fungsi pengalihan kode. Data yang terkumpul dianalisis dengan menggunakan tiga teori, teori pertama oleh Poplack sebagai teori utama yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini, teori ini digunakan untuk menganalisis tiga jenis kode swtching, yaitu: Tag Switching, Inter-Sentental Switching, Intra-Sentential Switching . Teori kedua oleh Apple dan Muyken digunakan untuk menganalisis fungsi alih kode. mereka membagi fungsi ke dalam enam kategori, yaitu: Fungsi Referensi, Fungsi Direktif, Fungsi Ekspresif, Fungsi Phatic, Fungsi Metalinguistik, Fungsi Puitis. Dalam teori ini oleh Grosjean digunakan untuk menganalisis alasan pengalihan kode. Dalam teori ini ada sepuluh alasan pengalihan kode, yaitu: Untuk Mengisi Kebutuhan Linguistik Untuk Item Leksikal, Menetapkan Frasa, Penanda Kesalahan atau Filler Kalimat, Untuk Melanjutkan Bahasa Terakhir Yang Digunakan (Triggering}, Untuk Membuat Seseorang, Untuk Menekankan, Untuk Menentukan Speaket Addressee, Untuk Memenuhi Kualifikasi Pesan: Memperkuat Atau Menekankan, Untuk Menentukan Keterlibatan Pembicara, Untuk Menandai Dan Menekankan Identitas Kelompok (Solidaritas), Untuk Menyampaikan Secara Rahasia, Amarah, Gangguan, Untuk Mengesampingkan Seseorang Dari Percakapan, Untuk Mengubah Peran Pembicara: Status Bangkit, Tambah Otoritas, Tunjukkan Keahlian. Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa di antara jenis alih kode seperti Switching Inter-Sentential Switching Tag, Switching Intra-Sentential. Tetapi dari enam fungsi alih kode yang diterapkan, hanya ada lima fungsi pengalihan kode yang ditemukan dalam novel, yaitu Fungsi Referensi, Fungsi Ekspresif, Fungsi Fungsional, Fungsi Metalinguistik, dan Fungsi Puitis. Dan berdasarkan alasan kode beralih hanya ada tujuh yang ditemukan dalam novel &quot;Critical Eleven&quot; yaitu Untuk Mengisi Kebutuhan Linguistik Untuk Item Lexis, Untuk Melanjutkan Bahasa Terakhir Yang Digunakan (Triggering), Untuk Mengutip Seseorang, Menentukan Alamat, Untuk Menentukan Keterlibatan Pembicara, Untuk Menandai Dan Menekankan Identifikasi Kelompok (Solidaritas) Dan Untuk Menyampaikan Secara Rahasia, Amarah, Dan Gangguan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Pengalihan Kode, Jenis Pengalihan Kode, Fungsi Pengalihan Kode, Alasan Pengalihan Kode</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In daily life we can see that English plays an important role in technology, mass media, economy and education; therefore, people need to master it. When communicating, people tend to switch from one code to another (Grossjean, 1982:146). The ability of using English in daily conversation does not act as our mother tongue might be the phenomenon of bilinguals. Switching of language especially word can be a result of la– nguage contact. The main concern of this English writing is code switching, a case when the writer of novel is using the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mixture of Bahasa and English in their novel. Code switching is an alternative use of two or more languages, varieties of language or even speech style (Dell Hymes, 1975). In this study, the writer shows the importance of languages in globalization and lifestyle. The writer discovereed how conversation switched from Bahasa to English, but in this writing, the writer focuses on the domi– nation of code switching used by the novelist in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Critical Eleven.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the background of the study presented earlier, the research problems of this study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types and functions of code switching were encountered in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Critical Eleven”</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What was the reason of code swit– ching used in the novel</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Critical Eleven”</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Related to the problems above, it covers into two major aims of study, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe type and function of code switching in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">”Critical Eleven”</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse the reason of code switching in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Critical Eleven”</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Research method is an important step and procedure when conducting scientific research. Research method is the way or procedure of understanding the object that becomes the target of subject. The method is divided into three points, they are: data source, method and technique of collecting data, also method and techni–que of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data were taken from the novel entitled Critical Eleven (2015) by Ika Natassa. This novel was chosen because there are many code switching occuring in the novel and it also has an compli– cated love story between Ale and Anya when they first meet on Jakarta – Sydney flight. Now, five years after their meeting, Ale and Anya confronted on a major tragedy that makes them questi– oning the choices they take including their important first eleven minutes. This novel is the Indonesian adult novel and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">was published in 2015 by PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama; it has 344 pages. The data were taken from primary data col– lected directly from the novel containing code switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collect– ing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method of collecting data applied in this research was documenta– tion. The technique of collecting data was divided into three parts, first by reading the novel carefully to find some code switching. Second, note taking of code switching found in the novel. Then chosing the word, phrases, clauses, and the sentence containing of code swit– ching. Third, analyzing the data accor– ding to the types, functions and reasons of each code switching which found in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In data analysis, the collected data were analysed based on the theory applied in this study. The first theory was proposed by Poplack (in Romaine, 1995:122) as the main theory used in this study; this theory was used to analyse the three types of code switching; they are tag switching, inter-switching and intraswitching. The second theory by Appel and Muysken (1987) was used to analyse the functions code switching, divided the function into six categories of code swit– ching; they are referential, directive, ex– pressive, phatic, metalinguistic and poetic functions. The last theory used is propo–sed by Grosjean (1982) which was used to analyse the reason of code switching. In this theory, there are ten reasons of code switching; they are filling a linguis–tic need for lexical item, set phrase, dis–course marker, or sentence filler; to con–tinue the last language used; to quote someone; to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">specify addressee; to qualify message, amplify or emphasize group identify (solidarity; to convey confiden–tially, anger, and annoyance; to exclude someone in conversation; to change role of speaker: raise, add authority, and show expertise.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting the Result of Data analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In presenting data, the qualitative descriptive method was used. The quali– tative descriptive describes the theory was based on explanation analysis. Meleong (2007:248) explains an effort by working with data, organizing data, sort– ing into manageable units, synthesizing it, searching and finding the patterns, finding what was important and what was learned, and deciding what can told others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The problems of the study are to find out the type of code switching in the novel, function of code switching in the novel, and the reasons of code switching in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Critical Eleven.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis is based on the language used by the writer in writing novel “Critical Eleven”. The analysis focuses on three basic issues: first, the types of code switching; Second, the functions of code switching, and the last is the reason of code switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis the Types and the</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Functions of Code Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of code switching is based on the theory proposed by Poplack (in Romaine 1995:122) and the analysis of functions of code switching is based on the theory of linguistic in Language Contact And Bilingualism Written by Apple and Muysken (1987:122-123). The analysis is presented one by one accor–</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ding to each type and function, and the examples taken from the novel “Critical Eleven” are given.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Tag Switching and Fun– ctions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tag switching involves the insertion of a tag in language into an utterance which was otherwise entirely in the other language, e.g. you know, I mean, etc. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rig</span><span class="font3"> itu pengeboran minyak lepas pantai itu, ya? (Page 12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the data above a switching which is classified as a tag where the expression of English in the data above shows that, as we know, Rig is a special term in the middle of sea. Tag switching also is also shown by the interjection mark after the expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to the function of code switching, the data in the above novel serves as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Referential function</span><span class="font3"> where this expression is more appropriate to express when someone would like to express a curious feeling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I mean</span><span class="font3">, apa sih yang nggak ada di toko buku? (Page 13)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The English word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“I mean”</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence is clarified into tag switching. &quot;I mean&quot; is in parenthesis because it is inserted as explanation in the Bahasa transitive clause. In this utterance the speaker tries to explain the reason why she likes being in a book store. The novelist might choose the word “I mean” instead of “maksudku” as it is more fa– miliar to the reader, who are commonly teenagers besides living up the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to the function of code switching, it functions as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Phatic Functi– on</span><span class="font3"> where the writer shows that the character in the novel would like to change the tone in conversation</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Inter-Sentential Switching and Function</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Inter sentential switching is a type of code switching where the switching oc– curs between sentences or clauses, where the sentence of another language which is being used in an utterance or the topic being discussed. The type of Inter-Sen– tential Switching found in the novel is formulated and analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aku tertawa. “Tapi yang aku omongin itu benar, kan? Well, who doesn’t hate Jakarta anyway”. (Page 10)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In the data above, the code switching is categorized into Inter-Sentential Swit– ching, because the word “well” is usually used in daily conversation with relaxed situation; here the novelist switches the code into Indonesian language in the beginning of the sentence then to English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this case, the </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Directive Function </span><span class="font3">occurs automatically because Anya spe– aks directly with Ale while explaining who hates the situation in Jakarta, about the traffic jam, pollution and her opinion and expression; she hates Jakarta situa– tion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“But you’re my favourite,” Sanggahku waktu itu menggenggam tangannya (Page 51)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In the data above, the code switching is categorized into Inter-Sentential switching. Because, there is the word “favourite “and the characters are shown that they are holding hands. In this case, the writer uses an English phrase in the beginning of this sentence ‘But you’re my favorite’. The speaker wants to des– cribe her feeling with friend in com– fortably.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to the functions of code switching, the code switching in the data above serves as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Expressive Function</span><span class="font3">, where the speaker emphasizes the use of two languages. In this sentence, the writer uses English phrase in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">beginning of this sentence ‘But you’re my favorite’. This phrase describes the feeling of the speaker Anya to Ale directly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ketika filmnya selesai, Ale tiba-tiba nyeletuk, “You know, I never get all these men in movies who say ‘I would die for you’ bullshit.” (Page 324)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Inter-sentential switching in this example occurs in the end of the senten– ce. It starts in Bahasa clause ‘ketika film selesai, Ale tiba-tiba,’ and followed by English utterance ‘You know, I never get all these men in movies who say ‘I would die for you’ bullshit’. The words “I would die for you” is a romantic expres– sion that is always seen in movie or novel. It is compliment for girl from a boy who loves her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to the function of code switching, the code switching in the data above is Poetic function; the speaker wants to describe the opinion about the movie, said “you know, I never get all these men in movies who say ‘I would die for you’ bullshit” the opinion in the real life nobody wants to die for love, that is just in a movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Intra-Sentential switching and Functions.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Intra sentential switching is a type of code switching where the switching occurs within a sentence or a clause where. The intra sentential switching found in the novel formulated is as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Di pesawat, di bus, di kereta api, berjalan kaki, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it somehow brings you to a whole other dimension more than just the physical destination.</span><span class="font3"> (Page 9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data above, the switching of English code in the sentence above occurs as an English phrase switching into the sentence; therefore, it is classified as Intra-sentential switching. The speaker Anya tries to explain her</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">feeling about going somewhere based on her knowledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to the function of code switching, the data above serves as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Metalinguistic Function</span><span class="font3">, where the data shows that the character in the novel uses his linguistic skill to make the utterance. This speakers expresses how the felling of character in that situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the Reason for Code</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Switching</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this last section, the analysis would deal with the reasons of code switching in the novel entitled “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Critical Eleven</span><span class="font3">”. The analysis of reason of code switching which filled a linguistic need for lexical item, setting Phrase, discourse maker or sentence filler, Continuing the last la–nguage used (triggering), Quoting the speaker’s involvement (personalize mes–sage), Marking and emphasizing, speci–fying (solidarity), conveying confidenti–ality anger annoyance, excluding some–one from conversation, changing role of speaker, ricing status and adding authori–ty to show expertise.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Fill A Linguistic Need For Lexi– cal Item, Set Phrase, Discourse Marker Or Sentence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Some notions are just better expressed in one language than in another, someone switches when she cannot find an appro–priate word or expression or when the language being used does not have sui–table translation from that vocabulary. The data taken from the novel “Critical Eleven” are classified and analyzed as below: Dia bilang, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“with-out a family man alone in the world, trembles with the cold. </span><span class="font3">(Page 90)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The reason of a linguistic need is clear from the data above. We can see that the code switching found in the data occurs to fill the linguistic need for lexi–</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">cal item, set phrase, discourse maker or sentence. In Bahasa, “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">with-out family man alone in the world, trembles with the cold</span><span class="font3">” means “tanpa keluarga lelaki sen– diri di dunia, gemetar karena kedingin– an”, this sentence consists of some words and terms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Continue The Last Language</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Used (Triggering)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Continuing the last language (trigger–ing) means that a single word or a phrase switching often triggers a continuation in the language of the switch. The example of this reason of code switching in the novel “CRITICAL ELEVEN” is as fol–lows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“What?”</span><span class="font3"> (Page 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The switching occurs as a continuation of last language used by the speaker. Clyne (in Gousjean, 1982: 151) states “a single word switch often triggers a conti–nuation in a language of the switch.” Ac–cording to the data, in the phrase of ut–terance, the writer switches into the English phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">what?”</span><span class="font3">, In the data abo–ve, this word is said spontaneously to follow the previous conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Quote Someone</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The reason is used in order to quote the sentence produced by someone else. The example of this reason of code swit– ching in the novel “CRITICAL ELEV– EN” is as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ketika filmnya selesai, Ale tiba-tiba nye– letuk, “You know I never get all these men in movies who say ‘I would die for you’ bullshit.” (Page 324)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quoting someone means that the switching occurs when the participants would like to express someone’s utte– rance including the language they use. According to the reason of code swit– ching, the data above is classified as quo–ting someone. Here, the character</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ale quotes in the utterance “you know I never these men in movies who say ‘I would die for you’ bullshit”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Specify Addressee</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Although switches of this kind may be made to accommodate monolingual interlocutors by switching to the language that they know, they are also used among bilingual speakers. The example of this reason of code switching in the novel “Critical Eleven” as below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Not having the option to leave takes the joy out of everything</span><span class="font3">, iya gak? (Page 12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above serves to specify the addressee’s reason because in this sentence the speaker switches into Eng– lish to imply meaning to special person. The English sentence &quot;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Not having the option to leave takes the joy out of everything</span><span class="font3">&quot; is this sentence seems to imply meaning to special person and more specific.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Specify Speaker Involvement</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Specifying the speaker’s involve– ment means that the speaker changes his/her language into another because ambivalent about certain embarrassing condition like clinical detachment about privacy condition. The example of this reason of code switching in the novel “CRITICAL ELEVEN” as below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I mean</span><span class="font3">, apa sih nggak ada di toko buku? (Page 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above serves specify– ing the speaker’s involvement because in this sentence the speaker switches to English to explain what she knows about the book store, and the situation is the opponent and, in other words, it shows that it used daily word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>f) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Mark And Emphasize Group</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Identify (Solidarity)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This reason of code switching func– tions to emphasize ethnic the identity</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">marker, consisting largely of exclama– tions and sentence connectors whose role is to emphasize group identity. The ex– ample of this reason of code switching in the novel “CRITICAL ELEVEN” as be– low:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fasilitasnya bintang lima, ada bioskop </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">private</span><span class="font3">-nya juga, itu benar gak sih? (Page 12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The code switching that occurrs in this utterance could be categorized into marking the group’s identity especially the solidarity reason, because these words are special terms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>g) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Convey Confidentially, Anger, and Annoyance</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The reason why the speaker switches into another language to express their anger or annoyance. The example of this reason of code switching in the novel “CRITICAL ELEVEN” as below: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">”guess what this is, Le.”</span><span class="font3">Anya nyengir lebar, melambai-lambaikan sesuatu di tangan kanannya. (Page 59). The text above can be categorized as conveying confidentially annoyance. The sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">guess what this is, Le</span><span class="font3"> in the text above shows that the speaker wants to make some joke to express her feeling with her close friend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In terms of function of code swit– ching, the findings shows the function of code switching appearing in the data; they are referential function, expressive function, phatic function, metalinguistic function, and last one is the poetic func– tion. The first function of code switching found in this novel is the referential function because most of the words, phrase clause and sentence are proper in English. The novel concerts of English besides Bahasa; therefore, it is suitable to discuss the topic. The next is the expres– sive function; in this function the speaker</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">emphasizes a mixed identity through us– ing two languages in the same discour– se. Phatic function serves to indicate a change in tone in conversation; the next is the metalinguistic function. It takes sympathy that the participants show li– nguistic skills. It shows that the writer can speak the other language, in this case English. And the last one is the poetic function which emphasizes the use of bilingualism language involving switches for jokes, puns, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From ten of code switching by Gros– jean, only eight reasons were found in the novel; they are: filling a linguistic need for lexical item, continuing the last la– nguage used (triggering), quoteing some– one, specifying addressee, quality mes– sage: amplifying or emphasizing, speci– fying the speaker’s involvement, marking and emphasizing group’s identity (soli– darity), and conveying confidentially, anger, and annoyance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Al Abdely, Ammar.A. (2016). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Types and Functions of Code Switching in The Language Usedby Iragi Doctors in formal Setting</span><span class="font3">. Agus– tus, ppl-10. Citra, Komang Gede Wisnu Prama. (2010). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analy– sis of Code Switching in The Novel “Look I’m Fire</span><span class="font3"> (skipsi). University Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grosjean, F. (1982). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two La– nguage: An Introduction to bli– ngualism</span><span class="font3">.Cambridge, Mass: Har– vard Unversity Press. pp.370.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hymes, Dell. (1974). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Foundations in Sociolinguistics: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ethnographic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Approach</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Philadephia: &nbsp;&nbsp;Universi–ty of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pennsylvania Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Modupeola, Olagunju Robert. (2013). Jurnal of Humanities And Sosial Science. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching as A Tea–ching Strategy:Imlication for Eng–lish Language Teaching and Lear–ning in A Multilingual Society.</span><span class="font3"> Volume 14. Issue 3. July-Austust, pp 92-94.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Natassa, Ika. (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Critical Eleven</span><span class="font3">. Pe– nerbit PT. Grammedia Pustaka Utama. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Romaine, Suzanne</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> (1995). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism 2nd &nbsp;Edition</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaught, Ronald. (1987). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Intro– duction to Sosiolinguistic</span><span class="font3">. Basil Blackwell. Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">64</span></p>