---
layout: full_article
title: "The Psychological Analysis of Jamie Sullivan’s Behaviors in Nicholas Sparks’ Novel “A Walk to Remember”"
author: "Nezia Priscila Bulan, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih, I Made Winaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Humanis: Journal of Arts and Humanities</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 23.4 Nopember 2019: 271-276</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DOI: 10.24843/JH.2019.v23.i04.p03</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Terakreditasi Sinta-4, SK No: 23/E/KPT/2019</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Psychological Analysis of Jamie Sullivan’s Behaviors in Nicholas Sparks’ Novel “A Walk to Remember”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Nezia Priscila Bulan*, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih, I Made Winaya</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:neziapriscila7@gmail.com"><span class="font4">neziapriscila7@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font4">], [</span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">alit_ida@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">], [</span><a href="mailto:made_winaya@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4">made_winaya@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font4">] Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The title of this undergraduate thesis is The Psychological Analysis of Jamie Sullivan’s Behaviours in Nicholas Sparks Novel “A Walk to Remember”. The discussion of this study focused on psychoanalysis of the behavior of the main character Jamie Sullivan and the most dominant psychoanalysis concepts of the main character based on Freud's personality theory. Documentation method was applied to collecting the data of this study, which were analysed using descriptive qualitative method; then the result of analysis was presented in the form of sentences using informal method. The result of this study shows that Jamie’s dominant personality in Freud's tripartite personality theory is Superego as she behaves according to the civilized manner. Jamie tends to help others. She makes decisions based on morals and judgments about what is right and what is wrong, and her decisions are based more on moral values.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">psychoanalysis, id, ego, superego.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Judul dari penelitian ini adalah The Psychological Analysis of Jamie Sullivan’s Behaviors in Nicholas Sparks’ Novel “A Walk to Remember”. Pembahasan ini fokus pada psikoanalisis terhadap perilaku tokoh utama yaitu Jamie Sullivan dan konsep psikoanalisis yang paling dominan yang dimiliki oleh tokoh utama tersebut beradasarkan teori kepribadian yang diusulkan Freud. Metode dokumentasi diaplikasikan untuk mengumpulkan data dari penelitian ini yang kemudian dianalisis lebih lanjut dengan metode deskriptif kualitatif, setelah itu, analisis disajikan dalam bentuk kalimat menggunakan metode informal. Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa kepribadian Jamie yang dominan dalam teori kepribadian tripartit Freud adalah Superego ketika ia berperilaku sesuai dengan cara yang beradab. Jamie memiliki kecenderungan untuk membantu orang lain. Dia membuat keputusan berdasarkan moral dan penilaian tentang yang benar dan salah, dan keputusannya lebih didasarkan pada nilai-nilai moral.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">psikoanalisis, id, ego, superego.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In this study, the writer chose a novel as the data source of the study. The novel is manner. It is a kind of literary works</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">presenting many kinds of views and values and giving some fun and sadness for everyone who reads. By reading a novel, the reader may find the</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Received 27 May 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Received in revised form 15 November 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted 21 November 2019</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">characterization of the characters. In addition, the reader may acquire amusement leading them to a keen perception of beauty and making them sensitive to artistic work in general. The novel also tells the story whether it happens today, later or in the past</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Therefore, this study is dedicated to the analysis of Psychoanalysis of a novel entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Walk to Remember</span><span class="font4">” based on a theory proposed by Sigmund Freud about Psychoanalytic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the background stated above, the research problems can be stated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;What kinds &nbsp;of psychoanalytical</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">concepts are found in the main</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">character’s behavior?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;What is the most &nbsp;dominant</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">psychoanalytic &nbsp;concept &nbsp;in Jamie</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sullivan’s behavior?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the problems mentioned above, the aims of this study can be stated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the psychoanalytical concepts of the main character behavior in the novel </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Walk to Remember</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify what is the most dominant psychoanalytical concept in Jamie Sullivan’s behavior.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The research method in this study consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing the data, and method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data in this study are divided into two types; they are primary data and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">secondary data. The primary data of this study were taken from a novel entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“A Walk to Remember”</span><span class="font4"> by Nicholas Sparks in 1999.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The method used in collecting data is the documentation method, meaning that the data were collected by reading the novel, and note taking the data needed. The processes of collecting data are: firstly, the data were collected by reading the novel </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Walk to Remember </span><span class="font4">repeatedly and very carefully. Secondly, note taking the data was done.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The collected data were analyzed using a qualitative method, in which each data was presented and analyzed based on the theoretical basis for psychoanalytical concepts adopted in this study. The technique of analyzing data in this study consists of several steps, namely identifying the psychoanalytical concepts of the main character based on Sigmund Freud Theory. Next, the data were classified based on the psychoanalytical concepts found in the novel. In the end, the factors and indicators to distinguish what kind and what is the most dominant psychoanalytical concept of the main character were analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Presenting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In presenting the result of data analysis, descriptive qualitative method was applied. By applying descriptive method, the data were explained descriptively based on two research questions mentioned above in order to give a clear explanation which can be easily understood. The techniques of presenting the result of data analysis are</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">as follows, the psycho analysis of id, ego, and superego of the main character’s behavior found in the novel. Furthermore, it was explained descriptively based on Sigmund Freud theory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Analysis of Jamie Sullivan’s Behavior</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">After analyzing the main character’s personality element that consist of the id, ego, and superego and the affection, it shows the important role in creating the major character’s mental condition. In this discussion of analysis, the researcher tries to relate one element to the others. In describing the condition of each element, it is necessary to collect and relate these elements into discussion of analysis. Nicholas Sparks gives attention in the personality elements, especially in Jamie Sullivan as the major character of the novel. The discussion in this chapter is based on the supplication of psychoanalytic theory of Sigmund Freud.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Id, Ego, Superego</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">“I’d really like this play to be special this year, not for me, but because of my father. I want it to be the best production ever. I know how much it will mean to him to see me be the angel, because this play reminds him of my mother....” She paused, collecting her thoughts. “It would be terrible if the play was a failure this year, especially since I’m involved.” She stopped again before going on, her voice becoming more emotional as she went on. (p 133) “I know that challenges are always part of the Lord’s plan, but I don’t want to believe that the Lord is cruel, especially to someone like my father. He devotes his life to God, he gives to the community. And he’s already lost his wife and has had to raise me on his own. And I love him so much for it....” Jamie turned away, but I could see the tears in her eyes. It was the first time I’d ever</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">seen her cry. I think part of me wanted to cry, too. “I’m not asking you to do it for me,” she said softly, “I’m really not, and if you say no, I’ll still pray for you. I promise. But if you’d like to do something kind for a wonderful man who means so much to me . . . Will you just think about it?” (p. 134).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jamie’s first id is when she asks a favour to Landon to play a role as her match in the high school play, she realized that she did not have much time left because she suffered from leukaemia and the doctor said she only had a year left. She wanted to make it the best play ever. Here the ego of Jamie works, there is always a moment when her mind churns, and she wonders that the miracle will happen or everything that happens is based on God’s plan. The superego of Jamie believes that just the possibility keeps her going on, not the guarantee. She realizes that the odds, and science are against her. She believes that science is not the total answer since Jamie is a religious person. All she wanted to do is to give her best before the time is out. Jamie is a loving, caring and the kindest hearted person. She was always cheerful, no matter what was happening around her. I swear, never said a bad thing about anything or anyone, even to those who weren’t that nice to her. She would hum to herself as she walked down the street, she would wave to strangers driving by in their cars. Jamie smiled, and after a moment she changed the subject, sort of throwing me off track. “Do you ever think about the future, Landon?” she asked. I was startled by her question because it sounded . . . so </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ordinary.</span><span class="font4">“Yeah, sure. I guess so,” I answered cautiously. “Well, what do you want to do with your life?” I shrugged, a little wary of where she was going with this. “I don’t know yet. I haven’t figured that part out. I’m going to UNC next fall, at least I hope so. I have to get accepted</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">first.” “You will,” she said. “How do you know?” “Because I’ve prayed for that, too.” “How about after college? What do you want to do then?” “I don’t know,” I said, shrugging. “Maybe I’ll be a onearmed lumberjack.” She didn’t think it was funny. “I think you should become a minister,” she said seriously. “I think you’re good with people, and they’d respect what you have to say.” Though the concept was absolutely ridiculous, with her I just knew it came from the heart and she intended it as a compliment. “How about you? What do you want to do in the future?” Jamie turned away and got a far-off gaze in her eyes, making me wonder what she was thinking, but it vanished almost as quickly as it came. “I want to get married,” she said quietly. “And when I do, I want my father to walk me down the aisle and I want everyone I know to be there. I want the church bursting with people.” “That’s all?” Though I wasn’t averse to the idea of marriage, it seemed kind of silly to hope for that as your life’s goal. “Yes,” she said. “That’s all I want.” (p.168). Well, you’ll get married someday. You’ll meet some guy and the two of you will hit it off, and he’ll ask you to marry him. And I’m sure that your father will be happy to walk you down the aisle.” I didn’t mention the part about having a big crowd in the church. I guess it was the one thing that even I couldn’t imagine. Jamie thought carefully about my answer, really pondering the way I said it, though I didn’t know why. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">“I hope so,” </span><span class="font4">she said finally. I could tell she didn’t want to talk about it anymore, don’t ask me how, so I moved on to something new (p.169)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jamie’s id is when she had a conversation with Landon and talked about the future and what Landon wanted to do after college. Here also the ego of Jamie works when she hopes that she can still chase her dream to get married even</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">though her super ego is doubtful if she is going to have a future because she knows she had no time left to achieve that. That is why she answered with “I hope so”, meaning that she takes everything good and bad happening to her life. I love my father with all my heart—but there are times when I wonder what it would have been like to have a mother around. I think she and I would have been able to talk about things in a way that my father and I can’t.” (p. 195). “What’s it like, living with your father? Is he like how he is in church?” “No. He’s actually got a pretty good sense of humor.” “Hegbert?” I blurted out. I couldn’t even imagine it. (p.196)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jamie’s id when she knows that she loves her father so much but the ego said that there are some times when she also misses her mom’s figure because her mom has passed away; there are some stuff that she cannot tell her father because it is a girl’s things. The superego of Jamie still accepts her father the way he is even though people sometimes talk bad about her father, because her father was known as a serious person and did not have a sense of humor just like a stiff. For a moment I was confused. I thought I’d done that already with my performance in the play. Jamie went on. “Well, I’ve been thinking about what you could do,” she continued without letting me get a word in edgewise, “and this is what I’ve come up with.” She asked if I wouldn’t mind gathering the pickle jars and coffee cans she’d set out in businesses all over town early in the year. They sat on the counters, usually near the cash registers, so that people could drop their loose change in. The money was to go to the orphans. Jamie never wanted to ask people straight out for the money, she wanted them to give voluntarily. That, in her mind, was the Christian thing to do (p. 234). One more time Jamie asked for Landon favor to help her gather the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">pickle jars and coffee cans where she had set all over town and she would give all the money collected to the orphans. Here the ego of Jamie works when she wanted to give her best that she can before she died and the superego believes that this is the right thing to do. “Landon,” she said to me after counting it up, “this is a miracle!” “How much is there?” I asked. I knew exactly how much it was. “There’s almost two hundred and fortyseven dollars here!” She was absolutely joyous as she looked up at me. Since Hegbert was home, I was allowed to sit in the living room, and that’s where Jamie had counted the money. It was stacked in neat little piles all over the floor, almost all quarters and dimes. Hegbert was in the kitchen at the table, writing his sermon, and even he turned his head when he heard the sound of her voice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Do you think that’s enough?” I asked innocently. Little tears were coming down her cheeks as she looked around the room, still not believing what she was seeing right in front of her. Even after the play, she hadn’t been nearly this happy. She looked right at me. “It’s . . . wonderful,” she said, smiling. (p. 241). After all the money was gathered Jamie feels happy because of the amount reach two hundred and forty-seven dollars which is a lot for her. The ego works because last time, the amount of money she collected was not enough; therefore, her superego happened to believe that it was a miracle. She was talking about the Lord’s plan. It took a moment for me to answer. “Sure,” I said. “Sometimes, I reckon.” “Do you ever wonder why things have to turn out the way they do?” I nodded uncertainly. “I’ve been thinking about it a lot lately.” Even more than usual? I wanted to ask, but I didn’t. I could tell she had more to say, and I stayed quiet. “I know the Lord has a plan for us all, but sometimes, I just don’t</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">understand what the message can be. Does that ever happen to you?” She said this as though it were something I thought about all the time. “Well,” I said, trying to bluff, “I don’t think that we’re meant to understand it all the time. I think that sometimes we just have to have faith.” (p. 262)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jamie’s id is when she was talking about the Lord’s plan with Landon. Jamie always believes that everything always happens to a reason. Here the ego of Jamie works she believes that the Lord has a plan for her and for everyone even though sometimes it cannot be understood. The superego of Jamie believes that whether it is a good or bad thing happening she needs to always put her faith in God. “You can’t be in love with me, Landon,” she said through red and swollen eyes. “We can be friends, we can see each other . . . but you </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">can’t</span><span class="font4"> love me.” “Why not?” I shouted hoarsely, not understanding any of this. “Because,” she finally said softly, “I’m very sick, Landon.” (page 313)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jamie knows that she loved Landon too, here the ego works, deep down she wanted to be with Landon too but the superego of Jamie believes that loving her will only bring pain to Landon because at the end of the day she will be gone because of the leukemia. “Aren’t you frightened?” Somehow I expected her to say </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no,</span><span class="font4"> to say something wise like a grownup would, or to explain to me that we can’t presume to understand the Lord’s plan. She looked away. “Yes,” she finally said, “I’m frightened all the time.” “Then why don’t you act like it?” “I do. I just do it in private.” “Because you don’t trust me?” “No,” she said, because I know you’re frightened, too.” (p.327). It turns out that Jamie is not always happy and cheerful person, she feels frightened also. Here the ego of Jamie works, she is afraid of what is coming next but the super ego of Jamie will not show how</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">she really feels otherwise she will keep what she felt it in private.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">As A Walk to Remember is analyzed in relation to Freudian psychoanalytic approach, it is visible that the main character of the novel have a direct relationship with the Freudian concepts of id, ego, and superego. When this characters are analyzed carefully, it is found that she have dominant personality which cause her to behave in such manners. Jamie’s dominant personality in Freud's tripartite personality theory is Superego as she behaves according to civilized manner. Jamie has the tendency to help others. She makes decisions based on morals and judgements about right and wrong, and her decisions are based more on moral values. Furthermore, she often compromising or postponing satisfaction to avoid negative consequences. Finally, Jamie also often chooses to avoid confrontation of any kind. When </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">id</span><span class="font4"> wants to be satisfied soon, it must be considered with morality. It can be said that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ego</span><span class="font4"> has given a pressure on </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">id</span><span class="font4"> and it causes the conflicts in the personality. Nicholas Sparks gives the important points when the major character, Jamie Sullivan, gets the conflict between his </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ego</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">superego</span><span class="font4"> to prove his affection.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Sparks, N. 1999. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Walk to Remember</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Grand Central Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Welleck, Rene dan Warren A. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Kesusastraan (terjemahan melalui Budiyanto).</span><span class="font4"> Jakarta: Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">McLeod, S. 2007. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Id, Ego and Superego</span><span class="font4">, accessed &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.simplypsychology.org/psyche.html"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.simplypsychology.org/</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://www.simplypsychology.org/psyche.html"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">psyche.html</span><span class="font4"> </span></a><span class="font4">(01/06/18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Isagou, H. 2015</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">. A Freudian Psychoanalytic Analysis of Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter</span><span class="font4">: Istanbul Aydin University School of Language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Adinda, T. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Psychoanalysis on The Main Character of Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde</span><span class="font4">. Padang. Andalas University</span></p>