---
layout: full_article
title: "ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE NAMES AND THE TASTES OF FOODS IN SONGKHLA PROVINCE, THAILAND"
author: "Angsuviriya Angsuviriya, Chanokporn Chanokporn"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-53672 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-53672"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-53672"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">February 2019 Vol. 12, Number 1, Page 1-13</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE NAMES AND THE TASTES OF FOODS IN SONGKHLA PROVINCE, THAILAND</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Angsuviriya<sup>1</sup>, Chanokporn<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>12</sup>Faculty of Liberal Arts, Prince of Songkhla University, Thailand</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">email: <sup>1</sup></span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">c</span><a href="mailto:hanokporn.a@psu.ac.th"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">hanokporn.a@psu.ac.th</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2poon_chanok@hotmail.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>poon_chanok@hotmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Received Date</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">21-12-2018</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">12-01-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">28-02-2019</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">Accepted Date Published Date</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The objective of this article is to study the attitudes of different age and ethnic groups reflected through the names and the taste of food, that is the southern Thais have a positive attitude towards more tasteful or the taste of hot than the other ethnic groups while the Chinese Thais they have a more positive attitude towards insipid taste than the other ethnic groups. For the Malaysian Thais they have a more positive attitude towards the taste of sweet than the other two ethnic groups. As for main course dish, the most popular main course dishes in all the 3 groups are “Kangsom” (sour soup made of tamarind paste) and “KangTaipla” or “KangPhungpla”. As for dessert, the most favorite desserts in all the 3 groups are “Klauybuatchee” or Klauybuat (banana in coconut milk) and “Lotchong” or “Singaporean Lotchong”. In addition, it is found that the Chinese Thais and the southern Thais have a negative attitude towards beef, eels, buffalo meat etc, while the Malaysian Thais have a negative attitude towards pork because they are Muslim. When age groups have been taken into account, age group 1 (15-25) does not like spicy foods, compared with the other age group. While age group 2 (35-45) has similarities in the food names of those in age group 1 and age group 3; therefore, there are more food names in age group 2 than those in the other groups. In addition, for age group 3 (55 or more) more local names of foods are found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: Attitudes, the names and the tastes of foods, the ethnic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Introduction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Urban inhabitants and countrymen in the southern Thailand have many physical characteristics; i.e. the light-colored, yellow or brown or dark skin, small bodies, tall and big bodies, curly or straight hair. These physical characteristics have been attributed to the assimilation of the ethnic races because of intermarriage. It may be said that there are no ethnic purity or a pure race in the southern people of Thailand. All of them are the product of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">the ethnic assimilation more or less. The process of assimilation has been developed for over 40,000 years ago. (Srisuchart, 2544)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are ethnic diversities and the racial assimilation in Hat Yai District, Songkhla Province because of migration. However, the ethnic groups can be divided into 3 main groups: the southern Thais, the Malaysian Thais, and the Chinese Thais. Since all of 3 main races live in the same area so they borrow cultures each other such as languages, foods, and utensils etc. but they still maintain their own identities which we can study through the names of foods.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Local foods have the relation to the way of life, value, culture, nature or food resources in each region. However, there are also acculturations. Nevertheless; there are many original local foods in southern Thailand e.g. Khawyam, Khangkheypla, Khanomla, Khanomba, and Khanomkhaipla etc. but some kinds of foods have been influenced by neighboring countries or the other regions of Thailand. (Sorajaphan, 2544)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Besides, Thailand has been influenced by neighboring countries, for example southern Thailand has been influenced on food by Malaysia, so Muslim and Chinese foods have been brought to local foods. In addition, the influence of northeastern food such as Somtam (green papaya salad) or foods of the middle of Thailand prevailing throughout southern Thailand contribute to the increase in the popularity of fast food such as pizza, KFC in southern Thailand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muslim’s food culture in southern Thailand is that Malaysian Muslims always eat food together in form of food set called “Edae”. In the tray, there are soup, vegetables, dried food e.g. fried-fish, fried-beef, cooked vegetable as salad, also shrimp-paste, Nambudoo, various kind of vegetables called Ulae. In the bowl there are dish-spoons, small bowl for washing hands, the members sit around the tray, put rice into one’s mouth with one’s own fingers, a left hand for using dish spoon. Nowadays although many families change the way of eating from sitting on the mat to sitting on the chair while eating, not very few families continue providing food set and using hand when eating (Dalan, 2553)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">While Chinese food that Thais have been used to is ChaoZhou cuisine which has been derived from Guangdong Province, the so called Cantonese cuisine. It was brought in the late Ayutthaya Period after western influences had been declined. The first thing the Chinese brought to the Ayutthaya Kingdom was a wok while western cooking practice uses a frying pan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the past foods that are high in fat were not popular for the Thais, their staple foods were vegetables, fish etc. Their cooking practice is to boil, to grill and to roast. Chinese people had introduced the new ways of cooking practice to the Thais; i.e. to stir fry, to deep fry, and to steam with a steamer box but in the past the Thais knew how to steam with a steamer made from bamboo. In addition, the Thais borrowed Chinese words such as fry, coat with sugar. In term of food, the Thais did not like insipid soup or clear soup but they liked a kind of spicy, salty, and sour curry with colorful chili such as Kangsom, Kangphet, Tomyam (hot and sour soup). The Chinese brought Chinese soup to the kingdom of Thailand later. (Khachachiva, P. &amp;&nbsp;Y., 2553)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In term of taste of southern foods, the southern Thais favor tasteful foods such as very spicy, very salty, very sour etc. Spicy taste comes from dried or fresh chili, salty from salt, shrimp paste or fish sauce, and sour from ripe tamarinds, tangerines, zalaccas, little plum mangoes, plum mangoes, or all kinds of oranges, especially garcinias. However, sweet foods are not popular for them; except Songkhla people (Sorajjaphan, 2544)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In term of geographical region, the south of Thailand is situated near the Equator. As a result, people lose their energy easily so they consume a kind of food high in energy for compensating it. It is believed that foods consisting of heat element give more energy; therefore they help stimulate a cardiovascular system to work effectively. As a result, the southern people favor for a kind of spicy, sour, salty and sweet food. Vegetables containing heat element are always spicy, astringent and bitter such as sataw (stink beans), cashew leaves, blume etc., if eaten with red chili paste, these vegetables are the so called “Phaknao” (various vegetables) or “Phakjum”. The ingredients of spices are always consisted of turmeric for fishy smelled curry. This gives energy. In addition, there is Khaoyam, consisting of turmeric leaves, Phahom leave, blume Indian leaves, lemon grass, fine dried chili, Budoo or shrimp paste, Mapraokhua (coconut stirred in a pan), fruits or sour sprouts. The southern Thais always prepare dried and salted foodstuffs for eating in the rainy season in order to give them energy. The cooler the weather is, the more appetizing they are. These foods making them appetizing are salted mackerels, salted king mackerels, salty field crabs, Indian anchovy, Budoo etc. As for dessert, there are many kinds of desserts; however, the main ingredients are flour (or starchy fruits), sugar and coconut. (Phongphaiboon, 2544)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The names of foods and tastes reflect the lifestyle and attitudes. This shows the relation between language and culture according to ethnosemantic study. Ethnosemantics is the study in order to access insight into culturally significant cognitive system, studying</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">through language. This study has another name; i.e. the new ethnography, ethnographic semantics. This study has been derived from the belief that language reflects thought and world view of the speakers. As a result, the analysis of the semantic fields of any ethnic languages can be insightfully shown thought and world view of those ethnic groups. (Phrasitrathasinth, 2529)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The study of language and culture is considered to be important for the ethnoscientific approach especially foods. This study has been referred to Frake (Phasukkit, 2543). He is the pioneer of studying culture through the analysis of language. Frake’s works show the concept of terms in each culture. Frake have claimec that studying terms in any cultures not only receives the meaning of the terms but also knows that there are or there are not things in each culture because these terms tell us that people in the society consider the importance and how they understand things around them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are some ethnosemantic studies of taste term in Thai academic circle such as an ethnosemantic study of taste term and taste attitudes in Thai dialects by Phasukkit Anchalika, 2000, an ethnosemantic study of taste terms and taste attitudes in Chaozhou by Mekbantoon Phornladda, 2004, and a study of taste term in Tai ethnics in the lower North by Jirananthnaphom Suphatra and Singhnoi Anchlle, 2553. :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">An ethnosemantic study of taste term and taste attitudes in Thai dialects (Phasukkit, 2000). This study aims to analyze taste terms in Thai dialects of Bangkok, Chiang Mai, UbonRatchathani, and Nakhon Sri Thammarat by categorization. The results show that all the four dialects have 8 common basic taste terms representing 8 basic taste categories: SOUR, SWEET, SALTY, BITTER, HOT, FLAT, ASTRINGENT, and CHEWY. As for the attitude towards tastes, all the four communities have positive attitudes towards Crisp + Starchy. In addition, Chiang Mai speakers have negative attitude towards Almost Bitter and UNPALATABLE TASTES while UbonRatchathani speakers have negative attitude towards these two and also NASAL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">An ethnosemantic study of taste terms and taste attitudes in Chaozhou (Mekbantoon, 2004). This study aims to categorize taste terms in Chaozhou into basic taste terms, nonbasic taste terms, and taste attitude terms. The results show that in Chaozhou there are 9 basic taste terms representing 8 basic taste categories: FLAT, SOUR, SALTY, SWEET, HOT, BITTER, ASTRINGENT and MOIST. The meanings of all the basic taste terms are differentiated by 7 dimensions of contrast: duration of taste sensation, nauseousness, pungency, soreness, stickiness, thirstiness, and tingle. The analysis of taste attitude terms</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">shows that they are divided into 3 groups according to the meaning: positive, negative, and neutral attitudes. The positive category can be divided into 7 groups: savory, delicious, good, appetizing, tasteful, and not bad. The negative category can be divided into 7 groups: not savory, not delicious, not good, fatty, difficult to eat, tasteless, and strong, and neutral category can be divided into 4 groups: easy to eat, simple, not different, and moderate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A study of taste term in Tai ethnics in the lower northern by Jirananthanaphom Suphatra and Singhnoi Anchalee (2010). The result of the study shows that there are 41 taste terms, consisting of only one taste such as very spicy, very sour etc. and mixed tastes such as spicy and salt and sour and sweet in the lower northern of Tai. There is no significance in structure, Syntax and ethnosemantics of taste terms, but there is slightly variation of vocabularies. In regard to attitude towards taste, it is found that there are 3 attitudes according to the meaning: positive, negative and neutral tastes. The positive tastes are good-smelling and cool, “nua” (delicious) etc. that are related to smells, textures and attitudes while the negative tastes are bitter , fishy, hot, fattening etc. that have relation to taste buds, smells, touches, and attitudes. The neutral tastes are spicy, sour, salty, acrid, crisp etc. that are related to taste buds, smells, touches, textures and attitudes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to 3 studies of taste term, there are both similarities and differences, that is Phasukkit’s and Mekbantoon’s studies are doing research by using the componential analysis, while Jirananthanaphom and Singhnoi’s study is the analysis of structure. However, the similarity of 3 studies is the analysis of attitude towards taste in order to understand the relation between language, thought and culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The purpose of this study is to analysis attitude towards tastes in 3 different age and ethnic group: the southern Thais, Malaysian Thais, and Chinese Thais that are divided into 3 age groups : 15-25, 35-45, and over 55 years old.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The informants in each age and ethnic groups were asked the questions about how their attitudes towards food are in order to analyze the attitudes towards the names of foods.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Positive Attitude towards the Names of Foods and Tastes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The names of foods and tastes reflect positive attitudes. These positive attitudes have been divided into main course dishes, desserts and tastes. That is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Main Course Dishes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most favorite curry for 3 ethnic groups and different age group is ‘Kangsom’ because this soup is firstly elicited, the second position is spicy curry or Phatphet dish. These dishes that the informants told are in accordance to the most favorite taste for the southern people. They love spicy dishes. In addition, each ethnic group still favors other main course dishes:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Southern Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Kangsom’ is the most popular main course dish for the southern Thais in all age groups, except age group 1 (15-25). This age group favors more main course dishes cooked from pork than other 2 groups. They like such as fried-pork, Khawmudang, Kraprawmusup (stir-fried pork with basil), Khanamusup (stir-fried pork with kale) and Phakbungmukrop. In addition, the southern Thais like other spicy salient tasteful foods; i.e. KangPungpla, Phatpet, NamPrik , Khuakling. Moreover, this southern Thais also love sea fish. They play a major role as the staple food of the local people such as Kangsomplakaphong, Kangphungpla and Phatphetpladukthale, etc. Furthermore, shellfish are also popular such as crabs, clams, and shrimps. As for vegetable, they are the ingredients of Kangliang and stir-fried vegetables and stink beans with shrimp paste eaten with various vegetables which are the so called “Phaknao” and also other local dishes such as Yamhuakrok (cashew nut salad) Yamlokmut (sapodilla salad).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Chinese Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Kangsom’ is also the most popular main course dish for the Chinese Thais in age groups 2 and 3. Next is Kangtaipla. In age group 3 there are more food names than the other 2 age groups; that is, the names of foods show both spicy and harsh taste of Thai food; i.e. Kangtaipla, Kangkhuapu, Phatsatawkapi (stink bean stirred with shrimp paste), Budoo. In addition, they still love eating Chinese foods such as abalone, sea barnacle, yellow noodle, Chinese spices with steamed pork, chicken. The most favorite meat of this ethnic group is pork. They bring it to cook food such as roasted-pork, deep-fried, three–layered-pork. The favorite food of age group 2 and 3 are similar but age group 2 love eating more seafood than age groups 3. They love Phatphetplakaphong, Hoykrangphao (cockles burnt in hot ash), Tomyam etc. The reason for age group 3 consuming less seafood than the other age groups might be seafood is high in Cholesterol. As for age group 1, they have not shown their favorite</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">food clearly. However, they love curry with coconut milk, omelet, Yamkhaikhem (salted egg salad). Some informants favor Northeastern foods such as Somtam (green papaya salad). This is because northeastern foods prevail throughout all the regions because of the migration of the northeastern Thais.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Malaysian Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Kangsom’ is also the most popular main course dish for the Malaysian Thais in age group 1, 2 and 3. Moreover, age group 1 also likes Phatphet. Age group 1 and 2 favor spicy or harsh taste food such as Phatphet, Kangsom, beef curry, Kangkhua, shrimp paste, PungWau, Pungpla and Tomyam etc. Now age group 1 also loves Somtamplala (green papaya salad with fermented fish). In addition, they love consuming Khawyam, PungWau, foods made of beef. All age groups loves stir-fried beef, spice with beef curry, beef soup, fried beef, rice topped with stir-fried beef etc. In addition, this age group favors for main course dishes tasting sweet such as stir-fried beef, fried red meat, vegetables stirred with sweet and sour sauce, green curry with beef etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Desserts</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most favorite dessert especially for the southern and Malaysian Thais is Kluaybuatchee (bananas in coconut milk). Next is Lotchong, while the Chinese Thais favor Chaokuay (Chinese jelly) and Muntom (yam boiled in syrup) etc. However, there are still the favorite desserts:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Southern Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are differences in the favorite desserts from each age group. Age group 1 like Kluaybuatchee, Thaptimkrob, Fakchieum etc. Age group 2 love Ruammit , fruits, Mokang while age group 3 like Lotchong, Kluaychieum, and Khanomchan etc. In addition, age group 3 loves foreign desserts such as yam-roll etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Chinese Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are differences in favorite desserts from each age group; that is, there are more names of desserts in age group 2 than those in age group 1 and 3 such as Muntom, Piaklumyai, Lotchong etc. Moreover, there are variations of Khawniew and Niew which age group 3 use Niew in stead of Khawniew. Age group 3 also love Chaokuay , Niewmamuang,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Niewrian etc. and they favor fruits as dessert while there are the least names of food in the age group 1 such as Lotchong, Fakchieum, Kluaychieum and Bualoy etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Malaysian Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are differences in favorite desserts from each group too. The most favorite dessert in group 2 and 3 is Kluaybustchee while the most favorite dessert in group 1 is Lotchong. Moreover, there are mores names of desserts in group 1 and 2 than those in group 3 because desserts are not popular for the elder people due to being worried about their health. In addition, desserts are popular for the Malaysian Thais in Ramadon month. They always eat desserts such as Ruammit, Lotchong, Kluaybuatchee, Fakthongbuat. It is observed that a popular dessert is a kind of ‘Buat’. It is an ingredient to cook with coconut milk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tastes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most favorite taste of 3 ethnic groups is ‘hot’, except age group 1. They like sour and sweet instead. This might be that they are so young that they can’t have hot and spicy food. However, there are some interesting tastes they like in each ethnic group:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Southern Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most favorite taste in all age groups of the southern Thais is ‘hot’. In addition, other tastes they like are ‘sweet’, ‘flat’, ‘salty’ ‘bland’ and tasteful which are related to main course dishes they like. The popularity of spicy main course dishes of the southern Thais is considered one of the identities of the southern people in Thailand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Chinese Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most favorite taste in age group 3 and 2 of the Chinese Thais is ‘hot’ while the most popular taste in age group 1 is “sweet”. In addition, they also love ‘salty’ ‘sour’ ‘flat’ ‘bland’ and ‘tasteful’. Compared with other ethnic groups, the Chinese Thais like ‘spicy’ less than the other age groups. They have told that traditional southern foods are so spicy that they have not eaten them because they are not good for their health. They prefer ‘flat’ to ‘spicy’. They also told that if they want to eat ‘spicy’ food, they will eat food that is not too spicy.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Malaysian Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Like the Chinese Thais, the most favorite taste in age group 2 and 3 of the Malaysian Thais is ‘hot’ while the most popular taste of age group 1 is ‘sour’. Also, they love ‘salty’ ‘sweet’ oily and sweet and ‘chewy’. Since the most popular foods of the Malaysian Thais taste ‘sweet’, they have more taste terms of ‘sweet’ than other kinds of taste terms. However, they also like another taste such as ‘sour’, ‘hot’ ‘salty’. The least popular taste is ‘flat’. In addition, age group 2 and 3 have more taste terms than age group 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Negative Attitude Towards The Names of Foods and Tastes</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The names of foods and tastes reflect negative attitudes. At first, mostly informants only told ingredients of food and the foods they do not like such as desserts. As a result, negative attitudes towards the names of foods, ingredients and tastes have been discussed instead.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Southern Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The least popular food of age group 1 is Lookniang, next is an ingredient of southern food such as sataw (stink bean), Lookliang, and vegetables. They do not like vegetables. As for age group 2, the least popular taste is ‘sweet’ they also do not like ‘oily food’ and ‘prickle’. The least popular meat in age group 3 is beef and eels. Next is frogs, and turtles. They also do not like foods tasting sweet, oily or flat food.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Chinese Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Age group 1 do not like food tasting ‘hot’ or ‘harsh taste’ such as Northeastern foods, Phungpla, ‘prickle’, salty eggs, and thousand eggs. The least popular meat in age group 2 is beef, food made of beef, Northeastern foods, Western foods and local food such as Budoo, Kungsom, Plasom. As for age group 3, there are more names of foods which they do not like than the other age groups ;i.e. beef (This might be that they respect Kuan-Im goddess), oily food, foods tasting ‘sour’ such as Moosom, Kungsom, Plasom, eels, buffalo meat etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Malaysian Thais</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are more names of foods in this ethnic group than the other age groups. The least popular meat in age group 1 is ‘catfish’ ; they also do not like their own foods such as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Plapangdang, Kangpae, Phungwau, Nangwau etc., foods tasting ‘bitter’, ‘hot’ and fresh-water fish. As for age group 2, they do not like satawdong (prickled stink beans) and eels and do not like the same foods as group 1. Moreover, they do not like ‘prickle’ food or food tasting ‘sour’ such as Hoydong, Kungsom, satawdong etc. and food tasting sweet and oily such as curry with coconut milk. Age group 3 do not like foods made of pork because they are always prohibited from eating pork; moreover they have negative attitude towards pork. They also do not like local foods such as sataw, Lookniang and Lookliang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results of study of attitudes towards the names of food in different age and ethnic group in Hat Yai District, Songkhla Province are found that the informants told the names of foods which they have eaten, and always found but have not loved to consume. This is not only the attitudes of the informants towards the foods but also the taste of individuals. This is some examples of the relation between attitudes and the names of foods and tastes according to ethnic and age groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 1, The Southern Thais giving examples of the names of foods and tastes according to attitudes</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age food</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Positive attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1) Main course</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fired pork (3) KangPhungpla (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kangliang (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Phatpet (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kangliang (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">KangPhungpla (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (8) KangPhungpla (1) Chili paste (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fried vegetables (2)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2) dessert</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Klauybuatchee (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Taptimkrob (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakthongchieum (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ice cream (3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Ruammit (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mokang (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong Singapore</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klauychieum (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Khanomchan (2)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3) taste</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (4) sweet (3) sour (2) salty (2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (6) salty (2) harsh (2) sour (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (4) flat (3) bland (3) sour (2)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Negative attitude Name of food and ingredient</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Lookniang (3) fried vegetable (2) stink bean (2) curry (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">dessert (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">food with coconut milk(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">fried chicken (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">beef (3) eel (3) frog (2)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 2, The Chinese Thais giving examples of the names of foods and tastes according to attitudes</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age food</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Positive attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">๑</span><span class="font2">) Main course</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">curry (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">omelet (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yamkhaikhem (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">papaya salad (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (3) pork (1) seafood (1) Phatpetplakaphong (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (5) KangTaipla (2) yellow noodle (1) Kangkhuapu (1)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">) dessert</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakchieum (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klauychieum (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bualoy (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Muntom (</span><span class="font0">๓</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Piaklumyai (</span><span class="font0">๓</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong (</span><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klauybuat (</span><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Chaokuay (</span><span class="font0">๓</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Niewmamuang (</span><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Niewrian (</span><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bualoykhaiwan (</span><span class="font0">๑</span><span class="font2">)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">๓</span><span class="font2">) taste</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">sweet (3) salty (1) sour (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (4) salty (4) sour (3) sweet (3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (6) sweet (3) sour (3) flat (2)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Negative attitude Name of food and ingredient</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Phungpla (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Salty egg (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thousand egg (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">beef (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fermented fish (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mutsamannieu (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">beef (7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Musom (2) curry (2)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Table 3, The Malaysian Thais giving examples of the names of foods and tastes according to attitudes</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age food</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Age group 3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Positive attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">๑</span><span class="font2">) Main course</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Phatpet (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (3) stir-fried beef (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fried rice (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">KangPhungpla (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shrimp paste (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kangliang (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kangsom (8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fried vegetable (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Plapriewwan (1) rice topped with stir-fried beef (1)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">) dessert</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakthongchieum (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Luktanchieum (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chaokuay (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Klauybuat (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakthongbuat (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Niewthuadam (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ruammit (1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Klauybuat (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lotchong (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakthongchieum (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ruammit (1)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">๓</span><span class="font2">) taste</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">sour (5) sweet (5) salty (4) hot (3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (8) salty (6) sweet (3) sour (2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">hot (3) sour (3) salty (2) flat (2)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Negative attitude Name of food and ingredient</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">catfish (3) Plapangdang (2) Kangpae (2) Plasom (2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">stink bean (3) eel (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Plapangdang (2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">pork (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">prickle (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prickled stink bean (</span><span class="font0">๒</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">stink bean (1)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Note: </span><span class="font0">ขอ้ สงั เกต ตวั เลขในวงเล็บคอื จํานวนผูบ้ อกภาษาทีใหข้ อ้ มูล</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mostly the members in all age group in the family love to eat the same kind of food, except harsh taste or spicy foods are popular in age group 2 and 3, while the Malaysian Thais in all age groups can eat spicy food. However, some members love different food from the other members in the family, for example, children loves northeastern foods, whereas parents like southern local food. This is the taste of individual too.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fast food is popular for age group 1 in all ethnic groups. This may be because the society has changed so it has an influence on consuming at present. According to the attitude towards the names of foods, in the future the behavior of consuming of people in Hat Yai District , Songkhla Province can be predicted. As a result, there should widely be the study in this issue by expanding the areas, ethnic groups in order to access the attitudes towards the taste through names of foods in the consumerism or materialism </span><span class="font0"><sub>ี</sub> ้ิ ั ั ่ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ั ิ ื &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;์้ ้ ็</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">นอกจากนีผูว้ จิ ยั ยงั พบว่าอาหารสมยั นิยมหรอื อาหารฟาสตฟ์ู้ดไดก้ ลายเป็ นทีนิยมแก่ผูบ้ อกภาษาโด ย เ ฉ พ า ะ ใ น ก ลุ่ ม อ า ยุ ที </span><span class="font2">1 </span><span class="font0">แ ล ะ เ กื อ บ จ ะ ทุ ก ก ลุ่ ม ช า ติ พั น ธุ์ อัน เกี ยว เนื อง กับ สภาพ สัง คม ที เป ลี ย นไป จึง มี ผ ล ต่ อ การบริโภ คข อง คนใน ยุ ค ปัจ จุ บันนี ได้ </span><span class="font2">cS </span><span class="font0">ัิ ้ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ี ่ ํ ี &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ั ิ ั </span><span class="font2">r</span><span class="font0">ํ็</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ซงึ จากทศั นคตขิ องผูบ้ อกภาษาทีมตี ่อคําเรยี กชอื อาหารดงั ผลวจิ ยั นีอาจทาํ นายความเป็ นไปในอนาคตเกียวกบั กา ร บ ริ โ ภ ค อ า ห า ร ข อ ง ค น ใ น ชุ ม ช น ห า ด ใ ห ญ่ จั ง ห วั ด ส ง ข ล า ไ ด้ ท า ง ห นึ ง</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ึ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ี ึ ็ ั ่ ้ ้ ึ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ื ี้ ื</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">จึงควรทีจะศึกษาประเด็นดังกล่าวใหก้ วา้ งขวางขึนโดยขยายขอบเขตของพืนที ขอ้ มูลหรอื กลุ่มชาติพันธุ ์ เพอื ใหไ้ ดค้ ําตอบทีครอบคลุมเรอื งทศั นคตทิ ีมีต่อคําเรยี กชอื อาหารในสงั คมยุคบรโิ ภคนิยมหรอื วตั ถุนิยมสมยั ใหม่</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Refrences</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dalan, W. (2010). Malaysian Thai food’s identities: southern Muslim kitchen. Bangkok: The Halal Science Center Chulalongkorn University. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frake,Charles.O. (1961). Language and cultural description: essays. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jirananthanaphon, S &amp;&nbsp;Singhnoi, A, (2010). An ethnosemantic study of taste terms and taste attitudes of Tai ethnic groups in lower northern Thailand. Journal of Humanities Naresuan University (7,3 September-December). (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kachashewa, Palasri &amp;&nbsp;Yotphicha. (2010). The most popularity of Chinese food. Bangkok: Modern housewife. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mekbantoon, P. (2004). An ethnosemantic study of taste terms and taste attitudes in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chaozhou. M.A’s thesis, Chulalongkorn University. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Phasukkit, A. (2000). An ethnosemantic study of taste term and taste attitudes in Thai dialects. M.A’s thesis, Chulalongkorn University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Phongphaiboon, S , (2001). Southern structure and cultural dynamics with development. TRF. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Phrasitrathasinth, A. (1986). Road to be a linguist. Bangkok : Linguistic department, Faculty of Arts Chulalongkorn University. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sorajaphan, A. (2001). Southern local food. Songkla: Songkhla Rajabhat University .(trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Srisuchart, A. (2001). Southern roots Characteristic, Physical Appearance, Geographical Features and Psychological Features. Bangkok: TRF. (trans.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">13</span></p>