---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ROLE OF SURAT UKAT IN KARO  SINGALOR LAU KARO DISTRICT"
author: "Sugihana Sembiring, Rosita Ginting"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-50237 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-50237"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-50237"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 26. No. 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ROLE OF SURAT UKAT IN KARO SINGALOR LAU KARO DISTRICT</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Sugihana Sembiring<sup>1</sup>, Rosita Ginting <sup>2</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Faculty of Cultural Sciences, University of Sumatera Utara, Medan-Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jl. Universitas No.19, Padang Bulan, Medan Baru, Kota Medan, Sumatera Utara </span><a href="mailto:sembiringsugihana19@gmail.com"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sembiringsugihana19@gmail.com,</span></a><a href="mailto:gintingzrosita@gmail.com"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">gintingzrosita@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font4">–Changing Karo language into a modern written language is certainly not an easy matter. Karo society does not want to be involved to improve, develop, and preserve the Karo language. Therefore, in this research we will examine the role of surat ukat in Karo Singalor Lau Karo District.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Surat ukat can serve as a way of life in every action in Karonese life so that people can live harmonious and peacefully. The method that used in this research is descriptive method and interview. The theory that used is cultural theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study describes about the role of surat ukat in the Karo community Singalor Lau Karo District can be distinguished on: surat ukat in deeds, surat ukat in thoughts, surat ukat in the household and surat ukat for students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the results above, can be concluded that the Karo people have surat ukat as a guide to life in sangkep geluh in ancient times, while in the present, the younger generation is rarely know and use the surat ukat. We suggest the Karo community to life their daily life based on surat ukat so that they can live in harmony and good.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat, Culture, Way of Karonese Life</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak - </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mengubah bahasa Karo menjadi bahasa tulisan modern tentu bukan perkara mudah. Masyarakat Karo tidak mau terlibat untuk meningkatkan, mengembangkan, dan melestarikan bahasa Karo. Oleh karena itu, dalam penelitian ini kita akan meneliti peran surat ukat di Kabupaten Karo Singalor Lau Karo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Surat ukat dapat berfungsi sebagai cara hidup dalam setiap tindakan dalam kehidupan orang Karo sehingga orang dapat hidup harmonis dan damai. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode deskriptif dan wawancara. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini membahas tentang peran surat ukat dalam komunitas Karo Singalor Lau Kabupaten Karo dapat dibedakan atas: surat ukat dalam perbuatan, surat ukat dalam pikiran, surat ukat dalam rumah tangga dan surat ukat untuk siswa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dari hasil di atas, dapat disimpulkan bahwa orang Karo memiliki surat ukat sebagai pedoman hidup di sangkep geluh pada zaman kuno, sedangkan di masa sekarang, generasi muda jarang mengenal dan menggunakan surat ukat. Kami menyarankan komunitas Karo untuk menjalani kehidupan sehari-hari berdasarkan surat ukat sehingga mereka dapat hidup harmonis dan baik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat, Budaya, Cara Hidup</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Speaking of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo Language can be divided into two words namely </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat.</span><span class="font5"> Word ‘letter’ according to KUBI is inscriptions or symbols of language consisting of vowel phonemes and consonants pronounced by human. Letter is used to write things that can be forgotten if not written for example there is something we want to convey to friends, relatives whose far apart from us, then we will write it in letter. Therefore, in Karo society there is a personal letter, official letter, etc. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo language can be interpreted as ‘sendok’ in the Indonesian language, but ‘</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5">’ in the Karo language is a large spoon made of bamboo</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">. Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo language can be divided into two namely: </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat nakan</span><span class="font5"> (spoon of rice) and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat gulen</span><span class="font5"> (spoon of vegetable).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat nakan</span><span class="font5"> (spoon of rice) used to scooping up rice from pot to plate and stirring rice when the rice is boiling. The </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ukat gulen</span><span class="font5"> is used to taste the salt of food and spooned vegetables from the pot to the plate. So </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo society is a few words written in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ukat</span><span class="font5"> (spoon) that uses Karo's Karachi which is now extinct. Many Karo people who do not know anymore the meaning contained in this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5">. Meaning contained in this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> to be delivered to the next generation is to give peace in life such as peace in </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sangkep nggeluh</span><span class="font5"> (life order in Karo society), brotherhood and in the household. This </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> also contains advice to give responsibility to every Karonese whose contents are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Do the best to people first. Each of our step should give joy to others and not harmful to us. So that, anywhere we are able to be friends, loving each other, helping each other that became the motto for the Karonese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Perhaps, the question arises for us is why in the advice written on </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ukat</span><span class="font5"> to the Karonese. There are some reasons:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ukat</span><span class="font5"> (spoon) is a tool to spoon rice and vegetables to the plate that to be eaten to give strength to humanity (Karonese).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Always there be the time to read it because when scooping rice and vegetables into the plate we remember the advice in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> (spoon)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Easy for us to see </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> (spoons) because the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5"> is a tool that always there in house or rest place.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ukat</span><span class="font5"> is a rain-resistant, hot- resistant, and never-broken home utensil for future generations.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ukat</span><span class="font5"> (spoon) is closely related to everyday life of Karonese.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">■</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study aims to determine the role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in the Karo Singalorlau community namely the role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat </span><span class="font5">in the behavior, household thinking, and student.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>METHOD</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The method of literature, the authors trying to find the books as a reference of various references so that more support in conducting research.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methods of observation, the researchers directly go to the location of research to observe the objects to be studied. Activities intended to understand more clearly the involvement of observational subjects.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interview method, which is a method that is a conversation conducted with a specific purpose, and this conversation is usually done by two parties: the interviewer (interviewer) who asks questions and interviewees (interviewee) who provide answers to the question. In this interview method researchers will conduct interviews to the parties who know all about the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESULTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">The role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo society can be divided into:</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>The Role of the </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"> in Behavior or Action</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">In Karo society there is one guideline to organize actions so that you will not harm yourself and others namely </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5">. How should we behave towards friends, family and brothers to fit the &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat ukat</span><span class="font5">&quot;?. Obviously we have to give what others want. No one will hate us if our daily behavior and deeds please others. We will be liked by others wherever we are. Therefore we must avoid unpleasant things like insinuating, abusing and deceiving others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Good behavior is our sense of reluctance and respect for others. If you want others to shrink and respect us, of course we must respect them first. Therefore if we want to be loved and appreciated by others, we must do it first. For example we are good to others either family or friends, then they also must be good to us. If this kind of goodness is unilaterally, it is impossible to preserve such a aphorism says “claps one hand” and impossible to achieve what the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> try to say which is the peace of life between fellow human beings. If we remember what the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">nini</span><span class="font5"> said (parental counsel), every action must be repaid, such as a borrowed bowl, a bowl returned, in other words there is debt and there is receivable. In the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat ukat</span><span class="font5">, it is emphasized that we must give first before we accept. If we can do this in our daily deeds of course we have to provide all of our needs so that we can give to friends and family. Thus we are required to work hard and sparingly so we can fulfill our needs of our daily lives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Actually this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5"> is a golden bridge into peace, both to friends and to family. According to Karo tribe experts, it is no</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">mistake that the letter is the philosophy of Karo tribe life. In general, the Karo tribe can adapt to other tribes in Indonesia because wherever the Karo tribe is located they can please others in both behavior and thought. There is parental advice in Karo society that '</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dimana langit dijunjung disitu tanah dipijak’</span><span class="font5">. In other words Karo proverb states &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bagi bindoranlah kita nggeluh, kuga inganna bage rupana</span><span class="font5">&quot; means we must be able to adjust to other people and leave our habits and adjust to others. For example we enter a place or village, we must follow the customs that exist in the place although it is different with the custom in our place.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>The Role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"> in Thought</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in thought has the intention that everyone should think </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rawin jemba</span><span class="font5"> which means that everything we think about and we will convey to others must be drawn first to ourselves whether it is good or not. Otherwise, If it is not good do not convey to others, if it is good then it can be delivered to others. For example, if we are oppressed by others then we will feel miserable or hurt, if we oppress others, of course he will hurt too. So do not oppress. Another example if we are deceived people of course we do not like it, then do not deceive others. If we think that we will not like to be abused by others, then do not scold anyone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Thinking </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rawin jemba</span><span class="font5"> is must be reciprocated between </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">awin</span><span class="font5"> that replied by </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">jemba</span><span class="font5"> can be similar with </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">'ndi'</span><span class="font5"> replied by </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">'enta'</span><span class="font5">. Speaking of reciprocal or not reciprocal, it is clear for us that everybody feels the services of parents to their children and it cannot be repaid. It is impossible for a child to provide the same service with the services the parent had given to them. If we reflect on how the parents treated and raised us from the womb until we married, the affection of the parents is infinite or we can say that it is the most sincere affection on this world. Their eating and sleeping time</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">are disturbed to take care of us. When we are sick or in distress, our parents are sad and hurt, their heart is beating so fast when their child is sick, the child is treated as well as possible. Parents never feel disgusted to clean up their child’s feces even though she or he was eating. After child has grown become a mature one, the child even denied their parents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Conversely, when parents are elderly, it is definitely a burden for children to take care of their parents because the parents who are elderly are not able to work especially if he is sick until they cannot go to toilet by themselves anymore. Although we have taken care of parents as much as possible, we still cannot repay even half of the sacrifice that they has been given to us, it will be more bad if we neglect it. There are children who are ungodly against their parents so that their parents are sick and stressed because they cannot overcome their children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> in Karo language is not similar with people who buying and selling, we give money to the seller, we accept the goods without any element of love inside it. In buying and selling, there is no difference who gives first with who receives first. Although in this case there are elements reciprocal. The giving and receiving are the same, so it is not the same as the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat’s</span><span class="font5"> law which contains </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">'ndi' 'enta'</span><span class="font5"> as a guideline for the life of the Karonese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">According to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5">, it is a honor if we can give to someone else but it cannot be resurrected to make the person hate to us. Is this case happens, their honor to us will be lost and the resentment of the receiving person will arises. When we often talk about our gifts to others, there is an element of high-mindedness inside it. Therefore, although we give much to others or help others, we have to stay humble in order that the higher self-personality remains in us. If the person we are helped does not reply our kindness, do not be hurt. Just think that it is</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">our part to help them. To the person who often berates us, we should do our best to him and suppose the person is inexperienced until someday someone else will reply his actions. Try not to hurt others because if we hurt someone else, someday someone will be hurt us. In this world, not everyone will repay the good to us even if we have done something good to them, of course it will be more bad if we do some evil, it is definitely, the result is more evil. The reply that we will receive certainly not as fast as biting chili, the time it bitten, immediately felt spicy. Bad behavior, will be rewarded with the bad, though not only the person we hurt will hurt us. Someone else will do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">It is possible if we do something bad such as hurt people, make them sad and etc on young age, the reward to us may come when we are old.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>The Role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"> in Students</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">This </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> may be filled with many things that hated by the students today. This </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> contains many counsels to students. The purpose of making this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> is that the life of future generations today much better than the life of the forerunners because the person who made this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> lived in an era of colonization who yearns for peace in his life. They never feel hopeless and will support the students as the next generation on the basis of love and love for the next generation with existing abilities to guide. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> was created when situation of Indonesia was not good because Indonesia was being colonized in that time. In those days there was a quarrel among the family and even brothers and got to the court. That is why the writer of this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> want if the young people will not get the same thing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">This independence has been entrusted to the next generation who sit in elementary, junior high school, or who already sit in college. They are the next generation who</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">can build this country become the better country. The young generation must prepare themselves as knowledgeable and experienced human beings to create a prosperous society. In addition, mental and disciplined behavior should also be prepared because knowledge is not enough. Eventhough their knowledge is as high as the sky is nonsense without disciplined mental and behavior. Like Hitler who made the German state destroyed by his poor mentality, he always considered his country is the best country in the world as the slogan says &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Deutschland ist uber alles&quot;</span><span class="font5"> which means Germany is the best so that Germany must lead the world. The Germans are arrogant and consider all the countries of this world not as good as Germany. Later, in the first and second world wars, Germany was lost and the country was divided into two and now reunited. Therefore, the writer of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat </span><span class="font5">really wants the next generation can use the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> as his life guide. In </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat, </span><span class="font5">there are good mental and behavioral teachings for the east people generally and in particular the mind of the Karonese. According to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5">, Karo people's personality is humble, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rawin jemba</span><span class="font5"> thought, and deeds </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ndi enta</span><span class="font5">. If the personality contained in this </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> has been a behavior for the people of Karo surely they will get peace and tranquility of the heart is also favored by others. Generations of successors must apply the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> in their lives so that people in the family can behave well or have good ethics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> appealed that students should be diligent in learning in the school. To achieve a good performance is definitely difficult, but in that trouble, there will be a privilege for him, for example a student who champion and quickly got a bachelor degree with good results would be easy to find a job because the company needs the best people. In general, people who are diligent to learn will be more earnest and full of</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">responsibility so that in his work will quickly get promotion. If he is a businessman then his business will forward and develop fast. Such a person will always be remembered until the end of his life as the proverb says elephants died leaving ivory, humans die leaving names.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From the above description, students want to suffer temporarily to get further pleasure. At school, it suffers from having to do good things and stay away from fun things like watching movies, picnics, and dating. Once the problems in school finished or finished school and work, of course they can do what they want to do not disturb the peace and decency of others. If they want to watch a movie every night, picnics every week no one will worry and ban him. School is the place for they to learn for the future.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The Role of </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"> in Household</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Households in Karo society have been included in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sangkep nggeluh,</span><span class="font5"> both in party customs, meetings, and also had responsibility both in action and mind. Household is a golden bridge to achieve the ideals. Meeting men and women in the household make a human being responsible in the household. Forming a household is not only if you have much money, because if everything has been fulfilled so the new household feels like vegetables without salt, it is tasteless. There is no pride for us if everything has been fulfilled but you will get pride of heart if you live with suffering first then happy. Similarly with student who struggle to find knowledge then after the graduation, he can be proud. There is no man who graduated in marriage even though age is advanced, only death can separate the household. To avoid the destruction of households, the people of Karo are guided by the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> to keep the house peaceful. We often meet a household that only one person who fought for the household and they are blame each other in the household. According to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5">, do</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">not blame each other and you must support each other. The reason why </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> is written on the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5"> is because women will often hold the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ukat</span><span class="font5">. This is in line with the nature of women who tend to be one-sided in the family, for example if the wife who came, the wife smiled, while if the husband’s family who came, the wife will sullen. There are also quarrels within the household for this reason. The </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat </span><span class="font5">appeals in the household, husband and wife, to be fair in their life against any party because husband and wife have become one.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">The </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Ukat</span><span class="font5"> on Karo society plays an important role both in action, mind, household, and students. According to cultural theory, all human activities or behaviors make man more prosperous. In accordance with the theory, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">the surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> in the Karo society used in ancient times it was seen that the Karo people were menologylike people, able to adapt to the place where he was, the social beings who live in mutual assistance, mutually cheers and respects. Karo people generally always think first before they act in order to avoid misunderstanding between them. When he wants to act, it will be done to himself, whether he is happy or not. If that is not good for him, he will not do it. But if it is good for him then he will do it. This is called in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> with </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rawin jemba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Generally, the Karonese had always tried to give first before they want the reply of it, both in action and words so there is a theory in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5">, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rendi enta</span><span class="font5">. Therefore, the life of Karo people in the past seemed to be working hard and always save money for their future. In this modern era, the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5"> as a guide in Karo society has begun to erode due to selfishness that controls the minds of Karo society. Karo society in general has begun to forget the role of the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat</span><span class="font5">. Many Karo people</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">who have lived like a </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">unduk-unduk</span><span class="font5"> or a type of caterpillar which means do not see the left and right, just selfish. The next generation in the Karo society has recently begun to be happy for a moment and hard forever, no longer as it is written in the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">surat ukat.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>REFERENCES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Alisyahbana, Sutan Takdir. Tata Bahasa Baru Indonesia. Jilid II. Jakarta: Pustaka Rakyat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Arikunto, Suharsini. 1996. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Prosedur Penelitian: Suatu Pendekatan Praktek</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta : Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Bangun, Terindah. 1990. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Dan Pencatatan Adat Istiadat Karo</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta : Yayasan Merga Si Lima.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Endraswara, Suwardi. 2003. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Sastra</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta : Pustaka Widyatama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">-------. 2003. &nbsp;(A) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kebudayaan</span><span class="font5">. &nbsp;Yogyakarta : Gajak</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Fall. 2006. AnthroNotes27 (2) .Washington DC: Smithsonian institution p.6.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Halim, Amran. 1981. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Dan Pembangunan Bangsa</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta : Pusat Pembinaan Dan Pengembangan Bahasa Departemen Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Koencaraningrat. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1985. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengantar</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Antropologi. Jakarta : Aksara Baru.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Milner, Max. 1992. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Freud Dan Interprestasi Sastra</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta : Intermasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">MyAnthroLab.2017. Anthropology and the Study of Culture. Chapter 1. England: the Big Question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Prinst, Darwan Dan Darwin Prinst. 1985. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sejarah Dan Kebudayaan &nbsp;Karo</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Yogyakarta : Cv. Yrama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Prinst, Darwin. 1996. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Adat Karo</span><span class="font5">. Medan : Bina Media Perintis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Ratna, Nyoman Kutha. 2007. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Estetika Sastra Dan Budaya</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta : Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">------. 2004. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode Dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta : Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sempa Sitepu. 1996. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pilar Budaya Karo</span><span class="font5"> : Bali Scan Dan Percetakaan Medan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sinaga, Warisman. 2015. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kearifan Lokal Dalam Pelestarian Alam pada Cerita Rakyat Sumatera Utara</span><span class="font5">. Medan: USU Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sibarani, Robert. 2012. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kearifan Local, Hakekat, Peran Dan Metode Tradisi Lisan: Analisis Tradisi Lisan</span><span class="font5"> (Atl). Jakarta Selatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sukapiring. Peraturen. 1985. Kamus Bahasa Karo Indonesia. Jakarta : Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Semi, Atar. 1988. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anatomi Sastra</span><span class="font5">. Bandung : Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Synulta Er. Pedah Nini Siarah Lebe. Medan : Ulamin Kisat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Suwito. 1985. Sosiolinguistik: &nbsp;&nbsp;Suatu</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Pengantar Awal. Surakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Tarigan, Henry Guntur. 1980. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Karo</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">-----. &nbsp;1979. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra Lisan Karo</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta: Pusat Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">------.1991. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-Prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font5">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>