---
layout: full_article
title: "The Use of Indoglish in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University-Bali"
author: "I Nyoman Sedeng, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: jsgs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-58899 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/id-58899"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-58899"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">Journal of A Sustainable Global South, p-ISSN: 2579-6062</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Use of Indoglish in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University-Bali</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">I Nyoman Sedeng <sup>1</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati <sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Faculty of Arts - Udayana University Denpasar </span><a href="mailto:nyoman_sedeng@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">nyoman_sedeng@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Faculty of Arts - Udayana University Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study is aimed at 1) identifying the form of linguistic level of Indoglish commonly used in communication in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University Bali; 2) identifying the reasons of speakers when using Indoglish in the campus; and 3) analyzing the impacts of its usage on the speakers Indonesian language. As a source of data, this study uses various forms of authentic conversation that focus on the emergence of Indoglish in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University Bali, which was collected through recording and note taking techniques. In addition, the data was also gathered through filling out questionnaires by 184 respondents consisting of students, lecturers and employees in the faculty. The questionnaires focused more on questions about the respondents’ motives behind their using of Indoglish in their communication. The data was then analyzed and presented qualitatively using the theories proposed by Weinrich [1] and Holmes [2].The results of this study indicate that the form of Indoglish linguistic level used in communication between students, lecturers and staff in the Faculty of Arts of Udayana University is at 3 different levels, namely at the word level(71.96%), the level of the phrase(12.15%) and the clause / sentence level(15.89%; the dominant motives behind the use of the language are to facilitate speaking / convey intentions (34.9%) and that they do not know the correct interpretation in Indonesian (33.7%). As many as 16% of respondents stated that it is for familiarity, 10.9% to show affirmation intentions, and 1.2% used the term to express irritation; although most respondents gave a positive response to the impacts of the use of Indoglish together with their Indonesian language, it is still needed to develop a positive attitude towards the use of the correct and appropriate Indonesian in order to optimize the dynamics and poise of the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Index Terms</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">— linguistic level, indoglish, impact, emergence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>1</sup></span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Indoglish which stands for Indonesian-English is a new language phenomenon that emerges along with the world revolution in technology, information and communication in globalization era. Many experts interpret globalization as the world drown sizing era when people can easily communicate with each other and that distance and time are no longer a barrier. The media social presence, for example, with one of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">its functions is as an effective and efficient communication media of the period, has brought about much influence in the use of Indonesian language in society which then gives results to the shifts and changes in its structures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The emergence of Indoglish is actually as the results of borrowing process of English terms by Indonesian speakers. The language is usually used to express English in Indonesian culture, by means that in its use, the English term is still in its original form but its meaning reflects Indonesian language and culture. For examples, the English terms of posting, edit, and browsing are frequently used and heard in Indonesian language communication but are added with</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesian &nbsp;affixes so that the terms become more</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesian: e.g. memposting, diedit, and browsingan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are many factors that have influenced the occurrence of the language. A well-known one is because speakers have difficulties in finding the right equivalent for the English terms they use, and as has been explained above, frequently, they will continue to use the original form and easily add some elements of Indonesian to the term. Another examples the word “men-download” has become common among the Indonesian community in which the process of its formation is very simple that is by adding prefix me- to the English word download to form transitive active sentences. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Orang Indonesia mereproduksi perbedaan semantik yang mereka dapatkan dalam bahasa Inggris, dan mereka akan meminjam dari bahasa Inggris untuk dapat mengekspresikan makna dengan sama tepatnya seperti bahasa Inggris</span><span class="font2">” [3:5]. (Indonesian people reproduce semantic difference that they get from English, and they will borrow the term in order to express the exact meaning as it is in English). However, many studies also reveal that the use of this type of language phenomenon is actually not only as the results of speakers' inadequacy in a language, but is due to a certain motives behind its usage. One of them is for prestige that is speakers usually feel more prestigious when they (intentionally) slip foreign terms in their speech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the realm of higher education, especially in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University, the use of Indoglish is commonly heard in everyday communication. This study assumes that in addition to the factors explained above, there must be other reasons behind its usage. The hypothesis of this study is the existence of academic demands due to the emergence of new English terms that have no equivalent in Indonesian may become one of the factors that cause its incidence. This academic condition and situation then has led this study to be conducted which concerns on the factors that has caused Indoglish emergence in university environment, besides, the forms and the effects of its usage in campus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, this study is aimed to answer the following questions:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1 What are the forms of linguistic level of Indoglish commonly used in Faculty of Arts, Udayana, University-Bali?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2 What are the reasons of speakers when using the language in campus?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">3 What are the impacts of its usage on the speakers Indonesian language?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to analyze the data of this study, several theories of word borrowings were used. Holmes [2] stated that borrowing occurs when someone speaks in a second language and includes several terms from his first language, or vice versa. This occurs because of the limitations of the words they have in the second language or because they do not recognize the exact equivalent of the first language. Additionally, Weinreich 1963 [1] asserted that when a word</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">is borrowed into another language, the word changes the mini semantic system, or space where the word acts as a member. In other words when a word is borrowed from another language used in a conversation, all the meanings of the words will adjust to each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The borrowing process can occur at the four levels of language, namely: phonology, grammar, vocabulary, and semantic where this allows the occurrence of shifts or even changes in language. According to Susanto [4] the changes in language are commonly interpreted as a change in rules, whether the rules are revised, the rules disappear, or the emergence of a new rule. As a result of the inclusion of foreign words / terms in a language, he added, it would lead to two kinds of changes, namely changes in the form of incoming words in order to adjust to the rules of the recipient's language and changes in the rules of the recipient's language in order to accommodate the elements that come from the outside.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark5"></a>II.</span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methodology</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As data source, this study uses various forms of authentic conversations that focus on the emergence of Indoglish in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University. The data was collected through recording and note taking techniques which was done underhandedly in order to get natural as well as trusted data. For this activity stimulus and inducement were provided in an ongoing conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In addition, the data was also collected through filling out questionnaires by 184 respondents consisting of students, lecturers and staff in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University Bali. The questionnaire is in the form of a statements where there are options that could be chosen by the respondents related to the use of Indoglish in academic setting. It is aimed to gather opinions and experiences of respondents in using the language in their campus life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After the data was collected, they then were transcribed and put into forms classification as well as factors/reasons and impacts of the usage. Finally they were then analyzed and presented qualitatively using the theories as proposed by Weinrich [1] and Holmes [2].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>iii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As has been stated in the background above, the phenomenon of Indoglishin the globalization era is currently unavoidable. Revolution in the field of technology, communication and information is very much felt in the environment of universities where there are many new English terms used in campus life that have not yet have equivalents in Indonesian. Hence, this study is conducted in order to 1) identify the form of linguistic level of Indoglish commonly used in communication in the campus; 2) identify the reasons of speakers when using Indoglish in the environment of the campus; and 3) analyze the impact of the use of Indoglish on Indonesian language in the campus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This subchapter outlines the results and discussions of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the problems of this study which cover the forms of linguistic levels of Indoglish that commonly used in Faculty of Arts Udayana University Bali, the reasons of its usage and the effects it is caused to the speakers’ Indonesian language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indoglish Forms of Linguisttic Level Commonly Used in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University-Bali</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the data collected, there are 107 Indoglish forms obtained from the record of various forms of communication among students, lecturers and employees in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University Bali. The analysis shows that their linguistic levels vary in terms of word level, phrase level and sentence level. There are as many as 77 or 71,96% of the Indoglish forms are in the linguistic level of word, 13 or 12,5% are at the level of phrase, and 17 or 15.89% are at the linguistic level of clause/sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The numbers linguistically show that the tendency to use words turns out to be greater than the tendency to use phrases and clauses or sentences. This indicates that the use of Indoglish is related to the level of language difficulties. A more difficult form of language is not a preference, but a simpler one (i.e. in the linguistic level of word) because it is easy to use. In detail, the linguistic facts that describe the form and linguistic level of Indoglishcan be seen in the following table 1.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">CORPUS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">INDOGLISH FORM OF LINGUISTIC LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jangan lupa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">next week </span><span class="font0">kita ada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">test speaking </span><span class="font0">yaa</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aku </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">prefer writing </span><span class="font0">dari pada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">speaking </span><span class="font0">sebenarnya nok</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Me too but </span><span class="font0">mau enggak mau </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">we must to do that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Yes </span><span class="font0">tapi pasti bakal </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">boring</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;next week: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;test : WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;speaking: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;speaking: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;we must to do that: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borimg: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udah buat </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">assignmentnya </span><span class="font0">Mrs. Mas?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yang mana?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis poetry.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh my god</span><span class="font0">, aku lupa.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Damn. Assignmentnya </span><span class="font0">dikumpul nggak ya?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Assignmentnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh my god: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Damn: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">A: Biasanya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">discuss </span><span class="font0">bareng aja kok, tapi aku gak tau gimana kalau yang ini. B: Kamu udah buat?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Same with you</span><span class="font0">, belum.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discuss: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Same with you:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">A: Kok telat bu Kadek?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">B: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Trafficnya </span><span class="font0">kuta </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">you know lah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A: Iya sih parah tu.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Trafficnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you know lah:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udah ada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">filenya </span><span class="font0">dari Pak?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belum lo. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Expired datenya </span><span class="font0">kemarin lagi</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Searching </span><span class="font0">aja materinya sekarang, sebelum ngajar Pak.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Filenya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expired datenya: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Searching: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kantin yuk, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">lunch</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aku </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">stay </span><span class="font0">disini aja deh</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Lem me know </span><span class="font0">kalo dosennya udah dating ya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lunch: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stay: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lemme know:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">B: Siap!</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eh artikelnya udah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">disapprove </span><span class="font0">sama </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">reviewernya</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belum lo baru tadi pagi saya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">sent </span><span class="font0">lewat email gatau udah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">diread </span><span class="font0">atau belum sama mereka.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But I know that </span><span class="font0">mereka pasti lumayan sibuk sih kayaknya.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Lagi dimana?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On the way </span><span class="font0">nih, dosennya udah dateng?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belumsih, tapi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">make sure </span><span class="font0">kalau kamu 10 menit lagi kamu udah nyampe yaa.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dosen kita yang ini selalu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">on time </span><span class="font0">soalnya.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oke, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m on my way</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diapprove: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reviewernya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sent: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diread: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But I know that:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On the way: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Make: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sure: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on time: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’m on my way.:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eeeh kamu jadi ikut </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">maksi </span><span class="font0">bareng kita di Kansas? Ada menu baru loh ayam gepreknya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">tasty </span><span class="font0">banget</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sorry </span><span class="font0">banget yaa aku lagi banyak kerjaan. Sekarang mau bantu ibuku </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ngeclean up </span><span class="font0">rumah</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aah gakasik</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maaf banget ya bro, lain kali aku ikut </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">hang out </span><span class="font0">bareng kalian.</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tasty: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sorry: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ngeclean up: tatar PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hang out: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hey, kamu udah buat tugas dariMr.Sena?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belum, kamu gimana?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udah. Bukannya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">dicollect </span><span class="font0">besok ya?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Masa? Aku mesti buat sekarangni, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">thanks </span><span class="font0">yau dah ngasik tau</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">- dicollect: WORD LEVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">- thanks: WORD LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Next week </span><span class="font0">yang maju presentasi siapa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">guys</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bukannya udah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">difixin </span><span class="font0">5 orang per pertemuanya?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">C: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Itu presentasi yang lagi satu, kalau ini </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Mrs</span><span class="font0">nya bilang bakal milih </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">random </span><span class="font0">sebelum presentasi</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Salah ya hehe</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Berati presentasi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">next </span><span class="font0">ini yang majunya gak sesuai </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">attendance list </span><span class="font0">lagikan?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">C: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exactly</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A&amp;B: Okay deh </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">thank you </span><span class="font0">yaa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Next week: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Difixin: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Random: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Next: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;attendance list: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;thank you: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pulang kerja jadi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">hangout </span><span class="font0">nih?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So pasti jadi</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kemana?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Level mall atau Plaza renon ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plaza renonaja yuk, saya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">prefer </span><span class="font0">plaza renon sih soal nya parker nya rapi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">its not kinda like </span><span class="font0">level mall</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yuk!</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hang out: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;prefer: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;its not kinda like: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guys </span><span class="font0">presentasi besok </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">withgroup </span><span class="font0">atau individuya?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Group kok</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">C: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ingetya 10 menit presentasi 10 menit diskusi</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh iya sekarang ada sesi</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">discussionnya </span><span class="font0">ya, maksimal berapa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">question</span><span class="font0">sih?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maybe </span><span class="font0">3(tiga)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">C: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ya 3(tiga) or 4(empat) pokoknya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">every group have 20 minutes </span><span class="font0">presentasi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">include discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Lumayan lama yah, baiklah, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">see you tomorrow, thanks </span><span class="font0">ya informasinya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guys: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Group: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussionnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Question: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maybe: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;group have 20 minutes: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;include: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;discussion: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;see you tomorrow:</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">- thanks: WORD LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udah pada liat tugas Mrs. Seri belum? Udah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">diupdate </span><span class="font0">tuh jadi udah pada bisa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">download</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aku udah </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">download </span><span class="font0">kemarin. Dikumpul minggu depan bukan?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Iya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">next week sent via email</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Berarti gak perlu </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">print out </span><span class="font0">lagi ya?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Iya gak perlu</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Okay </span><span class="font0">makasi yaa infonya</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diupdate: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Download: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;next week sent via email:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;print out: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Okay: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Temans, </span><span class="font0">inget </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">sign </span><span class="font0">di </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">attendance listnya </span><span class="font0">sebelum pulang yaa</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ada yang udah pulang tapi belum ttdni, gimana?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signin </span><span class="font0">aja dia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kayak gimana?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Whatever lah</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shit! Okay</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Temans: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sign: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;attendance listnya:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">PHRASE LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signin: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whatever lah: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hi, tugas Mr. Arya udah pada buat belum?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belum nih masih </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">searching </span><span class="font0">di google</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Kemarin aku juga </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">browsing </span><span class="font0">artikel tugasnya sih tapi belum nemu juga B: Emang susah sih materi kali ini. O ia tugas nya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">hardcopy </span><span class="font0">atau </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">softcopy</span><span class="font0">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seingetku hardcopy tapi jaga jaga aja keduanya</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eh aku nemu nih</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywordnya </span><span class="font0">apa?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">B: Coba aja cari pemabahasannya dulu nanti pasti langsung isi contoh</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Okay deh. Thanks ya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Searching: WORD LEVEL - Browsing: WORD LEVEL - Hardcopy: WORD LEVEL - Softcopy: WORD LEVEL - Keywordnya: WORD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Okay deh: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thanks ya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hey, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">weekend </span><span class="font0">ini ada rencana mau kemana ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aku kayaknya bakal ke Cineplex sih ada film </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">action </span><span class="font0">komedi gitu, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">you know what actornya </span><span class="font0">itu yang jadi Mr. Bean, pasti filmnya bakal </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">fun </span><span class="font0">banget deh A: Wah seru tuh aku bisa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">imagine </span><span class="font0">gimana kocaknya Mr. Bean di film itu</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How about you </span><span class="font0">ada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">plan </span><span class="font0">mau kemana? A: Kalau aku sih setiap </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">weekend </span><span class="font0">ada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">family time </span><span class="font0">gitu terus kayaknya bakal </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ngeseafood </span><span class="font0">deh</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">B: Wah enak tuh </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">seafood</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tapi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">honestly </span><span class="font0">aku </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">prefer </span><span class="font0">ayam sih</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Same with me</span><span class="font0">!!! gak tau kenapa aku lebih suka ayam juga dari pada yang lain. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">One heart </span><span class="font0">ya kita</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hahaha iya nih, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">have fun yaa watching filmnya</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Makasi, kamu juga yaa </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">have fun family timenya</span><span class="font0">, see ya</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Okay see you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;weekend: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;action: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;actornya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;fun: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;imagine: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How about you?: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plan: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Family: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ngeseafood: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Honestly: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefer: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Same with me:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One heart: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have fun ya watching filmnya:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have fun family timenya: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What’s going on?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kita lagi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">discuss assign mentan alysisnya </span><span class="font0">nih</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Bakal di presentasiin nggak ya?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">C: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power point maksudnya?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Iya</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">C: Dan </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">questionnya </span><span class="font0">sekarang bukan dari pihak kita tapi dari pihak yang presentasi A: Harus bener-bener </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">pay attention </span><span class="font0">nih</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B:</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Good luck </span><span class="font0">aja deh buat kita semua</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discuss: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Assignment analysisnya: PHRASE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Questionnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Answer: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pay: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;attention: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Good luck:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">CLAUSE/SENTENCE</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ada f</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">otocopyan </span><span class="font0">buku baruni yang mau comment ya</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wajib nggak?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Enggak sih tapi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">better </span><span class="font0">kamu punya, mau</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Boleh deh. Makasi ya</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">- Fotocopyan: WORD LEVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">- Better: WORD LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sudah pada </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">upload </span><span class="font0">di IMISSU belum?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eh iya belum, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">dead linenya </span><span class="font0">kapan?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A: Besok</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">B: oh, ya?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bu Ayu emang belum?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mau minta tolong P wayan buat</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">uploadin</span><span class="font0">, hehe</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A: Beeh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Upload: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deadlinenya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Uploadin: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eh ni banyak hasil </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">searchingannya </span><span class="font0">yang mana kamu pilih?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yang langsung isi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">discussionnya </span><span class="font0">aja, eh tapi </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">up to you lah </span><span class="font0">mau pilih yang mana B: Ini ada yang bagus nih</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eh iya </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">save in </span><span class="font0">dong nantik mintak ya</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udah</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Searchingannya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussionnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Up to you lah: CLAUSE/SENTENCE LEVEL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Savein: WORD LEVEL</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sekalian </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">bookingin </span><span class="font0">saya hotel nya ya Pak</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oke.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Di Ibis deket malioboro, mau?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">B: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Boleh. Biar deket </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">shoppingnya</span><span class="font0">, haha</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">- Bookingin: WORD LEVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">- Shoppingnya: WORD LEVEL</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reasons of Indoglish Usage in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University-Bali.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A speech is usually present because there is a reason for its use. Regarding the reasons of Indoglish usage in Faculty of Arts, Udayana University-Bali, the data reveals that there are several motives behind the use of the language , namely: to show English proficiency, to facilitate speaking / convey intent, to show the purpose of affirmation, for prestige, because they do not know the correct interpretation in Indonesian, for familiarity, and to express irritation From the observation of the linguistic facts, it is found that the most dominant motive of respondents use the language is in order to facilitate speaking / express their intentions (34.9%) followed by the option of because they do not know the correct interpretation in Indonesian (33.7%). They commented that when they use the original form of a term, the point of their talking will be fully understood by others. Moreover as they do not know how to express their intent appropriately in Indonesian, they choose to use the original form of English instead.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The other dominant reason of the use is for familiarity. As many as 16% of respondents stated that they used Indoglish in their conversations is in order to build closeness, relaxed friendliness and intimacy with the interlocutors. Meanwhile, 10.9% admitted that they used the language to show affirmation of intentions, and 1.2% using the term to express irritation. Interestingly, different from many studies which believe that prestige becomes the dominant motive of the language used, the data of this study shows that only 2,4 % of the respondents agree to it. The motive is in the 5th rank, right after to affirm attention. Surprisingly, none of the respondents acknowledged that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">using their Indoglish in everyday conversation is to show their English language skills.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The impact of using the Indoglish language on the use of Indonesian in the campus of the Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the opinions of the respondents regarding the impact they felt by the use of Indoglish in campus environment the results of the questionnaires analysis show several things as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When respondents were asked about whether Indoglish had a bad impact on the dignity of their Indonesian language, 63.2% stated “no”. They disagree if it is said that the use of Indoglish has negative influences on their Indonesian, and even 83.5% of them argued that they were not bothered by the presence of the language in their conversations and considered the presence of the language as natural. However, not a few of the respondents (35.1%) who did not agree if it is said that the existence of the term Indoglish supports the development of Indonesian. They commented that although its use might not have negative impacts on Indonesian language, its presence cannot be said that it supports the development of Indonesian. There seems a fear that its existence will actually reduce the intensity of the use of native Indonesian vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although most respondents gave a positive response to the use of Indoglish in their everyday conversation, however, it is still necessary to develop a positive attitude towards the use of the correct and appropriate Indonesian. If not, it is feared that it will disrupt the dignity of Indonesian language as many people are no longer loyal to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">prevailing rules of language, but instead turn to other linguistic forms [3]. Besides, if the use of Indoglish is uncontrolled it mighy hamper the optimization of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">dynamics and poise of Indonesian language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark9"></a>IV. </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are some points that can be concluded from the above analysis as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The form of Indoglish linguistic level used in communication between students, lecturers and staff in the Faculty of Cultural Sciences of Udayana University is at 3 different levels, namely at the word level, the level of the phrase and the clause / sentence level</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The reasons of its using is varied, they are: to make it easier to speak / convey intentions, because they do not know the correct interpretation in Indonesian, for intimacy, for affirmative intentions, and to express resentment</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Even though most respondents do not feel the negative impact of the use of Indoglish in their Indonesian communication, however, a positive attitudes towards Indonesian language should be more realized.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>References</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hassal, T. 2010. Fungsidan Status Kata Pinjaman Barat”, dalam Moriyama et al. Geliat Bahasa Selaras Zaman: Perubahan Bahasa-bahasa di Indonesia Pasca Orde Baru. Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;Holmes, J. 2013. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Wellington:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Routledge.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;Rahardi, K. R. &nbsp;2004. Bahasa Indoglish dan Jawanesia dan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dampaknya bagi Permatabatan Bahasa Indonesia. Yogyakarta: Universitas Sanata Darma.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rakhmawati, A., Saddhono, K., Sri, H., Rio, D. 2016. A Phenomenon OfIndoglish at Universities in Indonesia: Breaking Down the Motives from Sociolinguistics Perspective. Surakarta: Universitas Sebelas Maret.</span></p></li></ul>