---
layout: full_article
title: "Language Style in Romantic Movies"
author: "Ni Made Ayu Juliana Dewi, I Nyoman Tri Ediwan, I Made Suastra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humanis: Journal of Arts and Humanities</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 24.2 Mei 2020: 109-116</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p01"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-4, SK No: 23/E/KPT/2019</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Language Style in Romantic Movies</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Made Ayu Juliana Dewi<sup>*</sup>, I Nyoman Tri Ediwan, I Made Suastra </span><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:julianadewi14@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">julianadewi14@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study aims to find out the types of language style in romantic movies and what is the dominant type of language style that found in romantic movies. The data were taken from romantic movie entitled The Last Song (2010) and Midnight Sun (2018). The data were collected by using documentation method by applying qualitative audio-visual materials technique. In analysing the data, this study used both qualitative method and quantitative method and for the presenting data and analysis, formal and informal method were used. The data were analyzed using theory of language style by Joos (1976) and theory of context situation by Hymes (1974). The result shows that all types of language style are found in Romantic movie. In The Last Song (2010) movie could be found frozen style, formal style, consultative style, intimate style and casual style. Meanwhile in Midnight Sun (2018) movie there are only formal style, consultative style, intimate style and casual style. The dominant type found in romantic movies is intimate style, while the least is frozen style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key words</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: Language style, types, romantic movie</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis – jenis gaya Bahasa dalam film – film romantis dan apa jenis gaya bahasa dominan yang ditemukan dalam film – film romantis. Data penelitian ini diambill dari film – film romantis yang berjudul The Last Song (2010) dan Midnight Sun (2018). Data – data tersebut dikumpulkan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan dengan menerapkan Teknik bahan audio-visual kualitatif. Dalam menganalisis data, penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif dan kuantitatif, dan menyajikan analisis data dengan metode formal dan informal. Data dianalisis menggunakan teori gaya bahasa oleh Joos (1976) yang juga teori konteks situasi oleh Hymes (1974). Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa semua jenis gaya bahasa ditemukan dalam film romantis. Dalam film The Last Song (2010) ditemukan gaya beku, gaya formal, gaya konsultatif, gaya intim dan gaya kasual. Sementara itu dalam film Midnight Sun (2018) hanya ditemukan gaya formal, gaya konsultatif, gaya intim dan gaya kasual. Jenis dominan yang ditemukan dalam film romantis adalah gaya intim, sedangkan yang paling sedikit adalah gaya beku.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: gaya bahasa, jenis, film romantis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">109</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Info Article</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11<sup>th</sup> July 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;5<sup>th</sup> May 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Publised &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;31<sup>st</sup> May 2020</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In society there are a lot of language variation occur that makes a different style for each society. In using language, people have different way to express their feeling or thought according to the context and situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes (2013:239) stated that language varies according to its uses as well as its users, according to where it is used and to whom, as well as according to who is using it. The addressees and the context affect our choice of code or variety, whether language, dialect or style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Variation of language can be shown by the fact that speakers can adopt different style of speaking or called language style. According to Waldaugh (2006: 53) you can speak very formally or very informally; your choice being governed by circumstances. Ceremonial occasions almost invariably require very formal speech, public lectures somewhat less formal, casual conversation quite informal, and conversations between intimates on matters of little importance may be extremely informal and casual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are some related researchers have been done previously. Those previous research have their own specification related to the subject and object of the research in order to conduct this research, the writer read some previous researches as the example and literature review.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first article written by Tololiu (2017) entitled Language Styles with Reference to the Movie Ella Enchanted by Gail Carson Levine. The aims of this thesis to identify the language style used by all characters in the movie including the types of language style and also factors influencing the characters to use the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second article written by Jawas (2015) entitled Language Style Used by Fangirls in Japanese Idol Online</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Community. The aims of this study to identify the written language style and its meaning that is used by Fangirls in Japanese Idol online community and another aim is to present jargon used in Japanese idol online community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The third undergraduate thesis that written by Lailah (2015) entitled An Analysis of Language Style used in “Two fast and Two Furious” movie. The aims of this study to describe some kinds of language style and describe when that language style used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The fourth article that written by Simamora (2016) entitled Language Style Found in Indonesian Movies. The aims of this study to identify kinds of language style and tries to find the most dominant language style usage employed on the Five Indonesian movies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another one that written by Jamil and Nasrum (2018) entitled Language Style Used in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and The Cursed Child. The aim of this research is to find out the kind of language styles used by Albus and the social factors that influence his utterances in this novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language style can occur in every conversation and dialogues. Generally, when watch a movie, the focus of the audience only about the story and actors in the movie. But in the other hand, the way actors conveying language and style that the used are often ignored. Thus, it is so interesting to know language style in a movie. There are a lot of movies in different genre in this world and one of them is romantic movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of study above, the problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of Language style are occurs in romantic movies based on Martin Joos’s Theory?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which types of language style are dominant in romantic movies?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out type and describe the type of language style in romantic movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the dominant type of language style in romantic movies.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Methodology is very important and it provides the crucial steps that are used in conducting scientific research. The research method used in this study classified into three parts:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Data source of this study is primary data which is kind of spoken data that were taken from the dialogues between the actors and actress in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Last Song (2010)</span><span class="font2"> and also </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Midnight Sun (2018) </span><span class="font2">movies. Data were taken from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Layar Kaca 21</span><span class="font2"> that is a website that provide all movies that had been played in cinema. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Last Song (2010) and also Midnight Sun (2018)</span><span class="font2"> movies were chosen as the data because these movies so relevant with the study since talk about language style in romantic movie, there are a lot of situation that makes the actress convey their language with different styles according to the context and situation. These movies are so interesting to compare each other since both of them are best romantic movie but in different year.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Data collection is important to determine the data of the study. Method that is used in data collection is documentation method. The data were collected from the conversation in the movies. There were several steps applied in collecting the data: First, the movies and also the subtitles; second, watch the movies while reading the subtitle to make sure the correct words; third, understanding the script and movie; and finally, give mark using highlighter pen</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and coded the utterances in the transcript that include types of the language styles. analysis the language style.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The steps in analyzing data are describing the types of language style that used in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Last Song</span><span class="font2"> (2010) and also </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Midnight Sun</span><span class="font2"> (2018) movies by theory type of language style that proposed by Joos (1976) and supported with theory context of situation by Hymes (1974) in understanding the context of situation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Technique of presenting data were both used formal and informal method, since used words and sentence to explain the analysis but also used table to present the data analysis.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis was done base on the theory type of language style proposed by Joos (1967) and also used theory context of situation proposed by Hymes (1974) as the supported theory.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Types of Language Style</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frozen style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data 1 (The Last Song movie) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(01:07:43 – 01:07:47)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Priest: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Do you, Philip Louis, take this woman, Megan Blakelee, to be your lawfully wedded wife as long as you both shall live?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Philip: I do</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Priest: You may now kiss the bride.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation happened between Priest and Philip at Will’s house garden. The priest said wedding vow of Will’s sister to Philip and Philip as the fiancé of Will’s sister answered it explicitly. This situation was solemn and calm where</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">everyone listened to the wedding vow. The sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Do you, Philip Louis, take this woman, Megan Blakelee, to be your lawfully wedded wife as long as you both shall live?” </span><span class="font2">can be concluded that the priest uses Frozen style because that conversation does in very formal situation and cannot be change. Besides of that, that conversation also lacks of participation so the other hearer does not permit to responses. All of them are suitable with the characteristic of Frozen style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2 (Midnight Sun)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is no frozen style on Midnight Sun</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formal style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data 1 (The Last Song movie) (00:31:26 – 00:32:01) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Steve: Good evening Will: Hello, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Steve: hey. You mind?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Will: yes sir. I understand, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation happened between Stave and Will, they talked face to face at seashore in tense situation that felt by Will. It began when Ronnie met Will who is the volunteer from the aquarium. They were sitting on the beach at evening to guard the turtle eggs from raccoon. They decided to sleep there and suddenly Steve; Ronnie’s father came to visit them and made a line in the middle of them in order to make a limit between them. The conversation above was about Stave that made a line at sand and asked Will was it fine for him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language style that is used by Will to Steve is Formal style it can be seen from the sentences “Hello, sir” and “yes sir. I understand, sir”. That sentences indicate Formal style because it uses sentences structure that shows less intimacy, the speaker are very careful to use choice of words, pronunciation and the speaker also uses the word “sir” to call Steve. Another reason is because that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">conversation happened in Formal situation, it can be seen from the expression of Will and contextual meaning that happened. Will used that language to make it more polite because it was the first time Will meet Ronnie’s dad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2 (Midnight Sun) (00:39:25– 00:39:29) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jack: Is that what you go by? You go by Charlie and not Chuck or Chuckie or C-town?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">No sir, I… just Charlie</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jack: Charlie, okay. You ever been arrested?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">No, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation took place at Katie’s home at the night, Charlie came to Katie’s home to ask permission from Jack as the father of Katie because they were leaving the city together. Jack and Charlie sat together while waiting Kattie for dressing up. Charlie was very nervous when Jack asked about himself. Since it was the first time Charlie met Jack.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language style that is used by Charlie to Jack is Formal style it can be seen from the sentences “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No, sir, I… just Charlie” </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“No sir”. </span><span class="font2">That sentences indicate Formal style because it uses sentences structure that shows less intimacy, the speaker are very careful choice of words, pronunciation and Charlie uses the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“sir” </span><span class="font2">to call. Another reason, that conversation happened in formal situation, it can be seen from the expression of Charlie and contextual meaning that happened. Charlie uses that language to make it more polite because it was the first time Charlie meets Katie’s father.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Consultative Style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data 1 (The Last Song) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(01:07:13 – 01:07:27) Will: Ronnie!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ronnie: Do I look all right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Will: Yeah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ronnie came to Will’s house to attend the wedding of Will's sister. She looked beautiful to make Will fixate on him. Will smiled at Ronnie and Ronnie asked about his appearance that day. This conversation took place in a semi-formal situation and there were two participants who have a conversation namely Ronnie and Will.The conversation above is categorized Consultative style because the sentence “Do I look all right?” shows how Ronnie needs a response from the Will and Will responses it shortly with the word “Yeah” which is suitable with the standard signal of Consultative style. Beside of that this conversation happened in semi-formal situation which is also suitable with the characteristic of Consultative style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2 (Midnight Sun) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(00:19:09– 00:19:14) Charlie: Can I walk with you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Katie: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Um, yeah</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There were two participants in the conversation, Katie and Charlie. This conversation was taking place at Train station. Katie that left her notebook back to station to pick it up. But there Charlie stood while brought Katie’s notebook. Katie was feeling so shy and then Katie told Charlie, she wanted to walk to home. But Charlie who had an interest on Katie wanted to follow Katie so he asked to walked together. The situation was in semiformal situation since it was the first time Charlie met Katie but they tried to talk casually. The conversation above uses Consultative style since the speaker gives suggestion and the addresser response shortly with the standard signals of Consultative style “Um, yeah”. So that it can be conclude this conversation is Consultative style.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intimate style Data 1 (The Last Song) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(00:02:01 – 00:02:03) Jonah : Dad!</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Steve : Hi, Joe-Boy. How are you, man?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation happened when Jonah and his sister and mother arrived at his Father’s home. Jonah who just arrived to called his father. Stave responded and they hugged each other. The situation was very relaxed and warm where they were happy to meet each other after separating long enough. As seen in conversation above, Jonah uses Intimate Style, it can be seen in the word “Dad” that come from extraction of Daddy, Jonah uses that because he has really close relationship, that is between son and father, in other hand Steve also uses Intimate Style, it can be seen at the word “Joe-Boy”. Steve uses that word to call his son which is “Joe” stands for the name of his son, Jonah and “Boy” is used to say that Jonah still child. This conversation indicates Intimate Style because it uses private language, meanwhile this conversation also happened between dad and son that has close relationship, that suitable with the characteristic of Intimate Style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2 (Midnight Sun) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(00:23:36– 00:23:58)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Morgan: Mr.! May I present Katherine Price of Washington.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jack: Wow. Peanut... you look amazing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation was taking place at Katie’s house in relaxed situation when Morgan was trying to dress Katie, started from choosing clothes and also did make up. Katie that never dressed up before looked different and beautiful. That is why when Jack was looking her daughter, he was very happy and was stunned to see the beauty of his daughter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above uses Intimate style, it can be seen from the words “wow peanut… you look</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">amazing”. The word “peanut” here has meaning implicitly. It does not mean a peanut kind of food but it means love and word to show affection. Jack uses that word indicates Intimate style since that adressed to her daughter that means they have close relationship and this word also kind of jargon so that it is suitable for the characteristic of Intimate style.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Casual style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data 1 (The Last Song) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(00:04:06 – 00:04:08) Will: You Ok?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ronnie : I would rather drink my milkshake than wear it, but I’m fine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above happened at seashore when Ronnie was walking at seashore. Will accidentally threw a ball and hit Ronnie’s head when Ronnie held on a strawberry shake that made the drink spilled onto Ronnie’s clothes. Ronnie felt upset but she was trying to calm down. She answered sarcastically when Will asked about her condition after was hit by the ball.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The words that is used by Will for the first time they met are indicates Casual style because it happened in informal situation with less grammar and short sentence. In other hand, language that is used by Will indicates Casual style because it is suitable with the characteristic of Casual style that addressed to a stranger, but it serves to make someone an insider simply by treating someone as an insider.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 2 (Midnight Sun) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(00:09:21– 00:09:27)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie’s friend: What… what are you doing?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie: Dodging another bullet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie’s Friend: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">C’mmon, dude. I</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">t’s our graduation night.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Charlie: I’m not feeling it, boys.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation was taking place when Charlie and his friends were</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">celebrating their graduation but because Charlie still felt bad about his condition that he could not swim again so he decided to go home first. While Charlie’s friends are trying to convince him to stay because that day is their graduation day. This conversation indicates Casual style. Since it is taking place in informal situation at the graduation party. Beside of that, this conversation indicates Casual style because the sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">C’mmon, dude…” </span><span class="font2">kind of slang word from “Come on” and the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“dude” </span><span class="font2">also slang word from the word “brother”. The characteristic of Casual style is using slang word and used in informal situation between close friends.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dominant Type of Language Style</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Types of Language style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Frequency</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Percentage</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Frozen style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Formal style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Consultative</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">19%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">style Intimate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">51%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">style</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Casual style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">21%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">47</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">100%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The table above shows the frequency types of language style in The Last Song (2010) and Midnight sun (2018) that are analyzed. The types of language style in Romantic movies can be seen from the previous analysis that has been completed. In The Last song (2010) movie, all types of language styles exist, ranging from frozen style, formal style, consultative style, intimate style and casual style. But in Midnight Sun (2018) movie not all types of language style are found, only formal style, consultative style, intimate style and casual style, while frozen style is not found. So that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">base on the frequency that are found. It can be concluded that intimate style is the most dominant type in romantic movies since romantic movie generally uses informal language and sharing about affection between the characters.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, it is found that the type of language style of Romantic Movie is Frozen style, Formal style, Consultative style, Casual style, and Intimate style. Meanwhile the types of language style that found in Midnight sun movie (2018) are Formal style, consultative style, Casual style, and Intimate style. The most type used is Intimate style because in romantic movie there were a lot of moments to share feelings with close relationship. So that the most type of language style is Intimate style. On the other hand, the least found is Frozen Style.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Coupland, N. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(1992). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Style:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language variation and identity. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Key Topics in Linguistics</span><span class="font2">. Volume XXXIV, No. 1, Winter, pp 209.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Creswell, J. W. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches Fourth &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Edition</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SAGE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Publications, Singapore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ducrot and Todorov. (1993). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Language Style. </span><span class="font2">Cambridge University, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. (2013). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font2">. Longman, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hymes, Dell (1974). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Foundations of Sociolinguistics: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ethnographic Approach</span><span class="font2">. U of Pennsylvania P, Philadelphia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indra and Hamzah. (2018). E-Journal English Language and Literature. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Language Style of Teenagers Found in Facebook Status</span><span class="font2">. Volume 7, No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jamal, R.F and Nasrum. (2018). Elite: English and Literature Journal. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style Used in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and The Cursed Child</span><span class="font2">. Volume 5, No, 2, pp 190 - 200</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jawas, N.M. (2015). Humanis. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style Used by Fangirls in Japanese Idol Online Community. </span><span class="font2">Volume 16. No. 1. Juli 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Joos, M. (1976). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Five Clocks</span><span class="font2">. Harcourt Brace and World Inc, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Khotari, C.R. (2004). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methodology: &nbsp;&nbsp;Methods and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Techniques.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">International Publishers, New Delhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lailah, N. (2015). An Analysis of Language Style used in “Two fast and Two Furious” Movie (thesis)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">University &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sunan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ampel</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Surabaya, Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rashid, S. K. M., &amp;&nbsp;Zainal, H. (2013). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A contrastive study of language style altawkid between malay and arabic languages.</span><span class="font2"> Volume XXXV, No. 2, December, pp 1925.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Simamora, M. (2016). The Episteme Journal of Linguistics and Literature</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Language Style Found in Indonesian Movies</span><span class="font2">. Volume 3, No. 1, August.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tololiu, Y.G. (2017). Humanis. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Styles with Reference to The Movie Ella Enchanted by Gail Carson Levine</span><span class="font2">. Volume 19, No.1, March.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, R. (2006). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to sociolinguistics (5<sup>th</sup> ed). </span><span class="font2">Blackwell Publishers, Oxford.</span></p>