---
layout: full_article
title: "Literacy Syllabus Evaluation through Needs Analysis of English for Specific Purposes"
author: "Nindya Pradanitra Putri, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<div>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p02"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p02</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-4, SK No: 23/E/KPT/2019</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X Humanis: Journal of Arts and Humanities</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 24.2 Mei 2020: 117-128</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Literacy Syllabus Evaluation through Needs Analysis of English for Specific Purposes</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Nindya Pradanitra Putri<sup>*</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati </span><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:pradanitrap@gmail.com"><span class="font3">pradanitrap@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">], [</span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">With its unique and progressive approach on education, Green School High School Literacy Syllabus shall be evaluated from an ESP perspective and there is currently no research about it. The aim of this study is to find out what language skills the students think they need and help determine if the existing syllabus at Green School has adequately addressed the needs using qualitative-quantitative methods. Through questionnaires, this study uses Hutchinson-Water's theory of target needs and learning needs. After careful evaluation, the findings suggest that the syllabus has not addressed the Needs sufficiently. Out of 86 subskills, there are only 38 subskills addressed sufficiently. In this context-specific study, there are several implications to be drawn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: syllabus, English for Specific Purposes, needs analysis.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Dengan pendekatannya yang unik dan progresif dalam pendidikan, silabus Literasi SMA Green School harus dievaluasi dari perspektif ESP (Bahasa Inggris Khusus) dan saat ini belum ada penelitian mengenai hal tersebut. Tujuan penelitian ini ialah untuk mengetahui kemampuan bahasa apa saja yang murid-murid rasa mereka butuhkan guna membantu menentukan apakah silabus yang sudah ada di Green School telah cukup memadai dalam memenuhi kebutuhan dengan metode kualitatif-kuantitatif. Melalui kuisioner, penelitian ini menggunakan teori Hutchinson-Waters mengenai target needs dan learning needs. Setelah penilaian seksama, hasil temuan menunjukkan bahwa silabus yang ada belum memadai dalam memenuhi kebutuhan. Dari 86 sub indikator kemampuan, hanya 36 di antaranya yang terpenuhi. Dalam konteks penelitian spesifik ini, ada beberapa implikasi yang bisa diambil.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: silabus, Bahasa Inggris Khusus, analisa kebutuhan.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The need for English for Specific Purposes (ESP) has been and still is a major concern. An investigation for further information on ESP issues for effective implementation of ESP, especially in Indonesia, shall be conducted. (Sari, 2018) In the 1960s, ESP practitioners believed their main job</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">was to teach the technical vocabulary of a given field or profession. (Smoak, 2003) but it is not. ESP should be seen simply as an ‘approach’ to teaching or an attitude of mind (Anthony, 1997, p.2) Besides, ESP courses are likely to be designed for adult learners but may be organized for learners at the secondary school level. (Dudley-Evans and St John</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Info Article</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Publised</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font0">19<sup>th</sup> July 2019 5<sup>th</sup>May 2020 31<sup>st</sup> May 2020</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">in Javid, Choudhary Zahid, 2013, p. 140) The difference between General English and ESP is the learners’ awareness of the needs to learn a language. (Ekici, 2003)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A well-written syllabus could provide a doorway into the pedagogical beliefs of the teacher. (Murphy, 2018, p. 1) But what is a syllabus? It is the description of the contents of the program and the order they will be taught. (Richards &amp;&nbsp;Schmidt, 2010, p. 139 &amp;&nbsp;567) To see whether its objectives are being achieved, so that modifications in them can be made if necessary, an evaluation shall be conducted (White, 1971, p. 101) Supporting that idea, in ESP, it is a needs analysis that determines which language skills are most needed by the learners, and the syllabus is designed accordingly. (Rahman, English for Specific Purposes (ESP): A Holistic Review, 2015, p. 1) Needs Analysis (NA) is the systematic collection and analysis of all subjective and objective information necessary to define and validate defensible curriculum purposes that satisfy the language learning requirements of students within the context of particular institutions that influence the learning and teaching situation. (Brown, 1995, pp. 35-36) On that note, an evaluation of the syllabus through Needs Analysis of an ESP course shall be taken as a part of making an appropriate syllabus for an ESP class.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There have been several pieces of research regarding ESP and Needs Analysis. A study was comparing the needs analysis from the students’ point of view and employers’ regarding English usage at the workplace. (Chen, Chang, &amp;&nbsp;Chang, 2016) Another work investigated probable mismatch between skills in textbooks and students’ perception of the needs. (Zohoorian, 2015) A more recent study investigated students’ needs when dealing with and/or using ESP. (Izidi &amp;&nbsp;Zitouni, 2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Having developed their own curriculum, Green School High School has 6-week blocks, with students empowered to make their own choices; it focuses on project-based, experiential, service-learning; and educating for sustainability as their program. Students must acquire 4 credits in English classes (Literacy) to receive the Green School High School Diploma. (Green School, 2018) Literacy is the ability to identify, understand, interpret, create, communicate, and compute, using printed and written materials associated with varying contexts. (UNESCO, 2004, p. 13) The syllabus shall be evaluated from an ESP perspective and there is currently no research about it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This research employed a theory proposed by Hutchinson and Waters (1987) to evaluate the syllabus of Literacy English for Specific Purposes for High School Grade 3 students at Green School Bali. The central aim of this study is to propose an ESP syllabus which would be effective and appropriate to the students’ needs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the endeavor to reach its goal, this study has two questions to be explored as follows: What are the students’ perceptions of their language skills needs?, How does the existing syllabus at Green School address language skills needs?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study aims to: find out what language skills the students think they need, help determine if the existing syllabus at Green School adequately addresses the needs.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">In order to conduct the research, several aspects must be prepared, and, in this section, the research methods are introduced in four sections.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Data for this research is the existing syllabus of the third grade of high school</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of Green School Bali's English class and questionnaires on students' perceptions of what they think they need and a questionnaire on Literacy instructor' perception of what he thinks the students' need. The current number of students in Grade 3 is 37, and to achieve 10% of the population, this study gathered questionnaire responses from 4 student representatives. The questionnaires were conducted through Google Drive. The pilot was conducted from January 30<sup>th</sup>, 2019 to February 6<sup>th</sup>, 2019. After some reviews, the actual questionnaire was then conducted from February 14<sup>th </sup>through February 28<sup>th</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Quantitative-qualitative methods are used in this study. Several techniques are used: first, obtaining the current syllabus for High School Literacy, then obtaining the alumni profile, next, piloting of the Student Needs Assessment Questionnaire. After reviewing the result, the next step was conducting a Needs Assessment Questionnaire for both the students and the teacher.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Since this was a mix of qualitative and quantitative study, the steps of analyzing the data were as follows: first, identifying each data type, classifying data into categories, comparing students' perception with the teacher's, then comparing the findings with the existing syllabus, and lastly, giving recommendations if necessary.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This study presents the data taken from the questionnaire and interviews by informal description. Descriptive method was implemented using the following</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">technique: classifying the types of needs based on the four types of language skills, then classifying the types of skills based on Language Needs Skills and Target Needs Skills, and next was giving the analysis based on the data accordingly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Students’ Perception of Their Language Needs</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading Language Needs Skills</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Subskill &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></h2>
<p><a href="#bookmark20"><span class="font3">I---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------11</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark21"><span class="font3">making inferences about15</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark22"><span class="font3">critically analyzing and17</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">making thematic</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">connections to the literary device</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark23"><span class="font3">make connections between17</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">elements of style, form, and content</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark24"><span class="font3">assessing the author's intent18</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">and the reader's</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">interpretation</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark25"><span class="font3">self-selecting reading19</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">strategies to improve</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">comprehension skills</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wants for reading for academic needs are self-selecting reading strategies to improve comprehension skills, assessing author's intent and reader's interpretation, critically analyzing and making thematic connections to the literary device, and making connections between elements of style, form, and content. Whereas the Necessities are making inferences about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact, self-selecting reading strategies to improve comprehension skills, critically</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">analyzing and making thematic connections to the literary device, and making connections between elements of style, form, and content.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Writing Language Needs Skills</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">forming questions on connections between elements of style, form, and content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">taking the risk in style and structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">creatively applying stylistic structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">back up original claims</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">communicate ideas effectively</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">self-selecting writing strategies and tools to improve grammar, structure, and style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">asking critical questions about language and power</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Wants for writing for academic needs are to communicate ideas effectively, self-selecting writing strategies and tools to improve grammar, structure, and style, asking critical questions about language and power, forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact, and forming questions on connections between elements of style, form, and content. Whereas all sub-skills are considered Necessities.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">c. Speaking Language Needs Skills</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values, embedded in a text, and impact</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">forming questions on connections between elements of style, form, and content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">taking the risk in style and structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">creatively applying stylistic structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">back up original claims</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">communicate ideas effectively</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">asking critical questions about language and power</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">engaging in discussions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">making presentations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">criticizing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Wants of speaking for academic studies are engaging in discussions, communicating ideas effectively, criticizing, forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact, and lastly creatively applying stylistic structure. The Necessities of speaking for academic studies are backing up original claims, communicating ideas effectively, asking critical questions about language and power, forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact, forming questions on connections between elements of style, form, and content, engaging in discussions, making presentations, and criticizing.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">d. Listening Language Needs Skills</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">dictionary entries</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">memos</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">obtaining gist</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">instruction booklets</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">obtaining specific information</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">legal documents</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">19</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">listening for summarizing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">the agenda of a meeting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">recognizing how ideas are represented</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">the minutes of a meeting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">newsletter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">deducing arguments made in debates</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">catalogs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">extracting the information</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">not explicitly stated</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Wants are reading legal documents,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">recognizing the speaker’s attitude</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">reading maps, &nbsp;and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">reading &nbsp;email</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">messages. All reading</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">sub-skills are</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">regarded as Necessities for target</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Wants of listening for</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">academic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">situation.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">studies &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;obtaining</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">specific</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">f. Writing Target Needs Skills</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">information, recognizing the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">speaker’s</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">attitude, recognizing how</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">ideas are</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">represented, and deducing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">arguments</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">business letters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">made in debates. Necessities of listening</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">for academic studies are</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">all seven</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">memos</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">subskills.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">minutes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">e. Reading Target Needs Skills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">agendas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">notices</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">academic texts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">email messages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">manuals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">notes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">newspapers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">reports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">business letters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">itineraries</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">magazines/periodicals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">commentaries</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">reports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">legal documents</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">user manuals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">maps</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">email messages</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">brochures</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">leaflets</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">brochures</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wants are writing legal documents and writing e-mail messages. All writing sub-skills are regarded as Necessities for target situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speaking Target Needs Skills</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">with native speakers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">with non-native speakers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">with teachers/lecturers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">with colleagues</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">with customers/clients</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">with government officials</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in the office</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in court</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in science labs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">at the airports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in transportation contexts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in social settings</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Wants for speaking for target situation are speaking in court, speaking with teachers/lecturers, speaking with colleagues, speaking with government officials, speaking at the airport, speaking in transportation contexts, and speaking in social settings. All speaking sub-skills are regarded as Necessities for target situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Listening Target Needs Skills</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></h2>
<p><a href="#bookmark28"><span class="font3">I---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------11</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark29"><span class="font3">native speakers17</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark30"><span class="font3">non-native speakers18</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">the radio &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">TV programs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">announcements at different places</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">films</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">presentations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">meetings</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">19</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">conferences</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">19</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">seminars</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">discussions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">conversations on the phone</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">face-to-face conversations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">19</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Wants for listening for target situation are listening to discussions, listening to meetings, listening to conferences, listening to face-to-face conversations, listening to non-native speakers, listening to conversations on the phone, listening to native speakers, and listening to seminars. All listening sub-skills are regarded as Necessities for target situations.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>How the Curriculum Addresses the</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Students’ Language Needs</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading Language Needs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskill &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">making inferences about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">critically analyzing and making thematic connections to the literary device</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">make connections between elements of style, form, and content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">assessing the author's intent and the reader's interpretation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">self-selecting reading strategies to improve comprehension skills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in making inferences about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact, assessing author's intent and reader's interpretation, and self-selecting reading strategies to improve comprehension skills compared to the other two subskills among five of them. After looking at the Wants, the Necessities, and the students' perception of their proficiency, for reading for academic needs, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently. The Lacks are critically analyzing and making thematic connections to literary device and making connections between elements of style, form, and content.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Writing Language Needs</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></h2>
<p><a href="#bookmark36"><span class="font3">I---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------11</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark37"><span class="font3">forming critical questions15</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">about voice, purpose, values</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">embedded in a text, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">impact</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark38"><span class="font3">forming questions on13</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">connections between elements</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of style, form, and content</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark39"><span class="font3">taking the risk in style and11</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">structure</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark40"><span class="font3">creatively applying stylistic11</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">structure</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark41"><span class="font3">back up original claims12</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark42"><span class="font3">communicate ideas11</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">effectively</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark43"><span class="font3">self-selecting writing13</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">strategies and tools to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">improve grammar, structure,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and style</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">asking critical questions about 13 language and power</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in forming critical questions about voice, purpose, values embedded in a text, and impact. After looking at the Necessities and the students’ perception of their proficiency, for writing for academic needs, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently yet. The Lacks are forming questions on connection between elements of style, form, and content, taking risk in style and structure, creatively applying stylistic structure, backing up original claims, communicating ideas effectively, selfselecting writing strategies and tools to improve grammar, structure, and style, and lastly, asking critical questions about language and power.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">c. Speaking Language Needs</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">connections between elements of style, form, and content.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">forming critical questions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">about voice, purpose, values,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">embedded in a text, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">impact</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">d. Listening Language Needs</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">obtaining gist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">forming questions on &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">connections between elements of style, form, and content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">obtaining specific information &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">listening for summarizing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">taking the risk in style and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">recognizing how ideas are &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">represented</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">creatively applying stylistic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">structure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">deducing arguments made in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">debates</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">back up original claims &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">extracting the information not &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">communicate ideas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">effectively</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">explicitly stated</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">recognizing the speaker’s &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">asking critical questions about &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">language and power</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">attitude</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">engaging in discussions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in engaging in discussions. After looking at</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">making presentations &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">the Necessities and</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">criticizing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">the students' perception of their proficiency, for listening for academic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in engaging in discussions. After looking at the Necessities and the students' perception of their proficiency, for speaking for academic needs, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently yet. Even though five of the Necessities seemed to be addressed sufficiently, the students have not felt proficient enough in backing up original claims, asking critical questions about language and power, and in forming questions on connections between elements of style, form, and content. The Lacks are then backing up original claims, asking critical questions about language and power, and informing questions on</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">needs, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently yet. There is only one Necessity that has not been properly addressed, which is recognizing the speaker's &nbsp;&nbsp;attitude. &nbsp;&nbsp;Lack &nbsp;&nbsp;is &nbsp;&nbsp;then</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">recognizing the speaker's attitude.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e. Reading Target Needs</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">academic texts &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">manuals &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">newspapers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">business letters &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">magazines/periodicals &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">reports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">maps</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">emaill messages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">brochures</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">dictionary entries</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">memos</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">instruction booklets</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">legal documents</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">the agenda of a meeting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">the minutes of a meeting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">newsletter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">catalogues &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in reading memos. After looking at the Necessities and the students' perception of their proficiency, for reading for target situation, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently yet. There is only one Necessity seemed to be addressed sufficiently, reading memos. The students have not felt proficient enough in sixteen subskills. The Lacks are reading academic texts, reading manuals, reading newspapers, reading business letters, reading magazines/periodicals, reading reports, reading maps, reading email messages, reading brochures, reading dictionary entries, reading instruction booklets, reading legal documents, reading the agenda of a meeting, reading the minutes of a meeting, reading newsletter, and in reading catalogues.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">f. Writing Target Needs</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Points</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">business letters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">memos</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">minutes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">agendas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">notices</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">email messages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">14</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">notes &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">reports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">itineraries</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">commentaries</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">legal documents</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">user manuals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">brochures</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">leaflets</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in writing reports. After looking at the Necessities and the students’ perception of their proficiency, for writing for target situation, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently yet. Even though writing reports seemed to be addressed sufficiently, the students have not felt proficient enough in the rest fifteen subskills. The Lacks are writing business letters, writing memos, writing minutes, writing agendas, writing notices, writing email messages, writing notes, writing itineraries, writing commentaries, writing legal documents, writing user manuals, writing brochures, and writing leaflets.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speaking Target Needs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark44"><span class="font3">I---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------11</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark45"><span class="font3">with native speakers16</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Listening Target Needs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subskills &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Points</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark18"><span class="font3">I---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------11</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark46"><span class="font3">native speakers19</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark47"><span class="font3">with non-native speakers17</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark48"><span class="font3">with teachers/lecturers18</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark49"><span class="font3">non-native speakers19</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark50"><span class="font3">the radio17</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark51"><span class="font3">with colleagues17</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark52"><span class="font3">with customers/clients18</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark53"><span class="font3">with government officials13</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark54"><span class="font3">in the office14</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">in court &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">in science labs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">13</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">at the airports</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in transportation contexts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">in social settings</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The students are most proficient in speaking with teachers/lecturers. After looking at the Necessities and the students’ perception of their proficiency, for speaking for target situation, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently just yet. Even though seven out of twelve Necessities seemed to be addressed already sufficiently, the students have not felt proficient enough in five subskills. The Lacks are then speaking with government officials, speaking in the office, speaking in court, speaking in science labs, and speaking at the airports.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TV programs &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;18</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">announcements at different &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">places</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">films &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">presentations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">meetings</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">conferences</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">seminars</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">discussions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">19</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">conversations on the phone</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">face-to-face conversations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The students are equally most proficient in listening to native speakers, listening to non-native speakers, and listening to discussions. After looking at the Necessities and the students' perception of their proficiency, for listening for the target situation, the syllabus has not addressed it sufficiently just yet. Even though there is only one subskill seemed to be not addressed sufficiently. Lack is listening to announcements at different places.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">All in all, the findings of the questionnaires suggest that the syllabus has not addressed the Needs sufficiently. Out of 86 subskills, there are only 38 sub-skills addressed sufficiently. The Needs Analysis should have the aim of informing and be able to inform decision-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">making on all other aspects of syllabus development, including the resetting and adjustment of its objectives and aims if needed. While this study is highly context-specific, broader implications can be drawn from it before introducing those related to the immediate context. One implication is the importance of conducting a needs analysis prior to teaching a class. Another implication could be selecting the objectives for a focused set of definite, realistic aims.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark55"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark56"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Anthony, L. (1997, January). English for Specific Purposes: What Does It Mean? Why is It Different? Tokyo, Japan: &nbsp;Waseda University. On-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">CUE. Vol. 5., No. 3., pp. 9-10</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Brown, J. D. (1995). The Elements of Language &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Curriculum: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Systematic Approach to Program Development. New York: Heinle &amp;&nbsp;Heinle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chen, I.-J., Chang, Y.-H., &amp;&nbsp;Chang, W.-H. (2016). I Learn What I Need: Needs Analysis of English Learning in Taiwan. Universal Journal of Educational Research Vol. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4(1), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pp. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1-5.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doi:10.13189/ujer.2016.040101</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dudley-Evans and St. John in Javid, Choudhary Zahid. (2013, October). English for Specific Purposes: Its Definition, Characteristics, Scope, and Purpose. European Journal of Scientific Research, Vol. 112(1), pp. 138-151. Retrieved June 2018, from </span><a href="http://www.europeanjournalofscientificresearch.com/"><span class="font3">http://www.europeanjournalofscientificresearch.com/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ekici, N. (2003). A Needs Assessment Study on English Language Needs of the Tour Guidance Students of Faculty of Applied Sciences at Baskent University: A Case Study. Ankara: &nbsp;Middle East Technical</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Green School Bali. (2018, November 21). About. Retrieved from Green School:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.greenschool.org/about/"><span class="font3">https://www.greenschool.org/about/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hutchinson, T., &amp;&nbsp;Waters, A. (1984). English for Specific Purposes: A Learning- Centred Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Izidi, R., &amp;&nbsp;Zitouni, M. (2017, June). ESP Needs Analysis: the Case of Mechanical Engineering Students at the University of Sciences and Technology, Oran U.S.T.O. Revue des Etudes Humaines et sociales -B/Littérature et Philosophie No. 18, pp. 16-25. DOI: 10.33858/0500000-018-054</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Murphy, R. S. (2018). The Concept of Syllabus Design and Curriculum Development: A Look at Five Major Syllabus Designs. In A. Faravani, M. Zeraatpishe, M. Azarnoosh, &amp;&nbsp;H. R. Kargozari (Eds.), Issues in Syllabus Design (Vol. 6, p. 1). Rotterdam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rahman, M. (2015). English for Specific Purposes (ESP): &nbsp;&nbsp;A Holistic</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Review. Universal Journal of Educational Research Vol. 3.1, pp. 24-31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DOI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">10.13189/ujer.2015.030104</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Richards, J. C., &amp;&nbsp;Schmidt, R. (2010). Longman Dictionary of Language</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Teaching and Applied Linguistics. New York: Pearson Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sari, Farnia. (2019, July). The Issues of ESP Instruction for University Level in Indonesia. Global Expert Jurnal Bahasa dan Sastra, Vol. 7 (1), pp. 1-6</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Smoak, R. (2003, April). What is English for Specific Purposes? English Teaching Forum, Vol. 41 (2), pp. 22-27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">UNESCO. (2004). The Plurality of Literacy and its Implications for Policies and Programmes: Position Paper. Paris: &nbsp;&nbsp;United Nations</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">White, J. P. (1971). The Concept of Curriculum Evaluation. Journal of Curriculum Studies, Vol. 3 (2), pp. 101-112.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">DOI: 10.1080/0022027710030202</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Zohoorian, Z. (2015, January). A Needs Analysis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Approach: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Investigation of Needs in an EAP Context. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, Vol. 5(1), pp. 58-65. Retrieved May 12, 2018</span></p>