---
layout: full_article
title: "Natural Conservation Base on Management of Sacred Cultural Landscape of Catur Angga Batukaru Temple in Tabanan-Bali"
author: "I Nyoman Wardi"
categories: blje
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/blje/full-71768 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/blje/id-71768"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/blje/full-71768"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Jurnal Bumi Lestari, Volume 20, Nomor 01, Tahun 2020, Halaman 31-41</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Natural Conservation Base on Management of Sacred Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Batukaru Temple in</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>Tabanan-Bali</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>I Nyoman Wardi <sup>a</sup>*</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>a</sup> Departement of Archaeology Faculty of Arts, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali-Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">*Email: </span><a href="mailto:wardiecoculture@gmail.com"><span class="font1">wardiecoculture@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Diterima (received) 13 Desember 2019; disetujui (accepted) 1 Februari 2020; tersedia secara online (available online) 1 Februari 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The study aimed to discuss the characteristic and environmental wisdom of the sacred Cultural Landscape of Catur Angga Batukaru temples in the conservation of natural resources in the regency of Tabanan-Bali. To reveal the research problems, data collection was conducted through observation, in-depth interview, and document study. The collected data were analyzed by the descriptive-qualitative technique. The results showed the structure of cultural landscape of Catur Angga Batukaru Temple consists of five cultural heritages as single vortices (sacred cultural landscape). The Batukaru Temple as a center with two main segments as subordinates, on west side, consists of Muncaksari and Tambawaras Temple, and on east side, consists of Petali and Besi Kalung Temple. Each unit managed by local communities generally comes from the Bali Age people. The management consists of the pengempon’s group temple, the institution of traditional villages, and subak's in the surrounding. As a living monument (temple), functioned as a sacred place to invoke safety, agricultural fertility, health, peace, and political stability. Similarly, through myth, ritual, and emission values the sanctity of the magical-religious, its cultural landscape located in the upstream region indirectly contribute very important to the conservation of the natural environment. As well as, the ritual uniqueness and aesthetic architectural values and beauty of the natural environment are so potential to be developed as a tourist attraction. In the modern era, in environmental degradation, it's very important to improve the welfare of local communities and conserving the natural environment in the context of sustainable development in Tabanan-Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sacred cultural landscape; catur angga batukaru; management; conservation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk membahas karakteristik dan kearifan lingkungan dari Lanskap Budaya sakral Pura Catur Angga Batukaru dalam konservasi sumber daya alam di Kabupaten Tabanan-Bali. Untuk mengungkap masalah penelitian, pengumpulan data dilakukan melalui observasi, wawancara mendalam, dan studi dokumen. Data yang terkumpul dianalisis dengan teknik deskriptif kualitatif. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan struktur lanskap budaya Pura Catur Angga Batukaru terdiri dari lima warisan budaya sebagai pusaran tunggal (lanskap budaya sakral). Pura Batukaru sebagai pusat dengan dua ruas utama sebagai bawahannya, di sisi barat terdiri dari Pura Muncaksari dan Tambawaras, dan di sisi timur terdiri dari Pura Petali dan Besi Kalung. Setiap unit yang dikelola oleh masyarakat lokal umumnya berasal dari masyarakat Bali Age. Pengelolanya terdiri dari kelompok pengempon pura, kelembagaan desa adat, dan subak di sekitarnya. Sebagai monumen hidup (pura), difungsikan sebagai tempat suci untuk memohon keselamatan, kesuburan pertanian, kesehatan, perdamaian, dan stabilitas politik. Demikian pula melalui mitos, ritual, dan nilai emisi kesucian magis-religius, lanskap budayanya yang berada di kawasan hulu secara tidak langsung memberikan kontribusi yang sangat penting bagi kelestarian lingkungan alam. Selain itu, keunikan ritual dan nilai estetika arsitektur serta keindahan lingkungan alam sangat potensial untuk dikembangkan sebagai daya tarik wisata. Di era modern, dalam degradasi lingkungan, sangat penting untuk meningkatkan kesejahteraan masyarakat lokal dan melestarikan lingkungan alam dalam rangka pembangunan berkelanjutan di Tabanan-Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/blje.2020.v20.i01.p31"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/blje.2020.v20.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">© 2019 by the authors; Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Published under licence by Udayana University, Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lanskap budaya sakral; catur angga batukaru; pengelolaan; konservasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The Batukaru Temple heritage is one of Kahyangan Jagat (state temple) in the context of cosmological structure of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nawa Sangha</span><span class="font2"> in Bali Island (nine magical points of Bali coordinate). The Batukaru temple is situated in the middle of the protected forest of Mount Batukaru with area ±11899.32 ha (Provincial Government of Bali, 2009). Batukaru temple is located in the southern foothills of Mount Batukaru at an altitude of 833 meters above sea level, i.e. including the upstream regions (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaja</span><span class="font2">) of Wongaya Gede Village, District of Penebel, Tabanan Regency, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru has a close relationship with four other temples, the Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Petali, and Besi Kalung Temple which are also located in the upstream region which include the District of Penebel Tabanan Regency. The structure of Batukaru Temple relationship with four other temples called Jajar Kemiri Batukaru Temple (Candlenut Row of Batukaru Temple) or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple have an important role for local communities in relation to preserving the environment (forest) and its relation with the activity of cultivation of agricultural crops, especially paddy fields by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> institution (farmers).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to public view in Bali (Indonesia), Tabanan known as the rice granary of Bali. The soil is very fertile which formed from layers of volcanic ash and tuff, in particular on the activities of Ancient Buyan-Bratan Volcano and Mount Batur at approximately 22,000-1,500 BC (Hadiwidjojyo, Purbo, M.M., 1978). Tropical climate with high rainfall (3,038 mm/year) makes the presence of water in the Tabanan regency is relatively abundant with two lakes (Tamblingan and Bratan Lake) as the main source of water for irrigated agriculture (rice fields). In addition to the four main temples (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2">), the Batukaru Temple heritage also have a cosmic magical relationship with lake temple called Ulun Danu Tamblingan (located near the upstream, i.e. the direction to the northeast of Batukaru), and the Temple of the Sea, the Pakendungan Temple / Tanah Lot Temple which situated in the southern part, exactly at Village of Beraban – District of Kediri –Tabanan Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Since June 29<sup>th</sup>, 2012, in Saint Peterburg-the Russian Federation, Cultural Landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga </span><span class="font2">Batukaru Temple designated by UNESCO as part of world cultural heritage in the unity of The Cultural Landscape of Bali Province: the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> system as a manifestation of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> Philosophy (Dinas Kebudayaan Provinsi Bali, 2013: 7). World heritage status has a positive impact on tourist visiting in the region whose numbers are likely to increase, particularly in the area of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> Rice-Terrace of Jatiluwih Village and Cultural Heritage of Batukaru Temple. It is very important to improve the life quality and welfare of local communities. On the other hand, the management of Cultural Landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple is still not optimal (there are still many obstacles), mainly related to the attention of the central government (Jakarta-Indonesia) and coordination among stakeholders (public/communities and government) at the local level. This paper is aimed to discuss the characteristic and environmental wisdom of the sacred Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple in the conservation of natural resources in the regency of Tabanan - Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To reveal the research problem, a data collection and analysis technique was carried out. Data collection was carried out with literature / document studies, observation / survey, and interview (in-depth interview). The collected data were analyzed descriptive-qualitatively using Structural-Functional and Deep Ecology theoretical approaches. Through data analysis and interpretation, it is expected to reveal the values of cultural and environmental wisdom so that they can be implemented in the management of the World Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple in Tabanan-Bali for sustainable development.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Characteristic of the Cultural Landscape of Catur Angga Batukaru Temple</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the context of cosmological structure of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sad-Kahyangan</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2">) Bali Island, according to source of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Babad Pasek</span><span class="font2"> (manuscript), cultural heritage Batukaru Temple (Batukau) as a representation of cosmic point which located at the coordinate of the Northwest. In the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Babad Pasek </span><span class="font2">noted, the God who enthrones Batukaru Temple namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> (The God of Trees) (Budiastra, and Wardha, 1989). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> is another name to refer to the God or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara Pucak Kedaton</span><span class="font2"> who enthrones at the top of Mount Batukaru (1250 m above sea level). According to Jero Mangku Gede Batukaru (temple priest), the mention of the name of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> for local people deemed taboo (very sacred/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pingit</span><span class="font2">). Meanwhile in cosmological of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nawa Sangha</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pangider Bhuwana</span><span class="font2">) of Hinduism conception in Bali, the god who enthrones on coordinate of Northwest point, namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewa Sangkara</span><span class="font2">. In the context of color representation, Lord Ruler of cosmic point of Northwestern part using </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">willis</span><span class="font2"> color (green). This name is very suitable as the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> (the God of Threes/Mount) because it is associated with vegetation (forest). The name </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh </span><span class="font2">(The God of Threes/Mount) clearly indicate the name of the native Balinese who is very old (pre-Hindu). It can be interpreted that the appearance of the name </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> is original name (local God) which is a symptom that influence of Hinduism in Bali on that time is not strong yet. When the influence of Hinduism culture and religious belief system get strong, then the names of Hindu’s Gods began to be applied in the local cosmological system, including </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sangkara</span><span class="font2"> God as another name for the God of Mount Batukaru (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2">). Aside from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Babad Pasek</span><span class="font2"> source which mentioned above, the other traditional historical sources (Chronicle), is also stated that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru serves as a compass direction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lokapala</span><span class="font2"> in the West space with the God figure that Mahadeva with color representation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jenar</span><span class="font2"> (yellow). Therefore, in the context of cosmological Jagat Bali (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pangider Bhuwana </span><span class="font2">Bali) the possibility of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru has a dual function, namely on the one hand as a god of the cosmos point of the West space (West world), and on the other side as well as the God of the cosmos of the Northwest point. The basic argument is analogous to the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Besakih Temple (Centre of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Bali/Mother Temple), that doubles in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pangider Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> Bali i.e. as the ruler of the Northeast and as a representation of the God Çiwa who enthrones on the cosmic point in the middle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cultural landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple now covers 9 official villages and 15 subak organizations with area ± 2,409 ha of rice field. Those villages, namely: Village of Wongaya Gede, Tengkudak, Jatiluwih, Mangesta, Penatahan, Sangketan, Tegallinggah, Rejasa, and Village of Pesagi. Meanwhile </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> group included herein, namely: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> Bedugul, Tengkudak, Wongaya Betan, Jatiluwih, Soka, Kedampal, Keloncing, Penatahan, Pesagi, Piak, Piling, Puakan, Sangketan, Tegallinggah, and Subak Rejasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the context of the magical cosmology of Bali island, the position and status of Pura Batukaru classified as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> (state temple), while the fourth cultural heritages or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga </span><span class="font2">(Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Pucak Petali and Besi Kalung Temple) classified as Dang Kahyangan Temple. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> means that Batukaru Temple as one of the large temple (state temple) in the system of cosmology </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nawa-Sangha</span><span class="font2"> of Bali Island (9 magical points of Bali coordinates) as a holy place (temple) to worship the Supreme God (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Widhi</span><span class="font2">) with all its manifestations that worshiped by all Hindu’s communities in Indonesia with regardless of their social status (four castes/catur </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kasta</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Wesya, Sudra</span><span class="font2">). Meanwhile, the status of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dang Kahyangan</span><span class="font2"> means that the temple as a place of worship of God (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Widhi</span><span class="font2">) with all its manifestations that worshiped by the public communities (Bali) and has ever been visited, used, and/or constructed in the practice of religious life by the high priest/saint (Pedanda Sakti Wawu Rawuh/Danghyang Dwijendra, Mpu Kuturan, Mpu Bharadah, Danghyang Astapaka, and other high priest). Those Supreme Priests generally derived from Java (Hindu-Javanese).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the context of magical cosmic, on the fourth temples (Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Pucak Petali and Besi Kalung) are regarded as holy place of the Bala Putra as Batukaru’s God family (genealogy</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">relationship). Implicitly this means, that the four Gods in the temples are regarded as a representation of the power of Batukaru God. According of local perspective, the cosmic structure of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga </span><span class="font2">Batukaru Temple perceived as a country or cosmic empire. In carrying out its duties and functions, Bhatara Pucak Kedaton (Sang Hyang Tumuwuh) which enthrones at the top of Mount Batukaru regarded as a king. Meanwhile, four other gods of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> (Bhatara Jajar Kemiri of Batukaru Temple) are helping to operate the government (King) to maintain the stability and the cosmic order, the securitysafety (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kerahayuan</span><span class="font2">), justice, prosperity and welfare of the human world and his environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to the information (informants: Jero Mangku Gede Batukaru, the Mangku Catur Angga, Mangku Pura Pakerisan, Chairman of the Committee for Pangempon Pura Besi Kalung October 12-15<sup>th</sup>, 2015), detail of the duties and functions of the Gods who sited in the temples of Jajar Kemiri Batukaru (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2">), namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mucaksari Temple as center of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sarin Bhumi</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sari Bhuwana</span><span class="font2">) or central welfare (economic aspects of farming) of local communities or also called as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bedugul Gumi/Jagat</span><span class="font2">;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tambawaras Temple, tamba means medicines, and duties which linked to preserve and maintain public health and the environment, particularly with farm life (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">) in the context of the control and eradication of pests and plant diseases (especially of rice), and health in rural community life;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Luhur Petali Temple, analogous to a strap to maintain and preserve the unity and integrity of people in bhumi/earth (the unification of the universe), and the source of justice (in analogy with the judge) in providing protection and distribute welfare to the public at large; and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Besi Kalung Temple, in charge of keeping and maintaining the security sector (military), which capture and handcuff (for those who have committed crimes) offenders. In the context of farm life (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara</span><span class="font2"> sited at Besi Kalung Temple also often requested a grace for the fertility of rice plants and other agricultural crops, for the prosperity and welfare of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> communities and surrounding of rural communities.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to local belief, the scope of the security tasks carried by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara</span><span class="font2"> Besi Kalung Temple, i.e. not only in the regency of Tabanan or Bali, but within the scope of the Unitary Republic of Indonesia. One shrine (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palinggih</span><span class="font2">) at inner yard as a holiest yard (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jeroan</span><span class="font2">), which is very sacred, save a phallus artifact (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga</span><span class="font2">).The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga</span><span class="font2"> which is located on a main shrine (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Palinggih Agung</span><span class="font2">) of Besi Kalung Temple is functioned as a medium for Çiwa worship. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Palinggih</span><span class="font2"> shaped in stone throne (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bebaturan</span><span class="font2">) with three terraces and has three room partitions (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">rong tiga</span><span class="font2">) as a seat for worshiping Çiwa God as a representation of three embodiments of Çiwa, namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Çiwa-Sada Çiwa-Parama Çiwa</span><span class="font2">. According to the stakeholders of local and public confidence it is stated that sometimes on its place (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yoni</span><span class="font2">), magically </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga</span><span class="font2"> moves in a certain direction, and the movement will bring certain signs related to issues of national security and public prosperity or natural disaster. Based on the experience that has ever happened, the local people believe that if stone phallus statue moves toward Southwest and Northwest, generally interpreted will bring danger signs of natural disasters or disasters caused by man himself (wars and riots) or natural disaster. According to information from stakeholders and community’s leaders, since the shrine (temple) has strategic function in the field of security, it is often a numbers of officials of state government (governor, regents) and a member of the council (legislative) coming to worship the God of Çiwa which symbolized in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga</span><span class="font2"> Statue of stone terrace shrine of Besi Kalung Temple. The purposes are begging the government and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jagat Bali</span><span class="font2"> (Bali Island) and generally Indonesia in conditions of safety and well-being (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">rahayu</span><span class="font2">) (informants: Jero Mangku Pura Gede Besi Kalung and I Ketut Martana / Chairman of Temple Organization, October 14<sup>th</sup>, 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis of the characteristic of cosmology structure of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple (Batukaru, Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Luhur Pucak Petali, and Besi Kalung Temple) showed a symptom that the structure of the cultural landscape is based on the pattern of the relationship of four and one in the middle. The formation pattern of relationships in multiples of four is quite often found in a variety of traditional cultural expressions in Bali. For example in the ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mecaru</span><span class="font2">/sacrificial rite (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bhuta yadnya: kangin</span><span class="font2"> or eastward/white; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kelod</span><span class="font2"> or southward/red; westernward/yellow; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaje</span><span class="font2"> or northward/black, and in the middle/mixing of those four colors/brumbun) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dewa yadnya</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">banten catur</span><span class="font2">/catur offering), and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">layout pattern of the traditional village with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">catus pata</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">catus = catuh = catur</span><span class="font2"> = four) or intersection as a center grand cosmic village or kingdom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Similar views were also raised by J.L Swellengrebel and R Goris in a book entitled: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studies in Bali Life, Thoughts, and Ritual</span><span class="font2"> (1960). According to JL Swellengrebel, the cosmic pattern in Balinese culture, such as the concept </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaje-kelod</span><span class="font2"> (mountain-sea) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kangin-kauh</span><span class="font2"> (east-west), and combinations </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaje-kangin</span><span class="font2"> (north-east), and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kelod-kauh</span><span class="font2"> (south-west) holds important role in the cosmic system of bipartite division (division dichotomies or binary oppositions) and tripartite (three division or trichotomy). In the context of sacred values, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaje</span><span class="font2"> (mountain) can be categorized by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kangin</span><span class="font2"> (east), as well </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kauh</span><span class="font2"> (west) can be categorized by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kelod</span><span class="font2"> (sea). In addition to the rules of cosmic (cosmic order) in Bali is also known for the distribution pattern of four (fourfold pattern). In the center is a synthesis and represents the union of a higher or a multiple system is also counted four to five singles (four surround a single in the middle). The division of four or five divisions are always in the horizontal size (horizontal plane). Based on the cultural phenomenon in Bali and the illustration above, then R. Goris (in Swellengrebel, J.L., 1960) stated his opinion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“In my opinion the color division, possibly even linked with a corresponding distribution over the directions, is older than Hinduism. The four-five systems (four around the center) is also preHindu. That later Hinduism, with its pantheon, its lokapala (guardian of directions), and its colors, could easily link up to it no one will deny. It was close kinship in religious thinking that made various peoples in Indonesia such good soil, such a well-prepared field for several forms or earlier Hinduism”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the above statement, explicitly R. Goris viewed that the concept of fourfold pattern (division of four) or division five, four around which surrounds one (single) in the middle, an original concept or pattern autochthonic that had existed before the entry of Hinduism culture in Bali. That is the concept of division four in the cosmic pattern in Bali is a concept that has been known in the prehistoric era Indonesia as a local cultural identity (Bali). In addition, the strong orientation impression cosmology of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kaje</span><span class="font2"> (mountain) - </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kelod</span><span class="font2"> (sea/ocean) also showed symptoms of a prehistoric civilization, especially as the cultural identity of Austronesian’s speakers. The similarity in the mindset (Bali/Indonesia-India) it facilitates the entry of the cultural influence of Hindu (India) to Bali (Indonesia). Thus, then a cultural acculturation happened which enriching the local culture, such as the division of the four sacred zones, known in the local culture (pre-Hindu) then combined with the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lokapala</span><span class="font2"> (guardian deity of wind direction) with each colors in Hinduism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thus, it can be interpreted, that the characteristic of cosmological structure of Cultural Landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple tend to be guided by the basic conception of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> (four division of world) or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> (world likes a lotus blossom). The analogy of structure of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> can be assumed as a mandala in the form of a lotus flower, the four of flower’s petals (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">caturdala</span><span class="font2">) on a side (east-south-west-north) surrounding (protect) the essence of the flower in the middle. Even with the mention of the one of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Luhur Batukaru Temple called Pucak Petali (Bali’s language: petali means cosmic-magical’s string) can be interpreted, that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jajar Kemiri</span><span class="font2"> (Pecan-Row) of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru analogous to the conception of Foating </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana Ngelayang</span><span class="font2">). The conception of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana Nglayang</span><span class="font2"> is a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mandala </span><span class="font2">which presupposes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple as a lotus flower floating while rotating to the circumambulation (clockwise) and associated (dependent) with the upper world (heaven world/world of deity). Thus, it can be said, that the magical cosmic of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple serves as the connecting strap (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">axis mundi</span><span class="font2">) between the lower world/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bhumi</span><span class="font2"> (the human world) with the upper world/heaven (world of Gods) (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Patali-Nagantung</span><span class="font2">). The conception of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana Nglayang</span><span class="font2"> can be interpreted that the candlenut-row heritages (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jajar Kemiri</span><span class="font2">) of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple as a mandala and symbolic center of sanctity of the region and the central screening of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dharma</span><span class="font2"> (truth, virtue, safety, beauty, fertility, prosperity, welfare, and environmental sustainability) for life of the surrounding communities and people of Bali in general, and for the life of other creatures (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarwa prani</span><span class="font2">) on earth (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bhumi</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Characteristic of the Cultural Landscape of Catur Angga Batukaru Temple</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Conservation closely related to resource management, especially in this case the cultural landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple. The cultural landscape is entanglement between culture and nature (the interface of culture and nature), the legacy of tangible and intangible, diversity of biology and cultures -their (cultural landscapes) represent a closely woven net or interrelated relationships, the essence of cultural identity and its inhabitants. They (cultural landscapes) as a symbol associated with the growing knowledge of fundamental relationships between local communities with their heritages, humanity and the natural environment. In an intimate sense, the aspects that corelated to cultural landscapes are the story of the people , and something in which the memory is made: that is a cultural richness, which promotes a sense of the local characteristic of a local distinctiveness (Rossler, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In 1992, UNESCO introduced three categories of Cultural Landscapes which has an outstanding universal value to be registered as a world heritage, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;landscape which is clearly defined and consciously designed and created by man;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;organically evolved landscapes, divided into two groups, namely:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;microorganisms or fossil landscape in which the evolutionary process has reached the final stages, but the descriptions are typically can still be observed;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;continuing landscape which maintain an active social role in contemporary society in a way or a traditional way of life and in which the evolutionary process is still in progress and to show evidence of significant material from its evolution over time.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Associative Cultural Landscapes: namely inclusive cultural landscape that can be justified through the virtue of the religious powerful, aesthetic values, or associations of culture from the elements of nature (ecofacts) that exceeds rather than evidence of physical culture.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The category of associative cultural landscapes has contributed substantially to the recognition of intangible values and to the heritage of local communities and indigenous people. These landscapes are places with associative cultural values, some considered as sacred sites, which may be physical entities or mental images that are embedded with people’s spirituality, cultural tradition and practice (Nora Mitchell, Mechtild Rössler, Pierre-Marie Tricaud). Pivotal to this is the realization that it is the places, traditions, and activities of ordinary people that create a rich cultural tapestry of life, particularly through our recognition of the values people attach to their everyday places and concomitant sense of place and identity. Identity is critical to a sense of place – genus loci – for people. Relph (1979) aptly summarizes this in his proposal that identity of place is comprised of three interrelated components, each irreducible to the other : physical features or appearance, observable activities and functions, and meaning or symbols (Taylor, Ken .2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the types and categories of those cultural landscapes above, the cultural landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple (Batukaru, Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Pucak Petali, Besi Kalung Temple), which located in the District of Penebel, Tabanan regency, can be categorized into Associative Cultural Landscape which is sacred.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the concept of sacred cultural landscape, Hubert Cancik (1985/1986) stated that sacred landscape is a constellation of natural phenomena that formed as a meaningful system using artificial signs and signs of religious, by telling the names or stories that are etiological suitable for certain places and rituals that actualize the space. Further is stated, sacred landscape may also be conceived as a text prepared (formed) by natural artificial and religious icons in accordance with the rules that direct sight, perception, and movement. Sacred landscape nourishes the layers and traces the development of cultural and religious development for a very long time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sacredness sense in the context of resource management certainly does not mean the cultural landscape cannot be utilized, moreover which its status as a living cultural landscape such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga </span><span class="font2">Batukaru Temple. In my opinion, sacred cultural landscape like </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru always can be utilized by communities with thoughtful consideration, not intrusive the carrying capacity and ecosystems. In the context of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple, in praxis the sacred cultural landscape can be interpreted in the multiple significances. Among those things namely: (1) there is a cosmic-magical value contained</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">therein, (2) a very strategic position (upstream area: catchment and infiltration of rain water and habitat of biodiversity’s), (3) the ecosystem is unique (not yet revealed completely) and its potential is limited, (4) there are many interests of the local people regarding the basic needs which related to survival or fate of life and death of local residents, (5) the use of available resources should be done carefully and wisely, (6) the preservation and welfare of the people life and another creatures (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarwa prani</span><span class="font2">) to keep awake and be properly maintained.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indirectly in the context of the conservation of sacred cultural landscape, the position of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple is also strengthened by the Bali Provincial Regulation No. 16/2009 on Spatial Planning. Therein is mentioned about the sanctity of the temple radius (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karang kekeran</span><span class="font2">) adopted from The Bhisama Parisadha Hindu Dharma Indonesia (PHDI) 11/Kep./I/PHDI/1994 (Provincial Government of Bali, 2009). Related to the sanctity of the temple radius (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karang kekeran</span><span class="font2">) in which it is declared:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sad Kahyangan</span><span class="font2"> Temple applied radius </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">apaneleng agung</span><span class="font2"> (grand view-size at least 5 km from the temple);</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dang Kahyangan</span><span class="font2"> Temple applied radius </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">apeneleng alit</span><span class="font2"> (short view-size at minimum 2 km from the temple); and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kahyangan Tiga</span><span class="font2"> Temple (Three Main Temples for The God of Tri Murti worship in the village) and other temples applied radius </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">apanimpug</span><span class="font2"> (size as far as stone throwing of adult people) or apenyengker (temple wall limit).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is explained that in the area of the radius of the sanctity of the temple (the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karang kekeran</span><span class="font2">) there should only be a building associated with the life of the Hindu religion, such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dharmasala</span><span class="font2">, religious hostel, and other facilities for the convenience of Hindus which perform religious activities (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tirthayatra, dharmawacana, dharmagitha, dharmasadana</span><span class="font2">, and other activities). This means that within a radius of the sanctity of the temple is only allowed for the construction of religious facilities and open space that can be either green open space and open space for agriculture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Then with regard to conservation can be defined as the process of managing change to a place that is considered as significant place in the layout by means of which it will be the best way to preserve heritage values. Meanwhile from the opportunities that are already known, seeks to uncover or empower those values for the present generation and the generations in the future. In an operational definition above indirectly accept any changes in cultural values in the course of time, and actually change the values that may occur by the conservation process itself. In addition, the conservation objectives are not only concerned with the future generations, but also the current generation (Taylor, Ken, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The purpose of management of cultural landscapes inscribed on the World Heritage List is to protect the outstanding universal value for present and future generations. It is the role of management to guide change in the cultural landscape while retaining important values. Effective management involves a cycle of long-term and day-to-day actions to protect, conserve and present the World Heritage property. A thorough and shared understanding of the property by all stakeholders a cycle of planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and feedback; the full involvement of partners and stakeholders; the allocation of necessary resources capacity-building and an accountable, transparent description of how the management system functions. There are several inter-related components in the recommended management approach. Three of them – guiding principles, management processes and sustaining management.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cultural aspects of the landscape should be conserved or given protection, which involves authenticity and the integrity aspects of the cultural landscape. According to the operational guidance for the management of the Cultural Landscape of UNESCO which adopted from the 1994 Nara Conference recognized that the concept of the “test of authenticity” should not be limited to the four aspects described in the Operational Guidelines of the time: material, design, workmanship, setting and in the case of cultural landscapes their distinctive character and components. Accordingly, in the Nara Document on Authenticity, knowledge and understanding of original and subsequent characteristics of cultural heritage, their meanings, and sources of information are a prerequisite for assessing all aspects of authenticity, including form and design, materials and substance, use and function, traditions and techniques, location</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and setting, language and other forms of intangible heritage, spirit and feeling (Nora Mitchell, Mechtild Rössler, Pierre-Marie Tricaud).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Since 2005, all properties nominated must satisfy the conditions of integrity. This was specifically requested by many global, regional and thematic expert meetings on cultural landscapes. The meaning of the word integrity is wholeness, completeness, unimpaired or uncorrupted condition, continuation of traditional uses and social fabric (Nora Mitchell, Mechtild Rössler, Pierre-Marie Tricaud).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conservation of cultural heritage and historic environment, the value of significance (importance) should be the starting point. The principles of conservation of the heritage of British defines the value of significance (importance), namely &quot;the total value of the cultural heritage and natural heritage of a particular place, often designed (set out) in a statement of significance (significance). If further elaborated, a value is an aspect of value or importance, attached by the people against the quality areas. Those values are grouped into four major segments, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;evident, which is derived from places potential to show evidence about the activities of human life in the past;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;historic (historic), which is derived from human ways in the past, events and other aspects of life can be connected via a spot on today;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aesthetics, which is derived from the ways in which the human past through the draw sensory and intellectual stimulation from somewhere;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;communal, which is derived from the meaning of a place for people associated with buildings / historic neighborhood it, or to whom it was depicted in their collective experience or memory of (their collective experience or memory).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A common theme underpinning the concept of the ideology of landscape itself as the setting for everything we do is that of the landscape as the repository of intangible values and human meanings that nurture our very existence. This is why landscape and memory are inseparable because landscape is the nerve center of our personal and collective memories (Taylor, Ken.2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the context of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple, the conservation which is intended namely the conservation of the cultural approach, especially magical religious ritual, held at the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga </span><span class="font2">Batukaru Temple associated with maintenance (conservation) of natural resources, particularly water resources (lakes, rivers, and springs), forest, land and rice plants. Conservation in the management of sacred cultural landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple contains three main components of the environment i.e. human - nature - Gods which are summarized in the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Associative Cultural Landscape Concept in the nuance of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> implies the condition of a balanced relationship and harmony between human beings with one another, with the natural resources and the environment around them, and with God who is manifested in various dimensions of culture and belief systems. Various dimensions of cultures and belief systems, among them, namely the belief system (belief in the God of the mountain, the water God, ancestral spirits, and other Gods), artifacts, monuments/architecture, activities and rituals of agriculture (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">), history, myths and taboos, sacred sites, cultural arts, such as performing arts and literature, the art of traditional songs, music art (gamelan/gong), and aspects of ecofacts i.e. trees, rocks, water and other ecofact form that is deemed sacred. Cultural Landscape concept in nuance of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> implicitly contains awareness and enthusiasm for life (awareness and spirit of life) are diverse and holistic integrated (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhineka Tunggal Ika</span><span class="font2">). Cultural Landscape in nuance of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> is also based on the principle in view of coexistence and tolerance of various ways of life and objects in the zone of earth's biosphere, either with human beings (human society), plants (flora), fauna and the existence of abiotic natural resources (physical and chemical) as a creation of God (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Widhi</span><span class="font2">), so that they can live together (coexisting) in a harmonious and sustainable condition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The values of the sanctity of Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple are kept, maintained and powered continuously by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> and village communities through the maintenance of sacred buildings (temple), ritual of farming and other rituals at their respective of cultural heritage (temple) and the natural environment (mountains, forests, lakes, river, and land). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> rituals and other</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">rituals conducted by temple organization (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pangempon pura</span><span class="font2">) regularly based on astronomical calculations (Calendar of Bali). Among the ritual of magical-religious which related to natural resources and the environment, namely: 1) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mulang Pakelem</span><span class="font2"> in ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mapag Toya</span><span class="font2"> (sacrifice ritual for water welcoming); 2) ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nawur Sarin Tahun</span><span class="font2"> (annually crops payment ritual), (3) ritual </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">piodalan</span><span class="font2"> (birth day ritual) which is held in every six months on each temple, and other rituals. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> communities in Tabanan (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple), commonly practice three kinds of rituals </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mendak Toya</span><span class="font2"> made every year (every full moon in October/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Purnama Sasih Kapat</span><span class="font2">) .The annual ritual successively performed, namely: 1) the ritual in the full moon of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sasih Kapat I</span><span class="font2"> (October), is held at the summit of Mount Batukaru, 2) full moon of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sasih Kapat II</span><span class="font2"> in upstream of Mawa River, and 3) the full moon of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sasih Kapat III</span><span class="font2"> on the Lake Tamblingan. After the ritual </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pakelem</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mapag Toya</span><span class="font2">), then continued with the ritual at the level of lower </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> institution to deliver the process of cultivation in paddy fields.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Mangku Gede Batukaru Temmple (Temple Priest), ritual significance of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pakelem </span><span class="font2">(</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mendak Toya</span><span class="font2">) is very closely related to the conservation of water resources, especially natural water that comes from rainwater and then deposited in a lake and rivers which then flow through. So, the lake (Tamblingan Lake) regarded as a natural pond, as rainwater catchment. The ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pakelem</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mapag Toya</span><span class="font2">) is symbolically significant: that is like laying a foundation in the development process, so that the building would has a strong base. When its base essentially already strong, then when there is a blessing of rain fell from the sky, the water accommodated in the natural pond (lake). If the water reservoir (lake) is already strong, good with full of waters, then the water will flow downstream; The lake’s water will flow in regularly, as a source of fertility, prosperity, and welfare for society, particularly for farmers (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">) in cultivation of rice plants. Implicitly ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mapag Toya</span><span class="font2"> bears etnosains containing the environmental wisdom which associated with aquatic ecosystems (rain) with mountains, forests, lakes, rivers, and agricultural ecosystems in the fields. Likewise, among other meanings and expectations of the community of farmers and villagers associated with the delivery of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pakelem</span><span class="font2"> ritual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another important ritual is the ceremony of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nawur sarin tahun</span><span class="font2"> (annually crops payment ritual) or offering yields of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">. Offerings of crops (rice) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sesari</span><span class="font2"> (money) made by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> institution to sacred places (temples) as God’s palace while begging holy water (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tirtha/pakuluh</span><span class="font2">) for safety, fertility and prosperity for crops and communities. Then after a successful harvest (everyone cycles of rice cultivation) they offered </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarin tahun</span><span class="font2">, for example </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nawur sarin tahun</span><span class="font2"> at subak temple (Bedugul Temple), at </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Jagat</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Temple (Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Pucak Petali and Besi Kalung Temple).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sarin Tahun</span><span class="font2"> offerings in this sense has a double meaning. On the one hand, the offerings of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarin tahun</span><span class="font2"> and worshiping is meant as an expression of gratitude and thanks for the blessings that have been received from the Gods who enthrone in the temples. The second meaning, namely the ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarin tahun</span><span class="font2"> offering, intended that the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2"> community also seek blessings of salvation, fertility, prosperity for next rice cultivation in the form of ritual worship and supplication holy water (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tirtha</span><span class="font2">) will be taken and sprinkled on the wetland (paddy) of farmers in the neighborhood of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> communities respectively. To the ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ngaturang</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nawur</span><span class="font2">) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarin tahun</span><span class="font2"> (annually crops payment ritual) and please taking holy water (tirhta) of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara/Bhatari</span><span class="font2"> for safety, fertility and prosperity of the farmers, according to local tradition is called the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ngempak-Ngulanting</span><span class="font2"> (touching while clinging to a tree).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile, ritual </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">piodalan</span><span class="font2"> also called </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">partir</span><span class="font2"> than is a kind of ritual associated with the holy day of the establishment and inauguration of the sacred building (celebrated every 6 months or 210 days, according to calculations of Balinese calendar) which is regarded as the birthday of God / </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara</span><span class="font2"> who enthrones in the temple. Ritual of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">piodalan</span><span class="font2"> on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple generally lasts (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nyejer</span><span class="font2">) for 3 days. Indirectly, cultural value system that is practiced by society in the form of ritual, taboo, and the myths associated with the surrounding area, creating, and maintaining the values of sanctity (sacredness) for landscapes of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple. Sacredness, existence of taboo and myths associated with the existence of natural resources make people do not dare to violate (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ngusak-asik</span><span class="font2">) and damaging the natural environment (forests, lakes, springs, rivers) so that it can contribute to the value of preserving the environment and natural resources.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sanctity’s vibration of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Hyang Tumuwuh</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bhatara Pucak Kedaton</span><span class="font2">), the Gods and ancestral spirits who enthrone in the Batukaru Temple and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Temple (Muncaksari, Tambawars, Pucak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Petali and Besi Kalung) creating natural environment of Batukaru considered very sacred (seclusion) , such as talking should not boast (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cuah-cauh</span><span class="font2">), keeping away from attitude and behavior of damaging and disturbing the surrounding. Thus, the consequence is that the environmental conditions of forests and biodiversity in the region of Catur Angga Batukaru Temple growing well and developing naturally and environmentally be sustainable. According to the Head of the Forest Protection Officer of Forestry Department of Tabanan Regency (informant: I Gst W. Sukarsa, September 17<sup>th</sup>, 2015), the value of the sanctity of the area or the environment has to do with the environment. The farther the radius of the vortex sanctity (sanctity) of Pucak Kedaton Temple/Batukaru Temple (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple), then there is the emerging trend of citizen courage to commit abuses and disruption to the forest conservation and the biodiversity contained therein. According to him, violations such as illegal logging and encroachment into forest conservation industry (cultivation of cocoa and other economically valuable crops) tends to occur in the outside of the sacred area of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In addition, the rituals associated with rice cultivation in paddy fields, indirectly implies that the farming communities (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subak</span><span class="font2">) in the highlands (mountainous or region of Batukaru) has been conserving local rice varieties, in which the local rice varieties elsewhere in Bali is already almost extinct.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. Conclusions</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The cultural landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple (Batukaru, Muncaksari, Tambawaras, Pucak Petali, Besi Kalung Temple) can be categorized into an Associative Cultural Landscape which is sacred. The characteristic structure of Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple based on the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Bhuwana</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana Nglayang</span><span class="font2">. The conception of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Padma Bhuwana Ngelayang</span><span class="font2"> can be interpreted that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple as a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mandala</span><span class="font2">, and the symbol of center sanctity of the region and the central screening of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dharma</span><span class="font2"> (truth, virtue, safety, beauty, fertility, prosperity, welfare, and environmental sustainability) for life in the surrounding communities and the people of Bali in general, and for the life of other creatures (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sarwa prani</span><span class="font2">) on earth (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bhumi</span><span class="font2">). The sacredness of the area (Cultural Landscape of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple) maintained and guarded with the maintenance of sacred buildings (temple), ritual (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mapag Toya, Sarin Tahun, piodalan</span><span class="font2">/temple festival, and other rituals), taboo, myth, to glorify and worship the God of nature (God of the mountain, God of the sky/rain, the God of lake, the God of sun, the God of rice), ancestral spirits, and other holy beings. If the values of environmental wisdom as environmental ethics contained in Sacred Landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple (sacred </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">padma bhuwana nglayang</span><span class="font2">) combined with The Regional Regulation of Bali No.16 /2009 about region Spatial Planning, then the position of the conservation of the natural environment in the region of Batukaru should be strong enough to support the sustainable development. But all these things will certainly continue to be tested in practice of governmental management (commitment) and social interaction of everyday life of the communities, namely the extent to which the values of environmental ethics of Sacred Cultural Landscape </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catur Angga</span><span class="font2"> Batukaru Temple and positive law (government regulations) would be implemented.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Budiastra, Putu dan Wardha, Wayan.1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Babad Pasek Kayu Selem</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cancik, Hubert. (1985/1986). Rome As Sacred Landscape: Varro and The End of Republican Religion in Rome” dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Visible Religion For Religious Iconography</span><span class="font2">; Volume IV-V. Leiden, E.J. Brill; (p.250265).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dirjen Sejarah dan Purbakala. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 11 Tahun 2010 tentang Cagar Budaya</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goris, R. 1960. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Temple System</span><span class="font2">” in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Studies in Life</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thought</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and Ritual</span><span class="font2">. Amsterdam: The Royal Tropical Institute.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemerintah Provinsi Bali. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Peraturan Provinsi Bali Nomor 16 Tahun 2029 tentang Rencana Tata Ruang Wilayah Provinsi Bali Tahun 2009-2029</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Purbo-Hadiwidjono,M.M. (1978). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-Dasar Geologi Untuk Pengembangan P.Bali</span><span class="font2">. Bandung. (pp 8389).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Swellengrebel, J.L. (1960). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Patterns of The Cosmic Order</span><span class="font2"> in Bali Studies in Life, Thoughts, and Ritual. Hague and Bandung: The Royal Tropical Institute-Amsterdam.W.van Hoeve Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Taylor, Ken. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Landscape and Memory: cultural landscapes, intangible values and some thoughts on Asia</span><span class="font2">. Australia: Research School of Humanities The Australian National University Canberra ACT 0200.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">41</span></p>