---
layout: full_article
title: "Idiomatic Expression in Movie Screenplay Entitled Beauty and The Beast"
author: "Ni Kadek Udianti, I Gusti Agung Istri Aryani, I Komang Sumaryana Putra"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-62091 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-62091"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-62091"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 4 No. 1, February 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i01.p04"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i01.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">| </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">19</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Idiomatic Expression in Movie Screenplay Entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Kadek Udianti<sup>1</sup>, I Gusti Agung Istri Aryani<sup>2</sup>, I Komang Sumaryana Putra<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Email:</span><a href="mailto:udianti@gmail.com"><span class="font0"> udianti@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Email:</span><a href="mailto:ig_aryani@yahoo.com"><span class="font0"> ig_aryani@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>3</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Email: </span><a href="mailto:komangsurmayana@gmail.com"><span class="font0">komangsurmayana@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract: </span><span class="font0">This study entitled Idiomatic Expression in Movie Screenplay Entitled “Beauty and The Beast”. This study is aimed at classifying the types of phrasal verb idioms and analyzing the meaning of each phrasal verb idiom encountered in Beauty and The Beast screenplay. The data were taken from the movie screenplay written by Stephen Chbosky and Spiliotopoulus entitled Beauty and The Beast. The data were collected using the documentation method by applying the note-taking technique. In the analysis, this study used the qualitative method, and narrative method used to present the data analysis. In analyzing types of idioms, the writer divided phrasal verb idiom enchanted into six types and explained each pattern. In analyzing the meaning of each phrasal verb idiom, the writer described the literal meaning of an individual word and then explained the idiomatic meaning appropriate with the dialogue. The result of the analysis showed that the dominant pattern used among phrasal verb idioms enchanted in Beauty and The Beast is the combination between intransitive + adverb and the least of all patterns is the combination of transitive + adverb + preposition. Furthermore, the most type of meaning found is transparent, where mostly, the meaning of phrasal verb idioms in the screenplay, and the meaning of their literal word are similar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font0">Phrasal verb idiom, Idiomatic expression, Screenplay, Beauty and The Beast.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">People have different ways of representing their feelings, thought, emotions, and desires. Some people express their feeling directly and others express it through figurative language. Spivey (2011: 1) divides figurative language into some types; they are simile, metaphor, personification, onomatopoeia, hyperbole, idiom, and cliché. One of the seven categories of figurative discussed in this study is an idiomatic expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Seidl and McMordie (1988: 12) idiom is a combination of words which have different meanings from the individual meanings of each word. Moreover, Palmer (1981: 98) in his book described idiom as the combination of two or more words; the meaning of the individual word is different from its whole, but it can be close to the meaning of a single word. There are nine types of idioms, according to, Seidl and McMordie (1988); however, this study focuses on phrasal verbs idioms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">People do not only use an idiomatic expression in daily conversation but also written works such as a novel, short story, song lyric, even in a movie. In this</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">study, the writer chose to analyze phrasal verb idioms in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0"> is an American musical romantic fantasy film directed by Bill Condon from a screenplay written by Stephen Chbosky and Evan Spiliotopoulus in 2016. This movie is a live-action version of Disney's 1991 cartoon of the same name and produced by Walt Disney Pictures in 2017. It tells the story of a beautiful girl and a handsome prince who bewitched into a beast. This movie was chosen because it is a kind of touching, entertaining, and one of the most of Disney's famous movie. Besides, this screenplay adopts a cartoon's script from 1991 with the same name which is interesting because idiom has a relation with era and culture. Thus, idioms can give different representations for the audiences who watch this movie. As Akimoto said, cited in Lamont (2005: 4</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">), </span><span class="font0">that phrasal verbs occur more frequently in letters and dramas than in essays or academic writing in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Based on the reason above, the writer thought that it would be great to find the meaning of phrasal verb idioms in this screenplay to give more understanding of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0"> story.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>The problem of the Study</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background of the study, the writer proposes some problems. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of Phrasal Verb Idioms that occur in the screenplay Beauty </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and The Beast</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of Phrasal Verb Idioms that occur in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li></ul>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Aims of the Study</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, there are two aims of the research that can be identified according to the problems above. The aims of the study are presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of Phrasal Verb Idioms that occur in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the meaning of Phrasal Verb Idioms that occur in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHOD</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The methodology used in this research is divided into four points; namely data source, method, and technique of collecting data, method, and technique of analyzing data, and method, and technique of presenting analysis.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Data Source</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">The data of this study were taken from the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and the Beast</span><span class="font0"> written by Stephen Chbosky and Evan Spiliotopoulos in 2016. The screenplay consists of one hundred pages. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0"> is a famous movie that tells us a classic story of good and bad. This movie teaches us to judge people, not from their appearance but also their inner beauty. It also tells us about how to be ourselves and never let people's words tear us down. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0"> is a live-action adapted from 1991 famous Disney’s cartoon with the same title. Evan Spiliotopoulos and Stephen Chbosky (2016) as the writer of the screenplay do not give a lot of improvement to the story to keep its originality. This movie was also stated as the best movie of the year in 2017 by MTV Movie and TV Award. Thus, the writer wants to explore the meaning of phrasal verb idiom in this screenplay. Since idiom has a strong relation with culture; this is interesting because the screenplay was adapted from the style of language in 1991 in America.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">This research used the documentation method in collecting the data since the data were taken from a screenplay. The data in this research were taken from the line containing phrasal verb idioms in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast.</span><span class="font0"> In collecting the data, the writer used four steps; they are: First, searching and collecting the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Beast written</span><span class="font0"> by Evan Spiliotopoulos and Stephen Chbosky, Second, reading the screenplay repeatedly and watching the movie until understanding the story and the message given through the story. Third, taking note and collecting the sentence indicated as idiomatic expression especially phrasal verb idioms. After that, identifying each sentence collected; and finally, separating the same text which has the same meaning. If there are two texts which have a similar meaning and same words, the writer only put one text.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">After collecting the data, those were analyzed using some steps of analyzing data in a qualitative method according to (Creswell, 2014: 220); they are organizing and preparing data for analysis, reading through all data, coding the data, interrelating the data, and then interpreting the meaning of the data. Instantly, the data in this study were classified to separate each type of phrasal verb idiom and after that, the data enchanted includes the meaning was explained in a narrative form. The collected data were classified and analyzed based on Seidl and McModie’s (1988) theory of idioms. Furthermore, the meaning of each idiomatic expression was analyzed using the theory of meaning proposed by Palmer (1981) and the dictionary of American idioms proposed by Spears (2005).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis was done based on the theory of phrasal verb idiom proposed by Seidl and McMordie (1988) and theory of meaning proposed by Palmer (1981) and also the dictionary of American idiom proposed by Spears (2005). The analysis focused on the sentence containing phrasal verb idiom and its meaning according to the situation in the movie screenplay entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">. In analyzing the meaning, the writer translated the literal meaning of each word in phrasal verb idioms to find out the type of meaning used. If the literal meaning and the meaning in the idiom is similar, it is called transparent; moreover, if the literal meaning and the meaning of the idiom in the screenplay is not similar, it is called opaque (Palmer, 1981).</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>The Phrasal Verb Idiom Enchanted in the Screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Phrasal verb idioms usually begin with a verb followed by particle. The particle can be a preposition or adverb or both of them. In this part, the writer classified phrasal verb idioms enchanted into each type based on structure of phrasal verb idioms based on Seidl and McMordie (1988); they are: (1) transitive + particle, (2) transitive + preposition, (3) transitive + particle + preposition, (4) intransitive + particle, (5) intransitive + preposition, and (6) intransitive + particle + preposition.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Intransitive verb + Preposition.</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 1 Look for a sign that enhances</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &quot;DIVA: Oh how divine, glamour, music, and magic combine. See the maidens so anxious to shine, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">look for a sign that enhances</span><span class="font0">. Chances, she’ll be his special one. (The dance speeds up. The Prince connects momentarily with a beautiful woman -- but quickly moves on when his eye catches someone even more dazzling.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: 2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“look for (something)” </span><span class="font0">consists of a verb, preposition, and prepositional object. The pattern of this phrasal verb belongs to a combination of intransitive verb and preposition. In the dialogue above, the phrasal verb &quot;look for a sign&quot; has the preposition &quot;for&quot; and the prepositional object &quot;a sign&quot; without a direct object in between. The word &quot;look&quot; literally means turning one's eyes towards something or in some direction to see and the word &quot;for&quot; which means being intended to belong to, or used in connection with (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 260 and 173). &quot;Look for (something)&quot; means to seek someone or something (Spears, 2005: 414). In the screenplay, the meaning of &quot;look for a sign that enhances&quot; is to seek for an opportunity to be the consort of Prince. In this situation, the Prince holds a party and some girls are trying to catch his attention. The Prince's name is not mentioned in the screenplay but, in the rest of the story, he is known as the Beast. It means that the meaning of the phrasal verb idiom &quot;look for a sign that enhances&quot; in the dictionary and the screenplay is similar or transparent.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Intransitive verb + adverb.</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 2 Moving on</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. “GASTON: (hands her the flowers) for your dinner table. Shall I join you this evening?.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">BELLE: Sorry, not tonight.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">GASTON: Busy?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BELLE: No. (A mortified smile and Belle are off. LeFou approaches.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEFOU: So. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Moving on</span><span class="font0">?.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">GASTON: No, Lefou. It’s the ones who play hard to get that are always the sweetest prey.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">10-11</span><span class="font0">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“move on” </span><span class="font0">consists of the verb &quot;move&quot; and adverb &quot;on&quot;. The pattern of phrasal verb &quot;move on&quot; belongs to a combination of intransitive verb and adverb. This is because the phrasal verb &quot;move on&quot; in dialogue (a) does not have a direct object. The word &quot;move&quot; means to pass from one place or position to another and the word &quot;on&quot; is used to indicate place, location, situation, etc (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 287 and 304). As a phrasal verb, “move on” in dialogue (a) means changing into a different subject or activity (Spears, 2005: 442).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">“Moving on” in this screenplay means Gaston giving up to pursue Belle and find another girl to be his</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">wife. In this situation, Gaston was trying to seduce Belle but she ignored him thus, Lefou asked if he wanted to give up and find another girl, meaning that the meaning of phrasal verb idiom &quot;move on&quot; in the dictionary and the screenplay is not similar or opaque.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Intransitive verb + adverb + preposition.</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 11 Hold on to</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &quot;MAURICE: How does a moment last forever? How can a story never die? It is the love we must </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">hold on to</span><span class="font0">. Never easy – but we try.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: 11).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“hold on to” </span><span class="font0">is formed by a verb, an adverb, and a preposition. This phrasal verb idiom is a combination of an intransitive verb, adverb, and preposition. This is because the lexical verb &quot;hold&quot; does not have a direct object and it is followed by the adverb &quot;on&quot; and by the prepositional &quot;to&quot;. The word &quot;hold&quot; means to have or keep it in the hand, the particle &quot;on&quot; means in connection, association, or cooperation with something, and the particle &quot;to&quot; is used to express motion or direction towards a point, person, place, or thing approached and reached (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 211, 304 and 467). As a phrasal verb, &quot;hold on to&quot; means grasping someone or something (Spears, 2005: 305). In this situation, Maurice is singing alone and say &quot;It is the love we must hold on to&quot; which means that love is something we must keep in our heart whether the one we loved already gone but the memories will never be forgotten, although it is not easy because the one you love only exists in your memory. In the screenplay, Maurice’s wife passed away when his daughter was a baby. It shows that the meaning of “Hold on to” in dictionary and screenplay is not similar or opaque.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Transitive verb + preposition.</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 14 Catching you at a bad time</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. “GASTON: You are the wildest, most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen. No one deserves you, but at least I know our children will be beautiful.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">(A revenge angle reveals Gaston was addressing his reflection in a shop window)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEFOU: Am I </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">catching you at a bad time</span><span class="font0">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">GASTON: What is it, Lefou?.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: 15).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“Catch (someone) at a bad time” </span><span class="font0">is formed by the verb, direct object, preposition, and prepositional object. In the dialogue above &quot;catching you at a bad time&quot; belongs to a combination between transitive verb and preposition. This is because the lexical verb &quot;catch&quot; has the direct object &quot;you&quot;; it is followed by the preposition &quot;at&quot; and the prepositional object &quot;a bad time&quot;. The word &quot;catch&quot; means stopping and holding something especially in the hand; the particle “at” is used to say</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">when something happened, and “bad time” represents an unpleasant thing happening at a moment (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 63, 22 and 27). “Catch you at a bad time” as a phrasal verb idiom means to attempt to speak or deal with someone at a time inconvenient for that person (Spears, 2005: 91). In this situation, Lefou is coming when Gaston was adoring himself in front of the shop window and Lefou asked whether he came at the right time to talk or not. Thus, the meaning of &quot;catch you at a bad time&quot; in dialogue &quot;Am I catching you at a bad time?&quot; is talking to Gaston in improper time. It seems that the meaning of &quot;catching you at a bad time&quot; in screenplay and dictionary is not similar or opaque.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Transitive verb + adverb</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 19 Locking him away</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. “BELLE: A life sentence for a rose?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">BEAST: I received eternal damnation for one. I’m merely </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">locking him away</span><span class="font0">. Now… do you still wish to take your father’s place?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BELLE: Come into the light.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: 24).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“lock (someone) away” </span><span class="font0">is formed by a verb, direct object, and adverb. In the dialogue above, the phrasal verb &quot;locking him away&quot; belongs to a combination of transitive verb and adverb. This is because the lexical verb &quot;lock&quot; has the direct object &quot;him&quot; and it is followed by the adverb &quot;away&quot;. The word &quot;lock&quot; means causing something to become fixed in one position and unable to move and the particle &quot;away&quot; means to or at a distance from something (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 259 and 25). As a phrasal verb idiom, &quot;lock (someone) away&quot; means to put someone away in a locked container or space (Spears, 2005: 411). The phrasal verb &quot;locking him away&quot; in this dialogue means to put Maurice away in a locked space. In this situation, the Beast was locking Maurice in a dark prison tower because he saw that Maurice was picking his rose, and he asked Belle whether she wanted to replace her father to save him or not. Thus, the meaning of this phrasal verb idiom in screenplay and dictionary is similar or transparent.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Transitive verb + adverb + preposition</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0">Data 40 Twisted him up to be just like him now a. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“BELLE: But he has cursed you somehow. (Off their silence). Why?</span><span class="font0"> You did nothing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">MRS. POTSS: You're quite right there, dear. You see when the master lost his mother, and his cruel father took that sweet innocent lad and </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">twisted him up to be just like him now</span><span class="font0">… we did nothing.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Cbosky and Spiliotopoulos, 2016: 57).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The phrasal verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“twisted (someone) up to (something)” is </span><span class="font0">formed by a verb, direct object, and adverb. This phrasal verb is a combination of a transitive verb, adverb, and preposition. This is</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">because the lexical verb &quot;twist&quot; has a direct object &quot;him&quot; and it is followed by an adverb &quot;up&quot;, the preposition &quot;to&quot; and prepositional object &quot;be just like him&quot;. The word &quot;twist&quot; means causing something to bend or turn into a particular shape, the word &quot;up&quot; means towards the top of something and the word &quot;to&quot; means located in the direction mentioned from something (Oxford Dictionary, 2008: 480, 487 and 467). Moreover, &quot;him&quot; in this dialogue refers to the Beast. The phrasal verb &quot;twisted (someone) up to (something)&quot; means to change or distort someone into someone else (Spears, 2005: 724). In this</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">situation, &quot;twisted him up to be just like him now&quot; means that the personality of the Beast changed from a kind and friendly Prince into someone cold and arrogant known by The Beast. At this moment, Mrs. Potts was a flashback and remembered again when the father of the Beast was doing bad things on him but Mrs. Potts did not do anything so she regrets because she let the little friendly prince grown up into an arrogant man. The literal meaning of this phrasal verb and screenplay is not similar or opaque.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>IV. CONCLUSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Through the analysis of the phrasal verb idioms in the previous chapter, this study found that there are some types of phrasal verb idioms in the movie screenplay. Those are divided into six types based on each pattern. The dominant pattern used among phrasal verb idioms enchanted in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0"> is the combination of intransitive + adverb and the least of all patterns is the combination between transitive + adverb + preposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The verb in phrasal verb idioms can represent different meanings if combined with different particle, the particle can be adverb or preposition, or both adverb and preposition. In analyzing the meaning of phrasal verbs idioms in the screenplay </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast</span><span class="font0">, the most type of meaning found is transparent. It proves by the analysis above, where mostly, the meaning of phrasal verb idioms in the screenplay, and the meaning of their literal word is similar. This means that the phrasal verb idioms used in this screenplay are frequently easy to understand.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>REFERENCES</span></h3>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cambridge Dictionary</span><span class="font0"> [Internet]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Available from: </span><a href="http://dictionary.cambridge.org/html"><span class="font0">http://dictionary.cambridge.org/html</span></a><span class="font0"> [Accessed 10 October 2018].</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chbosky, S. &amp;&nbsp;Spiliotopoulos, E. (2016). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty and The Beast &nbsp;Screenplay</span><span class="font0">. &nbsp;California: Walt</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Disney Picture and Mandeville Films.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Creswell, J. (2014). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design (Qualitative, Quantitative, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and Mixed Methods</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches) &nbsp;4<sup>th</sup> &nbsp;ed</span><span class="font0">. &nbsp;America: &nbsp;&nbsp;SAGE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lamont, M. (2005). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Historical Rise of the English Phrasal Verb</span><span class="font0">. Toronto: University of Toronto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford advanced learner’s dictionary</span><span class="font0"> (8th ed.). (2010). Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Palmer, F. (1981). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic (Second Edition)</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Seidl, J. and McMordie. (1988). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">English Idioms Fifth Edition</span><span class="font0">. Oxford: Oxford University Press. New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Spivey, L. (2011). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Types of Figurative Language</span><span class="font0">. South Caroline: Super Duper Publication Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Spears, R. (2005). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of American Idioms</span><span class="font0">. United States: McGraw-Hill’s.</span></p>