---
layout: full_article
title: "Cultural Terms on Two Translated Versions  of Soethama’s Short Stories: A Comparative Study"
author: "Lina Pratica Wijaya, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58757 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-58757"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58757"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p04"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font8" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Cultural Terms on Two Translated Versions of Soethama’s Short Stories: A Comparative Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Lina Pratica Wijaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:linapwijaya@gmail.com"><span class="font6">linapwijaya@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font6"> Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati </span><span class="font6">e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id"><span class="font6"> mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font6"> Udayana University, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Translating a literary work from different culture, some problems will emerge, especially related to culture-specific terms since two different languages are certainly have two different cultures. We have to understand that literary work is not just a common writing work, but also contains culture, tradition and people’s daily life especially in ecology and material culture (artefacts). There are three problems in this study: 1) cultural terms related to ecology and material culture (artefacts) in the short story; 2) semantic features of the cultural terms; and 3) translation strategies applied by two translators when translating the cultural terms of the same short story by Gde Aryantha Soethama entitled </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font6"> which is translated by two different translators; Jeanette Lingard and Vern Cork.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The theories applied in this study were theories of cultural aspects (Newmark, 1988:95), theories of semantic features as proposed by Larson (1984) and Yule (1985/2010), and theory of translation strategies by Pedersen (2005) of Extralinguistic Culture-bound References. The collected data were analyzed comparatively. From the discussion of eight cultural terms related to ecology and material culture (artefacts) and their sixteen translations, it is discovered that some of the features were not carried out by the translations. Considering these two languages have different culture, it is inevitable to miss some components in the semantic features and the decision of using more target language-oriented strategies is part of the way to bridge the differences between culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font6">: </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">comparative study, cultural terms, semantic features, short story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Beberapa masalah akan timbul saat penerjemahan sebuah karya sastra dilakukan. Hal ini terjadi karena adanya perbedaan mendasar dalam budaya bahasa sumber dan bahasa target. Fenomena ini dapat dipahami mengingat karya sastra tidaklah sama dengan karya tulis biasa, di dalamnya terdapat kebudayaan, adat, dan tradisi, serta keseharian dalam kehidupan masyarakat di bahasa sumber. Studi ini berangkat dari tiga masalah utama yaitu: 1) istilah budaya berkaitan dengan ekologi dan artefak dalam dua cerita pendek berlatar budaya Bali; 2) fitur semantik dalam tiap istilah budaya yang teridentifikasi; dan 3) strategi penerjemahan yang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">digunakan dua penerjemah (Jeanette Lingard dan Vern Cork) dalam menerjemahkan cerita pendek karangan Gde Aryantha Soethama berjudul </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font6">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori aspek budaya oleh Newmark (1988:95), teori fitur semantik dari Larson (1984) dan Yule (1985/2010), serta strategi terjemahan dari Pedersen (2005) yaitu </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Extralinguistic Culture-bound References</span><span class="font6">. Data yang telah diidentifikasi dianalisis dengan membandingkan kedua terjemahan. Dari telaah fitur semantik delapan istilah budaya dan enam belas terjemahannya, diketahui bahwa produk terjemahan tidak menjunjung fitur-fitur tiap istilah dengan tepat. Dalam teori strategi penerjemahan Pedersen, tendensi ini berkaitan dengan dua tipe penerjemahan yaitu strategi yang berorientasi pada bahasa sumber dan strategi yang berorientasi pada bahasa target. Memahami bahwa kedua bahasa ini memiliki budaya yang berbeda, tidak termanifestasinya beberapa komponen dalam fitur semantik dalam dua terjemahan istilah budaya tersebut memang tak dapat dihindari.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">kajian perbandingan, istilah budaya, fitur semantik, strategi penerjemahan, cerita pendek</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Translation work is an important part of interactions between languages and cultures around the world. Since language is the most important component in any culture, it is inevitable for people to share their interest about anything through language in any different forms; news, literatures, films, stories, videos, and so forth. To broaden our knowledge about certain information, especially specific culture, translation work is the perfect bridge for this matter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In 1990s, Indonesian literature developed in excess speed in many forms. One of those forms is short story. Short story was spreading massively in Indonesia since the early 1900’s (Rosidi: 1980). Since then, it has been a famous reading choice for many people. In 1920’s, Balinese short story had begun to bloom. Currently, Balinese short stories` author appeared in many collections of Indonesian short stories translated by foreigners either in English or in their own languages. Certainly, Balinese literature is more than just a story. It is linked to Balinese culture, religion and their daily life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Translation is not merely just about the language but also the culture where the language used. Translating culture, leads us to culturespecific terms as explained by Nida and Taber’s (1969/1982) that cultural translation is “a translation in which the content of the message is changed to conform to the receptor culture in some way, and/or in which information is introduced which is not linguistically implicit in the original.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In a previous survey conducted for International Conference on Mother language in Bali in 2018, one translation of Balinese short story by Gde Aryantha Soethama - </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font6"> which was translated into </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">A Roast Chicken</span><span class="font6"> by Jeanette Lingard, an American respondent said that the translation work feels too</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Australian, because of the diction used by the translator (Wijaya, 2018). This case usually occurs in stories which have different culture where naturally some words related to culture could not be translated equally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">This particular phenomenon is the main concern of Puspani (2003) who tried to understand the cultural terms in Balinese stories using componential analysis to determine the semantic features of each term. Almost a decade later, Purnamadadi (2012) had done a research to understand two points of view of translating cultural terms, the first one, emic point of view to see the culture from the inside, and the second one etic point of view to see the culture from outside. The research on cultural terms continued in order to identify precisely the cultural terms in bilingual text </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Mati Salah Pati</span><span class="font6"> written by Soethama using componential analysis to represent the similarities and the differences among words with related meanings effectively (Arnita, dkk, 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">One study used to compare the similarities and the differences between a factor or situation usually using comparative study (Notoadmojo, 2012). Related to comparative study, Westling (2011) conducted a comparative paper comparing four translations of a realism novel entitled </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The Red Room</span><span class="font6"> written by August Strindberg in 1879. He analysed the translations of geographical names in the first chapter of the novel related to cultural references which may not be equivalent in the target language. His close comparison of these four translations of the novel highlights the significance choice and preference of linguistic feature made by the translators while translating culture-specific terms which in this study consist of geographical name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Cultural terms are not easy to translate, but also not impossible to transfer to another language. To understand this phenomenon, this study focuses</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">on a short story by one author – Gde Aryantha Soethama entitled </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font6"> first published by Penerbit Buku Kompas in 2006 and had won Kusala Khatulistiwa award – a prestigious award for authors in Indonesia, in the same year. Before it is published exclusively by Penerbit Buku Kompas, those short stories were already published at Sunday edition of Kompas newspaper back in the 90’s.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The story happened in a Balinese family who is holding a ceremony. The story focuses in the problem of siblings who live outside Bali for so long, they do not really understand Balinese customs especially how to deal with offering during ceremony. Their lack of understanding leads them to a disaster happened in the family after the ceremony. This story shows us the strict rules of Balinese customs and how people deal with it in daily live.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The short story is translated into the same title </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">A Roast Chicken</span><span class="font6"> by both translators - Vern Cork and Jeanette Lingard. The translations carried one purpose, as cultural short stories published in short stories compilation about Indonesia (Cork, 2008).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">This study applied the qualitative approach using text and data with brief explanation and reference to some related references. The data analysed in this study are in the form of words and sentences containing cultural terms collected from two short stories. The qualitative observation method was applied, and the results were presented using descriptive sentences, tables and images. This study considered as a descriptive-comparative analysis. The method implemented in this research is library research because it focused on the translation products as the primary data in the form of texts which were collected by the researcher (Saldanha and O’Brien, 2014). From the data</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">sources mentioned before, there are two main data, the translations of the short stories. Both data are comparable because those are translations of the same short stories from the same author.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">After collecting the cultural terms in the short stories, the data were classified according to the cultural term category proposed by Newmark (1988) as qualitative substantiation. Then the data analysed based on translation approaches proposed by Pedersen (2005). Method of analysing the data were comparative model proposed by Chesterman and William (2002). This model is a product-oriented method, which focuses in one equivalence relation that can be described as ST </span><span class="font7">≈ </span><span class="font6">TT, or TT </span><span class="font7">≈ </span><span class="font6">ST. This model allowed us to compare the source text and target text which will select contextually close between target texts and source text. The analyses were presented in paraphrase and diagrammatic forms. The paraphrase was used to explain the analyses of translation strategies in sentence based on Pedersen’s ECR transfer strategy, and the diagrammatic forms were used to show the source text (ST) and its two translations : Target Text 1 (TT1) is the translation by Jeanette Lingard, and Target Text 2 (TT2) by Vern Cork, also to show the semantic feature showed in componential analysis by using table and mathematical symbols (+, -).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Lalu dipasang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Then it had been</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Then it had been</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">menempel berdiri</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">arraged in a</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">placed in the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">dikelilingi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">standing position</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">midst of flowers</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">rangkaian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">and encircled by</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">standing upright,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">kembang, kue</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">flowers, cakes,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">cakes and </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">salak</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">dan buah-buah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">and fruits such as</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">fruit</span><span class="font4">, apples,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">salak</span><span class="font4">, apel,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">salak</span><span class="font4">, apples,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">mangosteens,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">manggis, pisang,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">mangosteens,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">bananas,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">jeruk, rambutan,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">bananas, oranges,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">oranges,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">dan mangga.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">rambutans, and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">rambutans,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 50 – line 9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">mangoes.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">mangoes.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 86 – line 11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 129 – line 11</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The cultural terms as categorized by Newmark’s were divided into five: 1) Ecology; 2) Material Culture (Artefact); 3) Social culture; 4) Organization, customs, activities, procedures, and concept; 5) Gesture or habit. In this study, only two categorisations discussed: 1) ecology, and 2) material culture (artefacts). There are eight cultural terms in the short stories entitled </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font5">. The discussion in this research based on the cultural terms categorization which is presented in componential analysis (CA) contained: 1) form, 2) characteristics, and 3) functions. In each analysis, both TT translation strategies explained using Extralinguistic Culture-bound References (ECR) from Pedersen which is divided into two namely SL-oriented ECR strategies and TL-oriented ECR strategies. SL-oriented ECR consists of retention, specification, explicitation, addition, and direct translation. Meanwhile TL-oriented ECR consists of generalization, substitution, cultural substitution, paraphrase, and omission.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural Terms Related to Ecology</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Cultural terms related to ecology can be normally distinguished from other cultural terms in that they are usually value-free, politically and commercially. It’s also usually part of geographical feature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Salak</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Salak</span><span class="font5"> is a fruit from a plant, specifically unbranched palm tree, it has sour taste (Poerwadarminta, 1982). This fruit is native to Java and Sumatra in Indonesia. It is cultivated in other regions of Indonesia as a food crop, and reportedly naturalized in Bali, Lombok, Timor, Maluku, and Sulawesi. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Salak</span><span class="font5"> in the story refers to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Salak Bali</span><span class="font5"> which is roughly the size of a large fig, and has a crunchy and moist consistency. The fruit has a flavour reminiscent of dilute pineapple and lemon juice. In Bali, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Salak</span><span class="font5"> is usually used as part of an offering for ceremony. Translation of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">salak</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The semantic features of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">salak</span><span class="font5"> in ST, TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SEMANTIC FEATURES</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Salak</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Salak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Salak</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fruit</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Has unique shape like ripe fig with</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">distinct tip</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Consists of three lobes with the two larger ones, or even all three, containing a large inedible seed</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Has a crunchy and moist</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">consistency</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Has reddish-brown scaly skin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Has a flavor reminiscent of dilute</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">pineapple and lemon juice</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Edible to eat raw or pickled</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Used as part of offering in Bali</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">From the semantic features, it is obvious that SL-oriented transfer strategy since both of the translators used SL-oriented translation strategy. Focusing on the ST, TT1 used </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">retention marked in italic </span><span class="font5">as the translation strategy to translate this particular term. On the second translation of TT2, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">salak</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">salak fruit</span><span class="font5"> that is a </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">specification </span><span class="font5">strategy. This strategy leaving the ECR in its untranslated form, but adding information that is not present in the ST, making the TT ECR more specific than the ST ECR by adding fruit in the translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anjing Belang</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Up to the present time, Balinese used dog as an offering sacrifice for specific </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Bhuta Yadnya</span><span class="font5"> ceremonies. Balinese Hindu believe the importance of sacrificing in ceremony to maintain the balance of the world. Some references on old </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">lontars</span><span class="font5"> mentioned the use of dog in this particular ceremony, depends on the type of offering. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Belang</span><span class="font5"> is the type of dog used in that ceremony. This dog particularly should have reddish brown fur, with black fur on its mouth and tail (Dharmawan, 2009:26). Translation of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Belang</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Akan disembelih puluhan ekor itik dan ayam, kerbau, sapi, dan seekor </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">anjing belang</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Page 52 – line 26</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dozens of chickens and ducks would be slaughtered and some buffaloes, cattle, and </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">a special striped dog</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Page 58 – line 7</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dozens of ducks, chickens, a buffalo, a cow, and </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">a spotted dog</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Page 131 – line 23</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font5">Focusing on the TT, in TT1, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Belang</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">a special striped dog</span><span class="font5">. In ST, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Belang</span><span class="font5"> points out a very specific fauna, while in TT1, it is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">a special striped dog</span><span class="font5"> which is very generic of striped dog, with no detail explanation about the type, nor the color of its fur, so the translation strategy is </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">generalization</span><span class="font5">. In TT2, the translator translated ST into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">a spotted dog</span><span class="font5">. The translation strategy of TT2 is </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">substitution </span><span class="font5">where the translator removed the ST ECR and replaced by another explanation which depends on</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font5">The semantic features of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Belang</span><span class="font5"> in ST, TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SEMANTIC FEATURES</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Anjing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Belang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">A special striped dog</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">A spotted dog</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Animal with four legs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">A type of dog</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Has reddish-brown fur and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">black fur on the mouth</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">and tail</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Male dog</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Used as part of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bhuta</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Yadnya</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Caru Panca</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sanak/ Caru Rsi Gana</span><span class="font4">)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">ceremony in Bali</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Special dog to sacrifice in</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">an offering</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SEMANTIC FEATURES</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Rumah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Family</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Main</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Induk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">home</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">house</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Building made of wood/brick/concrete</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">A compound complex which consists of house building, family shrine complex, gate,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">balai-balai</span><span class="font4">, kitchen in</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Made based on </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Asta Kosala-</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kosali</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Place to live together with</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">extended family</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">The family who live here is part of social customs and traditions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Place to live with family Used as a place to perform</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Balinese ceremonies and social activities related to the family</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Mereka</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">They hadn’t taken</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">They were</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">mengintipnya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">their eyes off it,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">afraid that it</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">terus, takut</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">frightened their</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">would be</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">keduluan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">cousins who’d all</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">grabbed by their</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">diserobot oleh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">been taking part in</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">relatives who</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">saudara sepupu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">the holy day</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">were</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">yang sejak pagi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">ceremony at the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">participating in</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">ramai mengikuti</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">family home</span><span class="font4"> since</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">the ceremony in</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">upacara odalan di</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">morning would beat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">the </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">main house</span><span class="font4">.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">rumah induk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">them to it</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 129 – line 17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 51 – line 4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 87 – line 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">the translators’ understanding of the ECR.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural Terms Related to Material Culture (artefacts)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Material Culture or artefacts category according to Newmark (1988) commonly consists of several types; food, clothes, houses, towns, and transports. However, in the short stories only houses and food are found.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rumah Induk</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Rumah</span><span class="font5"> is a place or house where a family live together (Poewardaminta, 1982:836). Translation of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rumah induk</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The semantic features of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rumah induk</span><span class="font5"> in ST, TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From the semantic features, both translators used TL-oriented transfer strategies, focusing on TL. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Rumah induk</span><span class="font5"> or a Balinese home consists of a family or a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">number of related families living within one enclosure, praying at a common family temple, with one gate, and one kitchen (Covarrubias, 1973:74). This house built based on </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Asta Kosala-kosali</span><span class="font5"> or Balinese philosophy to build a house. R</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">umah induk</span><span class="font5"> in Balinese culture is very specific as presented in semantic features above. However, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rumah induk</span><span class="font5"> is translated to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">family home</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">main house</span><span class="font5"> in TT2, both translations indicated </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">generalization </span><span class="font5">as the ECR transfer strategy. The specific </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rumah induk</span><span class="font5"> in Bali translated into generic terms of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">family home</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">main house</span><span class="font5">. Both refer to house, but those translations are not necessarily mean Balinese house where ceremony and customs held continuously. House itself refers to a building where the majority people live, which normally has bedrooms, kitchen, living room, a bathroom and a dining room. While home is a place where someone lives, normally it is a house but it can be other things too like narrowboat, caravan, apartment, etc, home is often associated with a family and/or the place you feel attached to (woodwardenglish).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pekarangan</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">In Balinese architecture, traditional house was built with Balinese philosophy. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is defined as a public space when family held a ceremony or ritual. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is the center of the house, also acts as the orientation point of every important activity of the family (Suardana, 2015:59). Philosophically, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is the catalyst of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">akasa</span><span class="font5"> (sky) which represents male element, and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pretiwi</span><span class="font5"> (earth) which represents female element, the whole unity represented family life (Suardana, 2015:60). Translation of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Tapi ketika Toma</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">But just as Toma</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">But as Toma was</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">menggigit bagian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">took a bite of the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">biting into the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">dada yang renyah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">crisp tender</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">crispy breast with</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">dan empuk,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">breast, he heard</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">its soft flesh, they</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">terdengar jeritan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Aunty Nyoman</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">heard the screams</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Tante Nyoman di</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">screaming in the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">of Aunt Nyoman</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">tengah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">middle of </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">coming from the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">pekarangan</span><span class="font4">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">yard</span><span class="font4">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">middle of </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">compound</span><span class="font4">.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 50 – line 10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 87 – line 15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 130 – line 12</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">The semantic features of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> in ST, TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SEMANTIC FEATURES</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Pekara</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Yard</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Compo</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">A house complex which consist of building and space</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">ngan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">und</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">surrounded by wall Consist of building and space</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Surrounded by wall and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">telajakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Made based on </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Asta Kosala-kosali</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Place to live with family</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Place to perform ceremonies related to Balinese tradition</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">In TT1, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">yard</span><span class="font5"> which is the exact indication of </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">generalization </span><span class="font5">strategy of translation. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is a place to perform ceremonies as a one of the functions. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Yard</span><span class="font5"> on the other hand, is just part of the house if any. Not necessarily bear another function as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> in Balinese. In TT2, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">compound</span><span class="font5"> which contains some definition of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pekarangan</span><span class="font5"> located in the centre of house complex. This translation indicates </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">cultural substitution </span><span class="font5">as the transfer strategy, where the ST ECR changed into TT ECR that is more familiar in TT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ayam Panggang</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ayam</span><span class="font5"> is a kind of a poultry. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Panggang</span><span class="font5"> means cooked up on heat (Poerwadarminta, 1982:705). Translation of</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Ditatapnya </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">ayam</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">He looked at the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">He looked at the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">panggang</span><span class="font4"> itu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">roast chicken</span><span class="font4"> again.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">roast chicken</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">sekali lagi.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">again.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 50 – line 7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 86 – line 8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Page 129 – line 8</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ayam panggang</span><span class="font5"> in TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The semantic features of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ayam panggang</span><span class="font5"> in ST, TT1 and TT2 are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SEMANTIC</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">FEATURES</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">ST Ayam panggang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">The roast chicken</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TT2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">The roast chicken</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Edible object as food</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Made from chicken Cut in the middle so that</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">it has flat form</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Grilled/traditionally cooked on heat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Cooked with traditional spice using herbs Used as part of offering</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">related to Balinese tradition Related to Balinese</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">symbolization for pride and prosperity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">+/-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">From the semantic features as presented on the table, both translators used TL-oriented transfer strategies, focusing on TL. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ayam panggang</span><span class="font5"> is food used as part of offering. It is also related closely to offering in Balinese tradition as a symbol of wealth and prosperity. However, in TT1 and TT2, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ayam panggang</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">the roasted chicken</span><span class="font5"> - the ST is translated into different ECR which indicates </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">cultural substitution </span><span class="font5">as strategy of translation that could or could not carry several points of the semantic features.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">There are several points that can be summarized based on the discussion and explanation from the previous chapter particularly regarding the analysis of cultural terms related to Balinese culture and the two version of its translation in English. The conclusion obviously arose to understand the types of cultural terms in two short stories, the semantic features of each term and its translations, and the transfer strategies of two version of translations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From two types of cultural terms in </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font5">, the first type is related to ecology that consists of flora and fauna; the next type related to material culture consists of houses, and food.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The next discussions concerning the semantic features of each cultural terms and its transfer strategies. It is discovered that some of the features were not carried out by the translations. These tendencies related to translators’ transfer strategy which according to Pedersen divided into two namely SL-oriented strategies and TL-oriented strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From the discussion of five cultural terms and its ten translations, it is found the strategies used by both translators are mostly TL-oriented strategies which consist of generalization (4), susbstitution (1), cultural substitution (3), where the first translator (TT1) used mostly generalization (2), and cultural substitution (1) meanwhile the second translator (TT2) used generalization (1), substitution (1), and cultural substitution (2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">On the other hand, the use of SL-oriented consists of retention (1), and specification (1) where the first translator (TT1) used retention (1) and the second translator (TT2) used specification (1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Considering these two languages have different culture, it is inevitable to miss some components in the semantic features and the decision of using more TL-oriented strategies is part of the way to bridge the differences between culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">5. References</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">4. Conclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Alwi, H, et. all. 2008. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia Pusat Bahasa</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Arnita, I Gusti Ayu; Puspani, Ida Ayu Made; Seri Malini, Ni Luh Nyoman. Componential Analysis of The Cultural Terms in The Bilingual Short Story Entitled Mati “Salah Pati” and Its Translation “The Wrong Kind of Death”. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, </span><span class="font4">[S.l.], v. 23, aug. 2016. ISSN 0854-9613. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/22659"><span class="font4">&lt;</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/22659"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">view/22659</span><span class="font4">&gt;</span></a><span class="font4">. Date accessed: 30 oct. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chesterman, A, William, J. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Map: A Beginner’s Guide to Doing Research in Translation Studies</span><span class="font4">. Manchester: St. Jerome Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Covarrubias, M. 1973. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Island of Bali</span><span class="font4">. Singapore: Periplus Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Creswell, JW. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches; Third Edition</span><span class="font4">. United States of America: SAGE Publications, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dharmawan, NS. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Bali dan Rabies</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Buku Arti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hornby, AS. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary 7<sup>th</sup> Edition</span><span class="font4">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Larson, M. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation</span><span class="font4">. Lanham, New York &amp;&nbsp;Oxford: University Press of America, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lingard, J. 1995. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Diverse Lives, Contemporary Stories from Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Malaysia: Oxford New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Louis, K. 1979. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The True Interpreter: History of Translation Theory and Practice in the West.</span><span class="font4"> New York: St. Martin’s Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font4">. London: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nida, EA, Taber, CR. 1982. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Practice of Translation</span><span class="font4">. Leiden: E.J. Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pedersen, Jan. 2005. “How is culture rendered in subtitles?” </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Abstract S. Nauert (ed.) Proceedings of the Marie Curie Euroconferences ‘MuTra: Challenges of Multidimensional Translation’, Saarbru¨cken</span><span class="font4">, 2-6 May.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Poerwadarminta, WJS. 1982. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Umum Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: PN Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Purnamadadi, I Made Dwi. 2012. “Etic and Emic Points of View of the Balinese Cultural Terms and Their Translation from Mandi Api into Ordeal by Fire”. Thesis. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Purnama, Ida Ayu Eka. Translation Analysis of Balinese Terms &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Aspects. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana</span><span class="font4">, [S.l.],</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">v. 20, aug. 2013. ISSN 0854-9613. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/21878"><span class="font4">&lt;</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/21878"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">view/21878</span><span class="font4">&gt;</span></a><span class="font4">. Date accessed: 02 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Puspani, Ida Ayu Made. 2003. “The Semantic Features of the Terms Related to Balinese Culture in the Novel ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sukreni Gadis Bali’</span><span class="font4"> and Their Translation in ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Rape of Sukreni’</span><span class="font4">”. Thesis. Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rosidi, A. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ikhtisar Sejarah Sastera Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Pustaka Jaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Saldanha, G., O’Brien, S. 2014. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methodologies in Translation Studies</span><span class="font4">. London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Shadeg, N. 2007. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Balinese-English Dictionary</span><span class="font4">. Singapore: Tuttle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Soethama, GA. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mandi Api</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Buku Kompas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Soethama, GA. 2008. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ordeal by Fire</span><span class="font4">. (Cork, V, translator). Denpasar: Buku Arti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Suardana, ING. 2015. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rupa Nir-rupa Arsitektur Bali</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Buku Arti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengantar Penelitian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wahana</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan secara Linguistis</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Warna,W, et.all. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Bali-Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Dinas Pendidikan Dasar Propinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Westling, M. 2011. “A Comparative Translation Study of Strindberg’s The Red Room (1879): Norms, Strategies and Solutions”. Thesis. Stockholm (EU): Stockholm Universitet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wijaya, LP. 2018. “Loss and Gain of Information of the Cultural Terms in the Short Story </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Seekor Ayam Panggang</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Roast Chicken</span><span class="font4"> in Relation to the Target Language Reader’s Understanding” </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Abstract 1<sup>st</sup> International Conference on Local Language</span><span class="font4">, Bali, 23 – 24 February 2018.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">38</span></p>