---
layout: full_article
title: "The Syntactic Strategies and Equivalence of English Non Finite Verbs  Which Translated into Indonesian with Reference to  National Geographic Magazine"
author: "Ni Wayan Esti Ekarini Rahayu, I Nyoman Sedeng, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58758 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-58758"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58758"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p05"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Syntactic Strategies and Equivalence of English Non Finite Verbs Which Translated into Indonesian with Reference to</span><br><br><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>National Geographic Magazine</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Ni Wayan Esti Ekarini Rahayu</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Denpasar Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Email : </span><a href="mailto:esti.ekarini73@gmail.com"><span class="font4">esti.ekarini73@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>I Nyoman Sedeng</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Udayana University, Denpasar Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Email : </span><a href="mailto:inyoman_sedeng@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4">inyoman_sedeng@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Udayana University, Denpasar Indonesia Email :</span><a href="mailto:mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4"> mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">In dealing with problems while translating, translators need to apply translation strategies. It involves finding equivalents which are similar in meaning. The aims of this study are investigating and analyzing the syntactic strategies and equivalents of English non finite verbs which are translated into Indonesian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study employed descriptive qualitative method. The data are 130 complex sentences taken from two feature articles in National Geographic Magazines pulished in English and Indonesian on December 2018. The result of study shows that the syntactic strategies found are loan calque, transposition, phrase structure change, clause structure change, unit shift. and sentence structure change. In addition, formal equivalences are mostly found in translation, in comparison with the dynamic equivalences. It can be concluded that the syntactic strategy is applied by the translators to get natural translated text in TL by selecting linguistic equivalences without changing the meaning. The formal equivalence is used when translators maintain the message by focusing on form and content. While dynamic equivalence is applied when the translator does not maintain the form and content but focus more on sense of translation by using natural equivalence which is closest in meaning and shows similar concept in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Complex Sentences, Non Finite Clause, Syntactic Strategy, and Equivalents</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Untuk menghindari kendala dalam proses penerjemahan, para penerjemah menerapkan strategi. Dalam mencari kesepadanan arti, penerjemah menerapkan pendekatan kesepadanan pada penerjemahan. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisa strategi sintaktik dan kesepadanan penerjemahan yang ditemukan pada terjemahan kata kerja non finit dalam bahasa Inggris ke dalam bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif deskripsi dengan menggunakan 130 kalimat kompleks sebagai data penelitian. Data ini diambil dari dua artikel pada Majalah National Geographic dalam terbitan dua bahasa yaitu Inggris dan Indonesia yang terbit pada bulan Desember 2018. Hasil penelitian ini</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">menunjukkan strategi sintaktik yang ditemukan pada penerjemahan adalah loan calque, transposisi, perubahan struktur frase, perubahan struktur klausa, unit shift. and perubahan struktur kalimat. Lebih jauh dalam hal kesepadanan, kesepadanan formal paling banyak ditemukan dalam penerjemahan; sedangkan kesepadanan dinamis hanya ditemukan beberapa. Dari hasil penelitian ini dapat disimpulkan bahwa penerapan strategi sintataktik menunjukkan penerjemah berusaha menghasilkan terjemahan yang natural dalam bahasa target dengan tanpa merubah arti dalam bahasa sumber dengan menerapkan perubahan linguistik. Demikian pula dengan penerapan kesepadanan formal, dimana penerjemah berusaha mempertahankan pesan dengan berfokus pada konten dan bentuk kata kerja non finit. Sedangkan kesepadan dinamis menunjukkan penerjemah berfokus pada penerjamahan rasa ke rasa dari bahasa sumber ke bahasa target dengan tidak mempertahankan bentuk dan konten dalam bahasa sumber ke dalam bahasa target sehingga menghasilkan terjemahan yang sepadan, natural dan memiliki arti yang sangat dekat yang memiliki kesamaan konsep dalam bahasa target.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalimat kompleks, kata kerja non finit, strategi sintaktik, dan kesepadanan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">One of the problems faced by translators in the process of translating is finding the linguistic equivalence in the form of </span><span class="font4">words, phrases, clauses and sentences. As Larson (1984:3) mentions that the purpose of translation is to transfer the meaning of the source language (SL) text into the target language (TL) text, which is done by replacing the form of the first language to the form of the second by the semantic structure. It means the meaning should be maintained, but the form may change.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Translating English complex sentences into Indonesian has its own challenge. A complex sentence consists of a subordinate clause that cannot stand alone as a complete sentence because it does not express a complete thought. Moreover, when a subordinate clause is placed in a non-finite construction, it triggers problem for some translators, as its form is not influenced by tense, mood and sometimes it lacks of subject. Regardless this, the translator must convey the message from SL to TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study aims to analyze the syntactic strategies of translating English non finite verbs and their equivalences in Indonesian. The data of non finite verbs is taken from bilingual magazine of National Geographic published on December 2018. This magazine is the official magazine of the National Geographic Society containing articles about science, geography, history, and world culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Concerning the translation of the parables, there are two problems to be discussed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of syntactic strategies are found in the translation of English non finite verb into Indonesian?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the equivalences are found in translating English non finite verbs into Indonesian?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data of this paper is complex sentences whose their subordinate clauses are identified as non finite clauses. This study is focused on the syntactic strategies by using equivalences in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">translating English non finite clauses into Indonesian. The theory applied in this data analysis is the theory of syntax proposed by Quirk et. al (1985) which is related to the non finite clauses. He distinguishes 4 types of non finite verbs namely: to infinitive, bare infinitive, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> participle, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed </span><span class="font4">participle. These non finite verbs will be analyzed based on their translation into Indonesian by using their syntatctic strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chesterman (2016:90) lists ten types of changes in translation, which he calls as sytactic strategies, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation, defined as meaning “maximally close to the SL form”;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loan, Calque, considered as the borrowing of individual terms and sytagma;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategy transposition , which means the change of word class ;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unit shift, this is a term from Catford (1965), which consists of morpheme, word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph. A unit shift occurs when a ST unit is translated as a different unit in the TT;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phrase structure change. This strategy, or rather group of strategies, comprises a number of changes at the level of the phrase, including number, definiteness and modification in the noun phrase, and person, tense and mood in the verb phrase. The unit itself may remain unchanged, i.e. an ST phrase may still correspond to a TT phrase, but its internal structure changes;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clause structure change, this group changes have to do with the structure of the clause in terms of its constituent phrases. Various subclasses include constituent order (analysed simply as Subject, Verb, Object, Complement, Adverbial), active vs.passive voice, finite vs. non-finite structure, and transitive vs. Intransitive;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sentence structure change. This group of strategies affects the structure of the sentence unit, insofar as it is made up of clause units. Included are changes between main-clause and subclause status, changes of sub-clause types etc;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cohesion change. A cohesion change is something that affects intra-textual reference, ellipsis, substitution, pronominalization and repetition, or the use of connectors of various;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(9) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By levels of phonology, morphology, syntax and lexis. In a level shift, the mode of expression of a particular item is shifted from one level to another. An obviously influential factor here is the types of languages concerned, kinds;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(10) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scheme change, refers to the kinds of changes that translators incorporate in the translation of rhetorical schemes such as parallelism, repetition, alliteration, metrical rhythm </span><span class="font2">etc.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Another theory applied in this study is the translation equivalence proposed by Nida (1964). He states that there are two different types of equivalences, namely formal equivalence dan dynamic equivalence. Formal equivalence tries to remain as close to the original text as possible, without adding the translator’s idea and thought into translation. It focuses on form and content contained in the message.This is therefore much more of a word-for-word view of translation. However, dynamic equivalence is an approach to translation in which the original language is translated “thought for thought” rather than “word for word”as in formal equivalence. And only then the translator could state the original feature, he can achieve dynamic equivalence. This definition includes three basic terms namely: (</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span><span class="font4">) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">equivalent</span><span class="font4">, which refers to the source-language message; (</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span><span class="font4">) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">natural</span><span class="font4">, which refers to the receptor language; and (</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3</span><span class="font4">) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">closest</span><span class="font4">, which &quot;binds the two orientations together on the basis of the highest degree of approximation&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In addition, the author also reviews several relevant journals concerning with the translation procedure that contributes to enriching the frame of mind. Anita Permatasari’s (2015) with an article entitled “The Equivalence of Phrasal Verb Translation “The other Side of Midnight into Lewat Tengah Malam” which is contributed to this study since it also applied the equivalence on translation. The second journal article is written by Netra, I Made et al. entitled “Sistem Koreferensial Klausa Subordinatif Bahasa Indonesia’s” (2008) that contributed to this research since the two articles describe subordinate clauses.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The syntactic strategies of English non finite clauses translated into Indonesian</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The English non finite verbs translated into Indonesian are presented as the following:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loan, Calque</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This strategy covers both the borrowing of the individual items and the borrowing of syntagma. It refers to a deliberate choice, not the unconscious influence of undesired interference. The data below shows English verb in non finite clause translated into Indonesian. It might occur in the non finte verbs </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to-</span><span class="font4"> infinitive and -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> participle.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(1)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">A far more comprehensive solution may soon be technologically feasible,predicts Wallace, who hopes to use optical character recognition (OCR) software </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to digitilize</span><span class="font4"> every volume of the Greek New Testament (p.75)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Solusi yang jauh lebih komprehensif,prediksi Wallace, menggunakan perangkat lunak OCR untuk </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mendigitalisasi </span><span class="font4">sesi volum Perjanjian Baru berbahasa Yunani (p.82)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">In the data (1) the non finite verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to </span><span class="font4">infinitive of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to digitalize</span><span class="font4"> in SL is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mendigitalisasi</span><span class="font4"> in TL. The base form of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">digitilize </span><span class="font4">according to Advance Learner’s English Oxford Dictionary means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to change something such as a document to a digital form</span><span class="font4">. Both of them in the translation are verbs, there is no change occurred in the word class. The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">digitilize</span><span class="font4"> is adapted as Indonesian grammar structure by using the prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">me-.</span><span class="font4"> The loan strategy used by translator can be understood because there is no equal word to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">digitilize</span><span class="font4"> in TL .</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Boycotting</span><span class="font4"> palm oil is unwise (p.89)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Boikot</span><span class="font4"> juga akan sia sia (p.90)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The clause </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">boycotting palm oil</span><span class="font4"> is a non finite noun clause. This clause functions as subject of the sentence and the non finite verb is in -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> participle</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">construction. The base form of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">boycotting</span><span class="font4"> is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">boycott</span><span class="font4"> which means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">refuse to buy</span><span class="font4"> according to Advance Learner’s Oxford Dictionary. It is translated and adapted to suit Indonesian pronunciation into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">boikot</span><span class="font4"> in TL which according to KBBI means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bersekongkol menolak untuk bekerja sama (berurusan dagang, berbicara,ikut serta, dan sebagainya). Boikot</span><span class="font4"> is a loan word adopted from English into Indonesian because there is no word in TL that has similar meaning equals to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">boycott</span><span class="font4">. The loan strategy is applied in this data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The variants of non finite clauses found translated by using the transposition syntactic strategies are </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to </span><span class="font4">infinitive and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> participle which function as noun clauses, presented as follows :</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">It needs </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to diversify </span><span class="font4">the product (91)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Negara itu memerlukan diversifikasi (p.105)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The English non finite verb to infinitive is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to-</span><span class="font4">diversify translated into Indonesian noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">diversifikasi.</span><span class="font4"> In fact, it is a loan word adapted from </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">diversification</span><span class="font4"> which belongs to English noun. So the word class of verb in SL change into noun in the TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unit Shift</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This kind of strategy applied strategy proposed by Catford. The unit are morpheme, phrase, clause sentence, paragraph. A unit shift occurs when a ST unit is translated as a different unit in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The non finite verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cataloged</span><span class="font4"> is -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed participle </span><span class="font4">form. The non finte verb is translated into relative clause in Indonesian which is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang dikatalogkan</span><span class="font4">. There is a unit shift occured here because the unit in SL is translated into different unit in TL, that is from a verb into a relatif clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clause Structure Change</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This group changes occur to the non finite verbs </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to </span><span class="font4">infinitive which belong to active voice in SL; but after being translated, they turn into passive voices. In addition, a non finite intransitive verb in SL may change into transitive in TL. It is discussed as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">But as Green has come </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to learn </span><span class="font4">firsthand (p.52)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Namun seperti </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dialami </span><span class="font4">sendiri oleh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Green(p.65)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The non finite verb of the data above is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to learn</span><span class="font4"> in infinitive form translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dialami in</span><span class="font4"> TL which is in passive voice. The passive voice in TL can be recognized by the using of prefix </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">di.</span><span class="font4"> Additionally</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font4">suffix -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i</span><span class="font4"> is attached to its base form before it becomes a verb. It shows the syntactic strategy of clause structure change that occured in the translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sentence Structure Change</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This kind of syntactic strategy occur to the complex sentences that have a non finite clause in SL but their structure change when they are translated into TL.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(4)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">The one </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cataloged</span><span class="font4"> as cave 53 caught attention of Price in 2010 (p.47)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Gua </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang dikatalogkan </span><span class="font4">sebagai Gua 53 menarik perhatian Price pada 2010(p.58)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(10)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Kando indignantly denies that his family sold an authentic fragments, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">suggesting</span><span class="font4"> that any forgeries must have</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Kando dengan geram menyangkal bahwa keluarganya menjual potongan tidak autentik. Ia </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menyebutkan</span><span class="font4"> bahwa pemalsuannya pasti datang dari pedagang dengan reputasi lebih</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">come from less reputable dealers (p.69)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">rendah(p.77)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">In the data above, the complex sentence consists of a main clause and two subordinate clauses. One of them is a non finite construction. The last subordinate clause is a non finite clause because it does not have a subject. When this complex sentence is translated into Indonesian, it turns into two complex sentences. It is found that the translator is applied the syntactic strategy of clause structure change.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>3.2 . The Equivalent of Translation of English Non Finite Clause into Indonesian</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In line with the focus of this study, there are two kinds of equivalent will be discussed in he following part of article.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formal Equivalence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This kind of translation equivalence were found in all types on non finite verbs. Here are the examples of them :</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">a. Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> infinitive</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(11)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">It's thrill </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to watch</span><span class="font4"> these animals in the open p.90)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Seru sekali </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menyaksikan </span><span class="font4">satwa ini di alam terbuka (p.95)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The above data shows a non finite verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to watch</span><span class="font4"> is translated into TL verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menyaksikan. </span><span class="font4">Here the verb in SL is also translated into verb in SL. It means that they have the same form. They also have the same function as verb that modifies the adjective. The meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to watch</span><span class="font4"> according to Advance Learner’s Oxford dictionary (add year of publication of the Oxford dictionary here) is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">look at or observe attentively over a period of time.</span><span class="font4"> While </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menyaksikan</span><span class="font4">, according to Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia, means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">melihat dengan sesungguhnya.</span><span class="font4"> Both of the words have the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">equal form and content. It can be concluded that translation equivalence applied is formal equivalence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. Non finite verb of bare infinitive</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(12)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">What we are trying to do in Gabon is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">find</span><span class="font4"> a new development path (p. 88)</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the above data, a non finite verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">find</span><span class="font4"> is translated into TL verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mencari</span><span class="font4">. The non finite verb in SL is translated into verb also in SL. The function of the English non finite clause is object. It is similar to the subordinate clause in TL. We can say that they have the same form. The meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">find,</span><span class="font4"> according to Advance Learner’s Oxford Dictionary (add year here), is to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">discover</span><span class="font4"> oneself to be in a particular situation. The verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mencari</span><span class="font4"> according to KBBI (add year here) mean</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s berusaha mendapatkan (menemukan, memperoleh).</span><span class="font4"> As the meaning of the two verbs are equal, it can be concluded that their content is similar. It means that the translation equivalence applied is formal equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">c. Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing</span><span class="font4"> participle</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(13)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">After </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">signing </span><span class="font4">a pledge to return he codex once he'd made excact copies , he deliver ed it to</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Setelah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menandatang ani</span><span class="font4"> sebuah sumpah untuk mengembalik an kodeks itu begitu ia telah membuat salinan persisnya , ia pasti mengirim ke raja pelinding di St.Petersburg (p.58)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">his royal patron in St.Pete rsburg (p. 52)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The sentence in Sl above shows that a non finite verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">signing</span><span class="font4"> is translated into a verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menandatangani in TL</span><span class="font4">. Here the verb in SL is translated into verb also in SL and both of them are also preceded by adverb of time, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">after </span><span class="font4">in SL and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">setelah</span><span class="font4"> in TL. We can say they have the same form. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">signing</span><span class="font4"> has the base form </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sign</span><span class="font4">. According to Advance Learner’s Oxford Dictionary (add year of publication here), the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">signing</span><span class="font4"> is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">the action of writing one's signature on an official document; while</span><span class="font4"> the meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menandatangani</span><span class="font4"> according to KBBI is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">membubuhkan tanda tangan pada.</span><span class="font4"> Both of them have the equal form and content. It can be concluded that they are formal equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed</span><span class="font4"> participle</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(14 )</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Situated on</span><span class="font4"> the Equartor and on the continent's west coast, Gabon is roughly the size of Colorado with a third of the people (p.91)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Terletak di </span><span class="font4">katulistiwa, Gabon memiliki luas setara dengan Colorado dan memiliki sepertiga dari penduduknya (p.105)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The non finite verb in the data above is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">situated on.</span><span class="font4"> It is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">terletak in</span><span class="font4"> SL. Both of them have the same form because they are adverbial clauses that explain about places. The function of these adverbial clauses are to point out a place. Both of them are also</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">followed by a preposition. The meaning of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">situated at</span><span class="font4"> according to Advance Learner’s Oxford Dictionary (year of publication here) is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to build or place something in a particular position</span><span class="font4">, while </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">terletak di</span><span class="font4"> according to Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia (add year of publication here) means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berada (di); bertempat (di).</span><span class="font4"> The clause </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">situated at</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">terletak</span><span class="font4"> have the same content; it can be concluded that the translation strategy applied is formal equivalence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4.3.2 Dynamic Equivalence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Only a few data show the dynamic equivalence applied in the translation. It is not found in the form of bare infinitive, but in to- infinitive, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-ing </span><span class="font4">participle and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">-ed</span><span class="font4"> participle. Below are data from each non finite verbs, except the bare infinitive form.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">a. Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to</span><span class="font4"> infinitive</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">5)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">In Africa as in Southeast Asia, the crop is here </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to stay</span><span class="font4"> (p.88)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Di Afrika , sama seperti di Asia Tenggara , tanaman ini </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tak mungkin disingkirkan</span><span class="font4">(p.90)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The English non finite verb in the data is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to stay</span><span class="font4">. It is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tak mungkin disingkirkan</span><span class="font4"> in TL. It means they have different form, because the verb in Sl is translated into phrase in TL. According to Advance Learner’s Oxford Dictionary, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to stay</span><span class="font4">, means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to be accepted or used by most people and therefore a permanent part of our lives </span><span class="font4">while </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tak mungkin disingkirkan</span><span class="font4"> means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dijauhkan dari,</span><span class="font4"> according to Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia. They do not have different form and content but they have the same concept, it can be said it is translated by using the dynamic equivalence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ing participle</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shared by</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> TL</span><span class="font4">and yang </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">termasuk</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">is clearly e. It can trategy of a is by</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(16)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">It was a codex, an ancient text in book form instead of a scroll, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dating to</span><span class="font4"> the mid-fourth century (p.47)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Harta itu bdeirfufepraenste,bbuuaththkeoidreckosn,sceebputaahre the sa naskah kubneo dcaolnacmlubdeendtutkhabtukthuealtirhanalsilhation s gulungan,E</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">y</span><span class="font4">n</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font4">g</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">n</span><span class="font4">l</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">g</span><span class="font4">is</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">b</span><span class="font4">h</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">er</span><span class="font4">n</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font4">o</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">s</span><span class="font4">n</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a l</span><span class="font4"> f</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">d</span><span class="font4">in</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font4">i</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">r</span><span class="font4">t</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i</span><span class="font4">e pcelrateunsgeaihnanthe dat abad ke emuspiantg(pd.y6n5a)mic equivalence.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The English non finite verb in SL is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dating </span><span class="font4">translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang berasal dari</span><span class="font4">. It is clearly that the verb in SL is translated into relative clause in TL. It means that they have different form. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dating</span><span class="font4">, according to Advance Learner’s Oxford English Dictionary means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">establish or ascertain the date of (an object or event)</span><span class="font4">, while according to Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang berasal dari</span><span class="font4"> means </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bermula.</span><span class="font4"> They both have different form and content eventhough their concept is the same denoting the time of period of an event in the setence, namely </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">the mid-fouth century</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">c. Non finite verb of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ed participle</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">(1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">7)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Since 1943, nearly 16,000 square miles of rain forest on Borneo </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shared by</span><span class="font4"> Malaysia and Indonesia have been logged, burned and bulldozed to make way for oil palm (p.85)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sejak 1943, 41,000 kilometer persegi hutan tropis di Pulau Borneo , </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang termasuk</span><span class="font4"> wilayah Malaysia dan Indonesia, elah dibalak, dibakar dan dibuldozer utnuk memberi tempat bagi minyak kelapa sawit (p.88)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The English non finite verb in the data above is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shared by</span><span class="font4"> which is translated into TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang termasuk.</span><span class="font4"> Both of them have different forms, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shared by</span><span class="font4"> is a verb that translated into a relative clause. Besides, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">shared by</span><span class="font4"> in the complex sentence mentions about the island Borneo in which both Malaysia and Indonesia have territory; while </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang termasuk</span><span class="font4"> explain about the territory that belongs to the Malaysia and Indonesia in Borneo island. The content of</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The result of this research shows that there are four types of English Non Finite verbs found in the feature articles of National Geographic Magazine, namely, to- infinitive, bare infinitive, -ing participle, and -ed participle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research also found that in order to get natural translated text in TL, the translators made small linguistic changes known as syntactic strategy and translation equivalence. Those syntacic strategies can be accepted because they do not change the meaning. The syntactic strategie found in the translation of English non finite clause into Indonesian in National Geogrpahic Magazine are loan calque, transposition, unit shift, clause structure change and sentence structure change. While two types of equivalences, formal and dynamic equivalence are applied in the translation of English non finite clauses into Indonesian. Formal equivalence is applied when the translator requires to focus on the message itself, both in form and content. However, when the translator uses the dynamic equivalence, it means that the translator needs to give the sense for sense translation without concerning the form and the content.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">--------------Kamus Besar Bahsa Indonesia.(Online).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Available at </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">kbbi.kemdikbud.go.id/entri</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chesterman,Andrew. 2016. Memes of Translation, Helsinki: John Benjamin Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Drapper, Robert. 2018. “Bible Hunters”, “Palm Oil : The other Oil Crisis” in National Geographic. National Geographic Society</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Drapper, Robert, 2018.”Pemburu Alkitab”, “Harapan di Balik Krisis Minyak Kelapa” National Geographic. Jakarta : Kompas Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S. 2005. Advance Learner's Dictionary of Current English, Seventh edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Larson, M. I. 1998;1984. Meaning-Based translation: A Guide to Cross- Language Equivalence, (Lanham: University Press of America)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk at al. A. 1985 A Comprehensive Grmmar of English Language.Longman: London</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nida, E.A and Taber. 1964. Toward a Science of Translation. Leiden:E.J.Brill</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">PERMATASARI, Anita. Textual Equivalence of Phrasal Verb in The Novel ‘The Other Side of Midnoght” into ‘Lewat Tengah Malam’. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Linguistika: &nbsp;&nbsp;Buletin Ilmiah Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana</span><span class="font4">,. [S.l.], v. 22, sep. 2015. ISSN 2656-6419. .Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/21893"><span class="font4">&lt;</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistik</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/21893"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">a/article/view/21893</span><span class="font4">&gt;</span></a><span class="font4">. Date accessed: 10 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">NETRA, I Made et al</span><span class="font4">. Sistem Koreferensial Klausa Subordinatif Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">[S.l.], v. 15, sep.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2008. ISSN 2656-6419. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/305"><span class="font4">&lt;</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistik</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/305"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">a/article/view/305</span><span class="font4">&gt;</span></a><span class="font4">. Date accessed: 10 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">47</span></p>