---
layout: full_article
title: "The Nominal Address Terms Found In The Movie Harry Potter And The Chamber Of Secrets As English Teaching Material"
author: "Putu Kurnia Utami, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58763 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-58763"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-58763"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p08"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i01.p08</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Nominal Address Terms Found In The Movie </span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Harry Potter And The Chamber Of Secrets</span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"> As English Teaching Material</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Putu Kurnia Utami<sup>1</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:kurniautami18@gmail.com"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">kurniautami18@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>N.L. Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4">mas_indrawati@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This study aims to analyze the types of nominal address term and the factors which influenced the choice of it found in the movie Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets as well as how to use them as authentic teaching material in English class.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study used the movie Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets as the data source. The method of collecting data are, first, the movie was watched. Second, the script of the movie was downloaded from the internet. Then, the script was read. While reading the script, the address terms found were noted. Furthermore, if there were a lot of potential data found to be used, the data were selected into particular ones that were relevant to support the analysis. Once the data were collected, they were classified by the types. The factors constraining the polite choice of address terms then were analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis, there are several types of nominal address terms found in the movie such as name terms, occupational term, title, kinship term and term of endearment. There were three types of name terms found in the object of the study, they are first name, family name and full name. The factors that influenced the choice of address terms are the intimacy between the addresser and the addressee, the social relationship, and the setting of the conversation. The movie can be used as an authentic material to be used in English class to exposed students to the real language and give the appropriate context about when to use the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword: address term, movie, authentic material</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis jenis kata sapaan bentuk nominal dan faktor yang mempengaruhi pilihan tersebut yang ditemukan dalam film </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font4"> serta bagaimana menggunakannya sebagai bahan ajar otentik di kelas bahasa Inggris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Penelitian ini menggunakan film </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font4"> sebagai sumber data. Data dikumpulkan dengan cara, pertama film ditonton. Kemudian, naskah film diunduh dari internet. Selanjutnya, skrip dari film tersebut dibaca. Saat membaca skrip, bentuk sapaan yang ditemukan dicatat. Selanjutnya, jika ada banyak data potensial yang ditemukan, data dipilih untuk menentukan data yang relevan untuk mendukung analisis. Ketika data sudah terkumpul, data kemudian diklasifikasikan berdasarkan tipenya. Faktor-faktor yang membatasi pilihan bentuk sapaan kemudian dianalisis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Berdasarkan analisis, terdapat beberapa jenis bentuk sapaan nomina yang ditemukan seperti bentuk nama, istilah pekerjan, title, istilah kekerabatan, dan panggilan sayang. Ditemukan tiga jenis bentuk sapaan dalam bentuk nama yang ditemukan dalam objek penelitian, yaitu: nama depan, nama keluarga dan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">title</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">dengan nama keluarga. Faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi pilihan bentuk sapaan adalah keintiman antara pembicara dan lawan bicara, hubungan sosial, dan latar percakapan. Film dapat dijadikan sebagai bahan ajar otentik dalam kelas Bahasa Inggris karena siswa akan belajar dari Bahasa yang sebenarnya digunakan dalam kehidupan nyata sehingga mereka tahu konteks yang tepat dalam menggunakannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword: bentuk sapaan, film, materi otentik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">As part of society, people cannot avoid interacting with others. They use language as their media of social interaction. The fundamental purpose of using a language is for communication. Communication is involved in every aspect of our lives. It can be simply described as an activity of transferring information from the sender to the receiver. It is a two-way process that results in a common understanding between the sender and the receiver.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The choice of people's language when talking to others shows their relationships. It can be influenced by their social status, education background, religion, ethnic, etc. People will use formal language to talk to someone from higher social status, their leader, or someone who they meet for the first time. However, people will tend to use informal and everyday language when talking to their friends and family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">People's relationships with others also affect their way to address. The use of address terms can be found in every culture. Different cultures, different languages have their address term. The choice of address term when addressing the interlocutor can reveal the relationship between them, the social status, or the setting of the conversation. There are some factors influence the people's choice of appropriate address term in British/American, such as kinship relationship, age, sex, marked setting, well-acquainted. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Several studies have used address term as the object of the research. Kamaja (2014) in his article entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Struktur Semantik Pronomina Dalam Sistem Sapaan Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font4"> studies about the semantic structure of the arguments owned by the pronoun in the address term system in Balinese Language. It used Natural Semantic Metalanguage Theory as a basic reference and a tool to analyze the data which focused on the elements of form and meaning. Based on the analysis, it is found that there are several personal pronoun with varied semantic structure such as kai, waké, icang, bena, tiang, titiang, gelah, manira, ulun that mean ‘I’, cai, nyai, ragané, jeroné, gusti, iratu that mean 'you' and ia, dané, ipun, ida that mean 'someone',</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">'something'/ 'thing', 'people'/'person', 'body'. The semantic structure of these personal pronouns can be formulated as: ‘Something happens to Y if X does something’ (action), ‘something happens to Y if X says something '(utterance).^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Özcan (2016) in his article entitled Choice of Address Term In Conversational Setting tried to examine the address term used during spontaneous conversation taking place in no power situation. The study tried to identify the effects of a bilingual situation and a different culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data of the study were taken from the address terms school children use in a reciprocal situation. The data were analyzed regarding the potential effect of age, gender and being monolingual or bilingual in this issue. The result showed that monolingual children use more type of address term while bilingual children dwell on first names more frequently. The factors of the choice of address terms are politeness and positive and negative face. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In his article entitled The Pragmatic Meanings of Address Terms Sampeyan and Anda, Susanto (2014) investigates the use of sampeyan and anda by the students from Pasuruan and Probolinggo. It aims to find out factors influence the choice of address terms and the situation when it is used. The result shows that both </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sampeyan</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anda</span><span class="font4"> were found to be commonly used by the participants to address their lecturer, instead of using </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bapak</span><span class="font4">. They use sampeyan to express politeness and indicate informality. While, anda is used because it is more formal and appropriate in an educational environment, and to respect a person who is older or from higher social status.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Agustinus (2018) in his article entitled A Study on the Address and Kinship Terms in Kempo Speech of Manggarai Language in West Flores Indonesia, he tried to describe the address and kinship terms in Kempo speech and the linguistics formation of the term. The data show that Kempo's speech has various terms that are different from other languages as well as the form is linguistically different from other languages. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In her article entitled The Address Terms in English and Selayerese, Zavitri (2018) analyzes the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">address terms in English and Selayerese based on the situation and context and the factors that influence the choice of the address terms. The result found that in English, nobility and teknonym were found. Also, Selayerese has certain addresses terms to call cousin and nephew or niece. There are also similarities found, such as both languages use the first name to call father, mother, grandfather and grandmother. Moreover, both languages recognize the terms of endearment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is interesting to study address terms because the use of address terms reveals a lot of things including the identity, the power, the authority, and the relationship of the speakers. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One fundamental thing that language learners have to know is how to address their interlocutors. In EFL (English as Foreign Language) or ESL (English as Second Language) classroom, address term is the first thing to be taught. Students do not only learn a new language but also learn the culture of the language they are learning including the term of address. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Literary works are the reflection of our real life. They show the culture and social condition of the people in a certain area. The use of address form can also be found in literary works such as movies, novels, drama, and short stories. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lindstrom (2015) states that one way of developing intercultural competence in ELT is through the use of film, a powerful tool in language teaching since it has the possibilities not only to teach linguistic skills but also cultural and critical ones as well. It can be said that by using movies, teachers do not only teach about the language itself but also the culture of the people who speak the language. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kilickaya (2004) states that knowing a language goes beyond the knowledge of grammatical rules, vocabulary items and pronunciation of these items. Successful language learning requires language users to know that culture underlying language to get the meaning across. Therefore, it is important for language learners to not only learn the linguistic aspects but also the culture of the speaker of the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study takes the movie as the object of the study to analyze the address term used by English native speakers. It is interesting to analyze the dialogue in the movies because it contains the choices of appropriate address terms by the characters which are influenced by a lot of things.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The dialogue in the movie can further be used as an authentic teaching material to teach address terms for English learners. It gives a real context to students to use address terms in everyday conversation. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jacobson (2003) proposed that authentic or leaner-contextualized material is print materials used in ways that they would be used in the lives of learners outside of their adult education classes. For example, if students are very concerned about a city's decision to build a waste treatment facility in their neighborhood, their teacher might decide to bring in various newspaper articles and editorials about this decision so that students can learn the facts and discuss and debate the issues.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kilickaya (2004) stated that Authentic materials enable learners to interact with the real language and content rather than the form. Learners feel that they are learning a target language as it is used outside the classroom. It can be said that by using authentic material, students do not merely know about the language, but also they learn how to use it in a certain context. Besides, they will also learn the culture of the language that they are learning.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The main advantages of using authentic materials are (Philips and Shettlesworth 1978; Clarke 1989; Peacock 1997; Richards 2001, cited in Kilickaya, 2004):</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">•</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They have a positive effect on learner motivation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">•</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They provide authentic cultural information.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">•</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They provide exposure to real language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">•</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They relate more closely to learners' needs</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">•</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They support a more creative approach to teaching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Authentic material will make students more excited and expose them to the real language, not the artificial one. It also helps provide information</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">about the culture of the speakers of the target language. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mestari (2016) in her article entitled The Use of Authentic Materials in Teaching Grammar for EFL Students (Teacher's perspective), analyzes the use of authentic material in teaching English from the teacher's perspective and how to use them in the grammar EFL class. The result of the study revealed that all teachers tend to use authentic materials to teach grammar to expose students to the real use of language. Some criteria should be considered in choosing authentic material, such as suitability of content, exploitability and readability. Besides students' needs should also be considered such as their interest, level, language level, course objective and the richness of the material.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In her article entitled The Use of Authentic Material in The Teaching of Reading, Berardo (2006) stated that the reason for using authentic material is the learner will not be exposed to the artificial language but they will learn the real language and how to use it. She stated that the teacher should not delude the leaner but has to prepare them, giving awareness and necessary skills ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the background explained above, this study focused on the nominal address term and the factors which influence the use of address term in the movie being analyzed. The types of nominal address terms found in the movie can be later used as one of the English teaching sources in teaching how to address someone in English. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In order to conduct scientific writing, it is necessary to follow a systematic way and scientific procedures to achieve a valid result. This study was conducted by using descriptive qualitative design which consists of watching the movie and reading the script of the movie. The descriptive qualitative study does not intend to discover a new theory; however, it is used to prove the existing theory. The research method used in this study can be divided into three parts; they are (1) data source, (2) method and technique of collecting data, (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">method of technique of analyzing data to be explained further in the following sections.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As mentioned above, the data of the study was taken from one of the most popular movies entitled Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secret. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets</span><span class="font4"> is a 2002 British-American fantasy film directed by Chris Columbus and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is based on the novel of the same name by J. K. Rowling. The film, which is the second installment in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter</span><span class="font4"> film series, was written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman. The story follows Harry Potter's second year at Hogwarts as the Heir of Salazar Slytherin opens the Chamber of Secrets, unleashing a monster that petrifies the school's denizens.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The film stars Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter, alongside Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry's best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. It is the sequel to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone</span><span class="font4"> and is followed by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are some steps in data collection. First, the movie was watched. Second, the script of the movies was downloaded from the internet. Then, the script was read. While reading the script, the address terms found were noted. Furthermore, if there are a lot of potential data found to be used, the data was selected into a particular one which is relevant to support the analysis. When the data was collected, it was classified by the types and the factors constraining the polite choice of address terms were analyzed.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data was analyzed by using two main theories, the theory proposed by Braun (1988) and the theory proposed by Pride and Holmes (1972). This study used the theory proposed by Braun in his book entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font4"> (1988). Braun mentions that in most languages, forms of address concentrate on three-word classes, they are: pronoun, verb and noun, supplemented by words are syntactically dependent on them. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronouns of Address</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Braun (1988) pronouns of address are pronouns referring to the collocutor(s) or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">speaker. These are, above all, second-person pronouns such as you, third-person pronouns such as he, she, and they, and first-person pronouns such as I and we. The pronoun of address further includes pronominal forms, such from a diachronically point of view, not belong to the paradigm of a genuine personal pronoun.^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verb of Address</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Braun states that verbs of address are verbs in which references to the collocutor or the speakers expressed e.g. by means of inflectional suffixes. Frequently such verb forms are redundant; they are accompanied by a pronoun of address. However, in languages where the use of subject pronouns is not obligatory, the verb can be the only bearer of the collocutor or the speaker reference. In some languages with facultative subject pronouns, the verb is made the bearer of address, especially in those cases where the explicit use of a pronoun is inhibited by uncertainty or politeness. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun of Address</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Braun (1988) argues that noun of address are substantive and adjectives which designate collocutor or refer to them in some other way. This class covers the most diverse types. It can be classified into names, kinship terms, title, abstract noun, occupational terms, and terms of endearment. ^ 1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Names terms</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It belongs to the nominal repertory of address in all kinds of languages. Numerous classes of names can be distinguished according to the different naming systems. Personal names, however, are something restricted or even tabooed as a form of address.^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinship terms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Kinship terms are for blood relations and affine. For instance, father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, uncle, aunt, sister, brother, etc. When a KT is used for addressing someone who is not related to the speaker in one way or another, this is called a fictive use of KT. Fictive use can also imply addressing a relative with term expressing a relationship different from a biological one. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Title</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In many languages there are forms of address that correspond to Mr/Mrs, these are general forms that do not need to be regarded as particular titles and are common in use. Variants of Mr/Mrs type may have different properties in different languages. They can be prefixed or suffixed to names, terms of occupation, or they can stand alone. Sir, Mr., Miss, Mrs., etc.^ 4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstract Noun</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Abstract noun is a form of address which is originally referred to as some abstract quality of address, such as (Your) Honour, (Your) Excellency, (Your) Grace. These forms commonly used in addressing a King or a Queen in the kingdom.^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Occupational terms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Designating an addressee's profession or function serve as forms of address such as waiter, driver, doctor, etc. they are sometimes combined with other nominal variants, depending on the rules of the respective address system.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Term of endearment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Terms of endearment are defined by context and function rather than formal or semantic characteristics. In addressing a little kid or person to whom the speaker feels close, almost any- noun whether previously existing or invented for this purpose can serve as a form of address. Forms of endearment are, to a certain extent, conventionalized, but linguistic creativity and individual imagination play an important part here.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Factors Constraining the Choice of Address</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Terms</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Pridge and Holmes (1972), there are three factors that constrain the polite choice of address term:^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marked setting</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">It includes where the conversation takes place, such as in the palace, in the congress and in the courtroom, where is status clearly specified, speech style rigidly prescribed and the form of address of each person is derived from his social identity, for instance, Your Majesty, Your Honor, and Mr. Chairman. ^ 2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rank</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It includes the hierarchy within a working group, or to rank status such as teacherpupil. There is no distinction in the address that made to equals or subordinates since both receive the first name (FN), for instance, in the style of request used. It is found that subordinate outsides family receive direct commands in the form of imperatives more often that equals, to whom requests are phrased in other ways at least in some setting. For example, the senior alter has the option of dispending the speaker from offering title last name (TLN) by suggesting that he uses the first name or by tacitly accepting the first name. A professor addressing a doctoral candidate or younger instructor, whishes to receive back the first name (FN) he gives. The teacher addressing the student by their first name and the students use title and last name in addressing back or even use the FN if the teacher allows and suggests that use. 3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Identity</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Set refers to a list of occupational titles or courtesy titles accorded people in a certain status. For instance: judge, professor, and doctor. A priest physician, dentist or judge may be addressed by title alone, however, a plain citizen or an academic person may not. Then in later cases, if the name is unknown, there is no address form available and we simply no-name the addressee. The parentheses below refer to optional elements, the bracketed elements to social selection categories. For instance: a physician can be addressed as Doctor + Last name. David McKnight can be addressed by Doctor McKnight considering his job as a doctor or as Professor McKnight considering his job as a lecturer at university. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The theory proposed by Braun was used to identify the types of address terms found in the movie. While the theory proposed by Pridge and Holmes was used to analyze the factor constraining the polite choice of address terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The data was analyzed whether or not they are the type of address term. Then, they were classified into the types, whether they belong to the verb of address, pronoun of address or noun of address (names terms, kinship terms, title, abstract noun, occupational terms, or terms of endearment).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Then the factor constraining the polite choice of address terms was analyzed. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Name Terms</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Harry</span><span class="font4">! How wonderful to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">see you. (back to the boys) Beds empty! No note! You could’ve died! You could’ve been seen! (again to Harry) I don’t blame you, of course, dear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: They were starving him,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mum! There were bars on his window!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry is Harry Potter's first name. It commonly comes before the family name, in this case, Potter. Mrs. Weasley is Ron's mother. She already knows Harry Potter and has a good relationship with him which makes her calls him by his first name, Harry. ^ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : You best hope I don't put</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">bars on your window, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Ronald Weasley</span><span class="font4">! (softening instantly) Care for a spot of tea, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Harry</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">GINNY : Mummy. Have you seen my jumper -(A small, Red-headed girl appears) Sees Harry and squeals. Dashes back up the stairs. Ron Flowns) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-3</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry : I can't, Hedwig. I'm not allowed to use magic outside of school. Besides, if Uncle Vernon -</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(At the sound of the name, HEDWIG SQUAWKS again, LOUDER.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Uncle Vernon (O.S.) : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Har-ry Pot-ter</span><span class="font4">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry : Now you've done it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In English, it is common that when the parents are angry with their children, they will tend to call their children by using their full name. Mrs. Weasley calls Ron as Ronald Weasley because she was angry at him. It can be seen from the data, she softened her voice when she talked to Harry. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The second data also shows the same thing. Harry Potter's uncle is angry at him. He is mad because Harry made some noisy. He calls Harry with his full name which is Harry Potter.^ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-4</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry : The Train leaves at exactly eleven o’clock. We’ve missed it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron : Can’t hear anything. (a sudden</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">thought) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Harry</span><span class="font4">, If we can’t get through, maybe Mum and Dad can’t get back.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry : Maybe we should go wait by the car.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron : The car!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3-5</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Well done, &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Dudley</span><span class="font4">. &nbsp;Finally</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">learned</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the days of the week, have you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dudley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Today's your birthday. And</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">nobody cares. Dudley</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">SNAPS SHUT the flap. (Harry sighs, takes the soup and a bit of stale bread, and crosses to Hedwig.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: it's no good turning your beak up.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It's all we've got.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry feeds a piece of bread to Hedwig</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3-6</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hey... Where's </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Hermione</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hermione : (from the stall) I don't think I'm going. You go on without me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Hermione</span><span class="font4">, are you okay</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hermione : Just go! You're wasting time!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Calling someone by using his/her first name shows the intimacy between the addresser and addressee. Ron calls Harry by his first name because they are in the same age and they are friends. They already know each other well. Ron, Harry and Hermione are friends. Therefore, Ron and Harry call Hermione using her first name which is Hermione.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The second dialogue also shows that addressing someone with his/her first name is common in English. Harry calls his cousin with his first name.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3-7</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Ron : There. See. Now I reckon all we</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">have to do is find the Hogwarts express and follow it. Simple</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Harry nods, not entirely convinced. He peers out the window. Down below, two pedestrians stare in disbelief)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry : Uh, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Ron</span><span class="font4">. I should tell you. Most</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Muggles aren’t accustomed to seeing flying car.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron : Right</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry Potter calls Ronald Weansley by using his nick name. Ron is the nickname of Ronald. Calling someone by using his/her nick name can show the intimacy between the addresser and addressee. It is only done by someone who has close relationship to him/her. Harry and Ron are best friends. It is normal that Harry calls Ronald by using his nickname, Ron.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>3-8</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Professor McGonagall : What does it mean, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Albus</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: It means our</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">students are in great danger, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Minerva</span><span class="font4">. Mr. Creevey was fortunate. If not this…. (holding up the camera) He would surely be dead.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Professor McGonagall : What should I tell</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the staff, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Albus</span><span class="font4">? Dumbledore &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tell them the truth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tell them Hogwarts is no longer safe. Tell them it's as we feared. The Chamber of Secrets is indeed open again. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Albus is the first name of Dumbledore. Even though Dumbledore is the principal of Hogwarts and Professor McGonagall is one of the teachers there, Professor McGonagall chooses to call Dumbledore by using his first name and vice versa. It is influenced by the informal situation. They speak privately. There is no other person in the room, only them. It shows that they have a close personal relationship despite the fact Dumbledore has a higher position than Professor McGonagall.^ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-9</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I’m fine, thanks. I’m just—</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hagrid &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Harry! What d’yer think yer doin’</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">down’ere?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Hagrid</span><span class="font4">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Hagrid swats at Harry’s sooty clothes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hagrid &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: yer a mess! Skulkin’ ‘round</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Knockturn Alley. Dodgy place, Harry. Don’t want no one ter see yeh down there. People’ll be thinkin’ yer up ter no good.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry chooses to call Hagrid by using his first name instead of the title plus family name even though Hagrid is way older than Harry. It reveals that Harry and Hagrid have a close relationship.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3-10</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You have these. I’ll buy my own</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Draco &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (appearing, sneers) Bet you loved</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">that, didn’t you, Potter? Famous Harry </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Potter</span><span class="font4">. Can’t even go into bookshop without making the front page.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ginny &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Leave him alone! He did not want</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">all that!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Draco &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Look, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Potter</span><span class="font4">. You’ve got yourself</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">a girlfriend!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Draco and Harry are in the same year in Hogwarts but they are in different dormitories. Draco hates Harry because he is jealous of Harry. He chooses to call Harry by using his family name, Potter even though they are in the same age. It reveals that they do not have a good relationship. Draco makes a distance with Harry by calling him using his family name. In some educational institutions, it might be common to address other pupils using their family name only. However, it also shows that they do not have an intimate relationship.^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>3.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinship Terms 3-11</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">George &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Dad</span><span class="font4">'s home!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(The front door OPENS and ARTHUR WEASLEY enters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A tall man with red hair, his robes look dusty and travel-worn.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mr. Weasley : What a night! Nine raids! Nine!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (to Ron) Raids?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Dad </span><span class="font4">works at the Ministry of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Magic. In the Misuse of Muggle Artefacts Office.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One type of kinship terms in English is dad. It is used to call the male parent. The dialogue above shows the choice of address term using by the speaker. He calls his male parent with ‘dad’. In English, there is another term to address the male parent, it is father. Dad is the abbreviation of daddy.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>3-12</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : Harry! How wonderful to see you. (back to the boys) Beds empty! No note! You could've died! You could've been seen! (again, to Harry) I don't blame you, of course, dear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: They were starving him, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mum</span><span class="font4">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were bars on his window!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>3-13</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : You best hope I don’t put</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">bars on your window, Ronald Weasley! (softening instantly) Care for a spot of tea, Harry?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">GINNY : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mummy</span><span class="font4">. Have you seen my jumper -(A small, Red-headed girl appears) Sees Harry and squeals. Dashes back up the stairs. Ron Flowns) Every language has a term to call the female parent. From the data above, it can be seen that the choice of address term using by the speaker is mum. Mum is the abbreviation of the word mummy. Another term of address in English that can be used to refer to female parent is mother. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Occupational Term</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>3-14</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Hermione &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yes, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Professor</span><span class="font4">. But there</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">seems to be very little written about the Chamber of Secrets. For those of us with a personal interest in the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;subject, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">is...disturbing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Malfoy regards Hermione with chilly amusement. McGonagall considers Hermione's question for a long moment, then nods.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Professor Mcgonagall : Very well. You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was founded &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;over a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">thousand years ago by the four greatest witches and wizards of the age.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>3-15</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Snape &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You were seen! By no less then</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">seven Muggles. Do you have any idea how serious this is? You have risked the exposure of our world. Not to mention the damage you inflicted on a Whomping Willow that has been on these grounds for hundreds of years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Honestly, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Professor Snape</span><span class="font4">, I</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">think it did more damage to us.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Snape &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Silence! I assure you, were you in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Slytherin and your fate rested with me, the both of you would be on the train home tonight. As it is.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>3-16</span><br><br><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Tom Riddle : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Professor Dumbledore</span><span class="font4">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore : It's not wise to be wandering around this late, Tom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In English, sometimes we call someone using their occupation. The dialogue above shows that Hermione calls Mcgonagall using his occupation. She calls him professor since Mcgonagall is one of the teachers at Hogwarts. It also can be seen in the dialogue performed by Snape and Ron. Snape is one of the teachers in Hogwarts. However, not all teachers are called professor, only the one who is qualified for the title. The word professor can be used to address someone with or without being followed by his/her family name.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>3.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Title</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>3-17</span></h2>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mr. Borgin</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">: I’m not buying today, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. borgin</span><span class="font4">. But selling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: Selling?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: You have heard, of course</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">that the Ministry of Magis is conducting more raids. There are even rumors of a new Muggle Protection Act…</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Lucius unravels a roll of parchment, hands it to Borgin)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius is in Mr. Borgin's store. It is common that in the selling and buying process both the seller and the buyer will use title and family name to address the interlocutor. It also shows that the addresser and addressee do not have a close relationship. ^ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-18</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Forgive me, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. Potter</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">But your scar is legend. As, of course, is the wizard who gave it to you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: He was a murderer</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yes, a pity about your</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">parents. Curious that you yourself should escape with a mere flesh wound. Curious, too, that you speak of him in the past. Surely, you don’t think He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is gone forever.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy is the father of Draco Malfoy. He chooses to call Harry as Mr. Potter rather than Harry's first name even though he is way older than Harry. It shows his respect for the person he first met. It also reveals that the addresser and addressee do not have a close</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">relationship. ^</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>3-19</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:What... Who are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dobby &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Dobby, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">sir</span><span class="font4">. Dobby the house elf.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I see. Not to be rude or anything,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">but this isn't a great time for me to have a house-elf in my bedroom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dobby &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh, yes, sir, Dobby understands.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It's just that, Dobby has come to tell you... it is difficult, sir...Dobby wonders where to begin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dobby is not a human. He calls Harry with sir to show his respect to him. Their social position is not equal. Harry is in a higher social status if compares to dobby. It shows that, in English, social status also determines the choice of address term. ^ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3-20</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Professor Mcgonagall :Yes, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Miss Granger</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hermion &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Professor, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I was</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">wondering if you could tell us about the Chamber of Secrets?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(A HUSH falls over the class.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Professor Mcgonagall :My subject is</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Transfiguration, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Miss</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Granger</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hermione &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yes, Professor. But there</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">seems to be very little written about the Chamber of Secrets. For those of us with a personal interest in the subject, that is... disturbing.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>3-21</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Hermione : That's why Ron and I went looking for him, Professor. We'd just found him when Harry said...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Snape &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (raising an eyebrow) Yes, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Miss</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Granger</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: When I said I wasn't hungry. We</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">were heading back to the Common Room and... found Mrs. Norris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Snape eyes Harry coldly, knowing he's lying. Harry looks away... and finds Dumbledore studying him as well)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The dialogue above shows that even though Professor McGonagall is Hermione’s teacher and he is older than her, he calls Hermione with title and family name. It can also be seen in the dialogue between Hermione and Snape. Snape is also a teacher in Hogwarts. He also calls Hermione as Ms. Granger due to the setting of the conversation, where and when the conversation takes place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In English, sometimes, in a formal situation, we can call our interlocutor with title and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">family name. Therefore, the setting of the conversation plays an important role in determining the choice of address term. ^</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>3-22</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Tom Riddle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: About the school as well?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">They wouldn't really close Hogwarts, would they, Professor?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Headmaster Dippet may</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">have no choice, I'm afraid.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tom Riddle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Sir</span><span class="font4">? If it all stopped. If the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">person responsible was caught...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Is there something you</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">wish to tell me, Tom?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tom Riddle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;(a long beat) No, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nothing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tom is one of the students at Hogwarts and Dumbledore is one of the teachers there. The dialogue above shows the address term used by students when he addresses his teacher. He chooses to call him sir to show his respect towards him. It also indicates that it is a formal situation. The word</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘sir’ is not followed by family or first name. It can stand alone.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>3-23</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. Malfoy</span><span class="font4">! I have</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">something of yours. Harry comes up running, thrusts the diary into Malfoy's hand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lucius Malfoy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Mine? I don't know what</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">you're talking about.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I think you do, sir. I think</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">you slipped it into Ginny Weasley's cauldron that day in Diagon Alley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Malfoy shoves the diary into Dobby's face, then leans close to Harry and, with a nasty grin)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One type of nominal address terms in English is the title. Mister/Mr. is usually followed by family name. Harry Potter chooses to call Lucius Malfoy by using title and family. Lucius Malfoy's is the father of Harry Potter's friend. Using the title (Mr.) followed by the family shows that the speaker respects his/her audience. It also reveals that they do not have a close relationship.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>3-24</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Harry/Ron : (grinning) Thank you, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore :Now, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. Weasley</span><span class="font4">, if you would, have an owl deliver these release papers to Azkaban. We need our gamekeeper back. Ron nods, takes the envelope and exits.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore : First, Harry, I want to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">thank you. You must have shown me real loyalty down in the Chamber. Nothing but that could have called Fawkes to you. Secondly, I sense &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you're</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">troubled by something. Am I right?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>3-25</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Well, you're going to expel</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">us, aren't you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Professor Mcgonagall : Not today, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. Weasley</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">But I must impress upon both of you the seriousness of what you have done. I will be sending owls to both of your families tonight. And you will each get a detention.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Snape casts a look of pure venom at Harry and Ron.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Splendid. Now, I suggest</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">we return to the feast. There's &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">delicious-looking &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;custard</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">tart I want to sample.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dumbledore is the principal of Hogwarts. Ron Weasley is one of the students there. Although, Dumbledore is older than Ron and he is the principal yet he chooses to call Ron by using title and family name in a formal situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The second dialogue also shows the same thing. Professor Mcgonagall is Ronald Weasley’s teacher. However, she chooses to call Ron as Mr. Weaslye because of the formal situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark53"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark54"></a>3.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Term of Endearment</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>3-25</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Aged with : Not lost are you, my </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dear</span><span class="font4">?</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">: I'm fine, thanks. I'm just -: Harry! What d'yer think yer doin' down 'ere?</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">(Harry wheels, looking into the mossy teeth of a decrepit Witch. She holds a tray of human fingernails.) Harry Hagrid</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark56"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark57"></a>3-26</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : Harry! How wonderful to see you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(back to the boys) Beds empty! No note! You could've died! You could've been seen! (again, to Harry) I don't blame you, of course, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dear</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ron &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:They were starving him, Mum!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were bars on his window!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mrs. Weasley : You best hope I don't put bars on your window, Ronald Weasley! (softening instantly) Care for a spot of tea, Harry?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another type of address term is the term of endearment. In addressing a little kid or person to whom the speaker feels close, almost any- noun whether previously existing or invented for this purpose can serve as a form of address. One of the examples of terms of endearment is ‘dear’. The aged witch chooses to call Harry Potter with ‘dear’ because they have a close relationship. The witch treats Harry Potter as a little kid.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ronald Weasley's mother also calls Harry Potter with 'dear'. It reveals that they have a close relationship. ^</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark58"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark59"></a>3.2 . Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Wardaugh (2006:272) states that if we look at what is involved in addressing another, it seems that a variety of social factors usually governs our choice of terms: the particular occasion; the social status or rank of the other; gender; age; family relationship; occupational hierarchy; transactional status (i.e., service encounter; or a doctor-patient relationship, or one of priest-penitent); race; or degree on intimacy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Wardaugh (2006:264) in addressing someone implies that the person must consider about the classification, intimate term,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">addressing terms, such as; addressing using name, addressing of closing relationship, intimate term, addressing of kinship term, addressing of respectful term, even addressing of mockeries. Addressing a term can be a word, phrase, name, or title (or some combination of these).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data above shows that some nominal address terms used in English, such as name terms, kinship terms, occupational terms, title and term of endearment. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are several types of name term found in the data above, they are first name, family name, and full name. There are some factors influence the choice of address term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is common that in English, people call their interlocutors using their first name. Age does not determine the choice of address term. For example, Harry calls Hagrid using his first name even though Hagrid is older than him. It also shows that Harry and Hagrid have a close relationship. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It is also found in the movie that there is a possibility in English to call someone only by his/her family name. Draco addresses Harry using his family name only even though they are in the same grade. It reveals that these people do not have an intimate relationship. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Other interesting data that is found is parents address their children using their full name. In the data, Mrs. Weasley addresses his son, Ron, using his family name. It might be a sign that the mother is really angry with him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Besides name terms, the occupational term is also found in the movie. Dumbledore, Snape and Mcgonagall are called as Professor by their students. However, not every teacher is called professor, only the one who is qualified.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Calling someone using a title followed by a family name is also found in the data. It indicates that the addresser and addressee do not have an intimate relationship. In addition, it also shows the setting of the conversation. The conversation might occur in a formal situation. For example, Hermione is called as Miss Ganger by her teachers. So is Ron Weansley. His teachers call him Mr. Weansley. Harry calls Lucas Malfoy as Mr. Malfoy. By calling addressee who is older than addresser using</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">title followed by family name shows that the addresser is being respectful. At the same time, it also shows that they do not have a close relation. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Like other languages, English also has terms of endearment. Term of endearment is commonly used by parents to call their children. It can also be used when the addresser feels close to the addressee. For example, Ron's mother calls Harry using the word 'dear'. In a real-life situation, the term of endearment is not limited. It depends on the creativity of the addresser. Sweetheart, baby, angel are several examples of terms of endearment that are commonly used. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kinship terms are also found in the object of the study such as dad, mum and uncle. Kinship term is a term that is used to address someone who has blood relation with the speaker. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Indonesian language also has those types of address terms. However, there are differences between Indonesian and English. If it compares to the Indonesian language, mostly the choice of address term in English is influenced by the relationship between the speaker and the audience. However, in the Indonesian language, age is considered the most important thing in addressing someone.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Topic about greetings and how to greet or address someone is the first topic to be taught in English class for high school students. They have to know how to address someone correctly in English. It such a challenge to attract students to the topic being taught. Sometimes they merely know the topic they learn without understanding it since they only memorize it. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">How to address someone in Indonesian and English are of course different. Culture has influenced the choice of the address term. In the Indonesian language, age and social status play an important role in determining the address terms chosen. We cannot call someone older than us with only their name since it will be considered impolite. However, in English, the relationship between the speaker and the audience determines the choice of address term. The speaker can call his/her audience who has a close relationship with him/her only using his/her first name even though</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">he/she is older than the speaker and it is considered polite. Also, to call the second person singular in English, we can simply address him/her as 'you'. However, in Indonesian, there are several choices of pronouns that can be chosen. The choice depends on the age, social status, and setting of the conversation. If we use the wrong pronoun, we will be considered impolite. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One way to attract students is to use interesting teaching material. Using movies as authentic teaching material in the English Classroom, students will be more interested and they can follow the lesson well. They will not only learn pronunciation by listening to the English native speakers in the movie, but they also will learn about how to use the language properly in certain contexts. At the same time, students will also learn about the culture of the new language that they learn.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Iairo (2017) stated that authentic materials are print, video, and audio materials students encounter in their daily lives, such as change-of-address forms, job applications, menus, voice mail messages, radio programs, and videos. Authentic materials are not created specifically to be used in the classroom, but they make excellent learning tools for students precisely because they are authentic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Guarentino and Morley (2001) stated that the use of authentic texts is now considered to be one way of maintaining or increasing students’ motivation for learning. They give the learner the feeling that he or she is learning the ‘real’ language; that they are in touch with a living entity, the target language as it is used by the community which speaks it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Baharani and Sim (2012) in their article entitled audiovisual news, cartoons and films as sources of authentic language input and language proficiency enhancement, try to discover the effectiveness of the exposure of news, cartoons and films as authentic audiovisual programs in improving the language proficiency of low-level learners. There are three groups used as the subject of the study. Each group is given different types of audiovisual material. Group one is given news.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Group two is given cartoons. Group three is given films. The result of the study is group one which is given news failed to improve their language proficiency. In contrast, groups two and three which are given cartoons and films respectively succeed in improving their language proficiency. Moreover, group two has a significant improvement compared to group three. It means that authentic audiovisual programs can be used as teaching sources.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Harry Potter movie can be used as authentic teaching material in English class. In this case, this movie can be used to teach students how to address interlocutor in English by giving the reasons why the certain term of address is chosen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The teacher can show the movie to the students. In the beginning, the teacher should highlight the topic that will be discussed. While watching the movie, students are asked to pay attention to the way the characters in the movie address each other. After the movie has finished, the teacher presents the dialogue that contains certain address terms. The teacher first asks students why the characters choose to address his/her interlocutor using a certain term of address. Students may discuss it with their friends. After the discussion, the teacher explains the context when the appropriate address term is used. The teacher should show a comparison between Indonesian and English in terms of the culture that influences the choice of address terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The benefit of using the movie as the teaching material besides making students interested is the context in the movie that can help explain how the address term is used in a real-life situation. Students will be exposed to the real use of the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The teacher explains to students that the use of address terms in English is different from Indonesian because of the influence of the culture. In western culture, age does not have significant influence to address the interlocutors, however, the emotional relationship between the speaker and the interlocutor determines the choice of address term. In Indonesian, age is one of the most important</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">things that the speaker should consider in addressing his/her hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark60"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark61"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The current study discusses the nominal address terms which are used in English. The movie Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secret is used as the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The result shows that there are several types of nominal address terms found in the movie Harry Potter and The Chamber of Secret they are name terms, kinship terms, occupational terms, title and terms of endearment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the previous analysis, there were three types of name terms found in the subject of the study, they are first name, family name and full name. There is one occupational term, namely professor. Three types of kinship terms (uncle, dad and mum). Two types of the title (Miss and Mr.) and one type of term of endearment (dear).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The factors influenced in determining the use of address terms are the intimacy between the addresser and the addressee, the social relationship, and the setting of the conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The types of address term found in the movie can be used as authentic teaching material for English class. First, it will attract students’ attention. They will not realize that they study something. It will help to make them enjoy the class as well as understand the topic easily. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Using movies as an authentic material will give a context on how to use the correct address terms. The student will be exposed to the real language, not the artificial one. They will know how to use the language in an appropriate context. Students will also learn that in Indonesia and English, the way people address each other is different due to the culture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark62"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark63"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bahrani, T., &amp;&nbsp;Sim, T.S. (2012). Audiovisual News, Cartoons, and Films as Sources of Authentic Language Input and Language Proficiency Enhancement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Berardo, Sacha A.(2006). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Authentic</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Material in The Teaching of Reading</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Reading Matrix, Vol. 6, No. 2, September 2006, pp. 60-69.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Braun, Friedrike.1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font4">. New York. Mountoun de Gruyter press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DICKEY, E. (1997). Forms of address and terms of reference. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Linguistics, 33</span><span class="font4">(2), 255-274. doi:10.1017/S0022226797006488</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Guariento, W., &amp;&nbsp;Morley, J. (2001). Text and task authenticity in the EFL classroom</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ianiro, Sally. 2007. Authentic Material. California: California Adult Literacy Professional Development Project (CALPRO)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jacobson, E., Degener, S., &amp;&nbsp;Purcell-Gates, V. 2003. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Creating authentic materials and activities for the adult literacy classroom: A handbook for practitioners</span><span class="font4">. NCSALL teaching and training materials. Boston, MA: NCSALL at World Education</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kamajaya, I. (2014). STRUKTUR SEMANTIK PRONOMINA PERSONA DALAM SISTEM SAPAAN BAHASA BALI. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika: &nbsp;Buletin Ilmiah Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, 21</span><span class="font4">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Retrieved &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font4">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a><span class="font4"> article/view/21835</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kilickaya, F.(2004). Authentic Materials and Cultural Context in EFL Classroom. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The internet TESL Journal.</span><span class="font4"> Retrieved from </span><a href="http://iteslj.org/Techniques/Kilickaya-AutenticMaterial.html"><span class="font4">http://iteslj.org/Techniques/Kilickaya-AutenticMaterial.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lindstrom, M. (2015). The power of film.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Teaching culture, media literacy and intercultural competence in ELT</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Marrelli, J. (1990). Friederike Braun, Terms of address: Problems of patterns and usage in various languages and cultures. (Contributions to the Sociology of Language 50.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1988. Pp. xiv 374. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Linguistics, 26</span><span class="font4">(1),265-274.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">doi:10.1017/S0022226700014572</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mestasari, Sri Agiyanti. 2016. The Use of Authentic Materials in Teaching Grammar for EFL Students (Teacher’s perspective).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 27 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">LLT Journal: A Journal on Language and Language Teaching Vol. 19, No. 9, pp 125131.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Özcan, F. H. (2016). Choice of address terms in conversational setting. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Human Sciences</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">13</span><span class="font4">(1), 982-1002. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://jhumansciences.com/ojs/index.php/I"><span class="font4">https://jhumansciences.com/ojs/index.php/I</span></a><span class="font4"> JHS/article/view/3489</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pride, J.B and Holmes, Janet. 1972. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Selected &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Readings</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Penguin</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Semiun,Agustinus. (2018). A Study on the Address and Kinship Terms in Kempo speech of Manggarai Language in West Flores Indonesia. Communication and Linguistics Studies. Vol. 4, No. 4, 2018, pp. 108-117. DOI: 10.11648/j.cls.20180404.12</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Susanto, Djoko. (2014). The Pragmatic Meanings of Address Terms Smapeyan and Anda. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian Journal of Applied Linguistics Vol. 4 No. 1, July 2014, pp. 140-155.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics: Fifth Edition</span><span class="font4">. Malden. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Zavitri, Irma, Et Al. (2018). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Address Terms In English And Selayerese: A Sociolinguistic Perspective. Jurnal Ilmu Budaya Vol. 6 No. 1, June 2018, pp. 129-134.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">91</span></p>