---
layout: full_article
title: "An Analysis of Slang Words in Song Lyrics Used in the Songs “That’s What I Like”, “Smoke On The Water”, and “Ch-Check It Out”"
author: "Ni Luh Karmila Dewi, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-69281 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-69281"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-69281"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">| </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">85</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 4 No. 2, September 2020 DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i02.p08"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i02.p08</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">An Analysis of Slang Words in Song Lyrics Used in the Songs “That’s What I Like”, “Smoke On The Water”, and “Ch-Check It Out”</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Ni Luh Karmila Dewi*, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">English Department-Faculty of Arts- Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:karmiladewi470@gmail.com"><span class="font1">karmiladewi470@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] [</span><a href="mailto:ayufsb@gmail.com"><span class="font1">ayufsb@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>*Corresponding Author</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font0">The paper entitled “An Analysis of Slang Words in Song Lyrics Used in the Songs “That’s What I Like”, “Smoke On The Water”, and “Ch-Check It Out”. This study concern with the analysis of slang words in the Songs “That’s What I Like”, “Smoke On The Water”, and “Ch-Check It Out”. There are three statement problems (1) What are the types of slang words used in the song? (2) What is the meaning of slang words in the three sample that are in the lyric? (3) What is dominant type of slang words of three song lyrics? The data of this study were collected from three song lyrics in different genres: pop, rock, and rap song. Documentation method was used to collect the data and qualitative method was used to describe the types of slang words, the meaning of slang word, and dominant types of slang words that used in three song lyrics. The writer used theory of the types slang by Patridge (2004:204) and the meaning of the slang word used theory by Geoffrey Leech (1974).There are six types of slang words which are found in this study such as four slang words in publicity, four slang in public School and University, twenty one slang words in society, three slang in theatre, one soldier’s slang, and one public house slang. Then, there are six meanings of slang word are found by the writer: seven in collocative meaning, six in conceptual meaning, five in stylistic meaning, three in connotative meaning, six in reflected meaning and four in affective meaning. From the analysis that were found that society slang and collocative meaning mostly found and used in there song lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: Slang types, meaning, genre, song lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For human being, communication is an activity of exchanging and conveying information by speaking or writing among people. Holmes (2000) added that people’s speech reflects not only aspects of their identity such as their ethnicity, age, gender, and social background, it also reflects the contexts in which they are using the language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Language varieties indicate that the speakers are distinct from members of other groups (Finegan, 2008:330). There are some examples of language variations that are of interest to linguist according to Akmajian et al (1998), lingua francas, pidgins, creoles, jargon, slang, and taboo language. The main concern of this English writing is was focus only on the language variation which could be categorized as slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Leech Svartvik (1981) “slang is language which is very familiar in style, and it is usually restricted to the members of a particular social group. In this study, the writer showed the importance of languages in globalization and lifestyle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The writer focused on the domination of slang language that used in song’s lyrics in different genre. This research used theory of the types slang by Patridge (2004:204) and the meaning of the slang word used theory by Geoffrey Leech (1974).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROBLEMS OF THE STUDY</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">From the statement background of study above the research problems of this study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of slang words used in pop song “That’s What I Like” by Bruno Mars, rock</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">song “Smoke on The Water” by Deep Purple, and rap song “Ch-Check it Out” by Beastie Boys?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of slang words in the three sample that are in the lyric pop song “That’s What I Like” by Bruno Mars, rock song “Smoke on The Water” by Deep Purple, and rap song “Ch-check it Out” by Beasti Boys? on The Water” by Deep Purple, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is dominant type of slang words of three song lyrics?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AIMS OF THE STUDY</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Related to the problems above, it covered into two major aims of study, namely the following: a. To find out the types of slang words used in pop song, rock song and rap song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meanings of slang words in the three sample that are in the lyrics pop, rock, and rap song.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the dominant type of slang words of three song lyrics.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SCOPE OF DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This study provides to apply what is the meaning of language variations, especially about the slang language in the lyrics of the song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study also explains in the field of the sociolinguistics, especially about the slang words that appear in the lyrics of the song. Besides that, to find out the dominant slang word that used in pop song “That’s What I Like” by Bruno Mars, rock song “Smoke on The Water” by Deep Purple, and rap song “Ch-Check it Out” by Beastie Boys.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Research method is an important step and procedure when conduct scientific research. Research method is the way or procedure of understanding the object that becomes the target of subject. It showed specifically the way to analyze the data. Each of these three research methods are explained in the followings. The method is divided into three points, they are: data source, method and technique of collecting data, also method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were taken from three songs lyrics in different genre. There are: pop song lyrics by Bruno Mars’s song “That’s What I Like” on album 24k magic with five singles were released from the album that released January 30, 2017, rock song lyrics by Deep Purple song “Smoke on The Water” on machine head album it was recorded through December 1971 in Montreux, Switzerland, and released in March 1972 with three singles. Rap song</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">by Beastie Boys song “Ch-Check it Out” on to the 5 boroughs album with three singles written by Michael Diamond, Adam Horovitz, Adam Yauch that released march 2004. The data were taken from primary data which collected directly from the YouTube and jooxs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The method of collecting data applied in this research was documentation. The data collected through some steps. The first step, the writer found the songs and lyrics on YouTube and Jooxs and then read the song lyrics second, the writer classifies the words in the lyrics script by encoding or noting those words, which are included into slang language. Third, slang words that found in the lyrics checking in the dictionary of American slang and online slang dictionary whether it is slang word or not, and then bold the slang words that found. Four, finding the types of slang word, the meaning of the slang word used and dominant types of slang words. The last from the compiled data, then the writer will write their analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysis Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In data analysis, the collected data were analyzed based on the theory applied in this study. The first theory by Creswell (2003), as a main theories used in this study, this theory used to help in adding visual aspect the data that makes it much easier and quick to understand. The second theory by Patridge (2004:204) which divided type of slang into eleven types. And the last theories by Leech (1974) used to giving the meaning of the slang word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting the Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this research, informal method is used in presenting the results. Informal method means presenting the result of the analysis by using words and sentences. The techniques of presenting analyzing data are first, the data of full lyric songs that had collected was written. Second, the slang words that were found was bold. Third, the slang words was described based on their types of slang and the meaning of slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">VI. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FINDING AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this chapter, the writer presents the finding of the research about slang language in song lyrics. There are twelve journal that were conducted by the previous students related to the same topics to analyze slang language, but the studies used different object. Fifth journal are previous study analysis of slang language on song Lyrics. First written by Kuspiyah, H. (2017). Concerns with the analysis of slang in Eminem song lyrics and proposes two problem are: what types of slang language are used in Eminem song lyrics? And what are the meaning of those slang language used Eminem song lyrics?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second written by Muhammad Taufiq Arie Sandi with the title Critical Discourse Analysis of Eminem’s “Love the Way You Lie Part II”. This journal is to analyze songs from Eminem which is related to his life story. In examining the songs, the researchers used the three inter-related processes of analysis tied to three inter-related dimensions of discourse proposed by Fairclough’s model of CDA. This journal applied qualitative design with the content analysis approach. His research focused on the words used in the song lyrics, such as African American vernacular English variety, informal language, and American slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Third journal written by Defi Nofrizal with the title “An Analysis of Word Forms and Meanings of Slang Language in EMINEM’S song Lyrics. He focuses to analyzed word forms and meaning used theory by yule (2006) and Leech (1981). The research used descriptive and qualitative method. The data are five songs of EMINEM in the last album. The finding of the research shows that the words forms subordinators in the songs are classified into six types.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fourth journal written by Rani Evadewi with the title “an analysis of English slang words used in Eminem’s rap music”. She used Abadi’s (2009, p.17) theory about the characteristics of slang and used qualitative approach with descriptive method. She found that the total data of slangs in Eminem songs were 47 slangs. There were 13 data of creativity, 27 data of flippant, 5 data of fresh and 2 data of onomatopoeic. She found flippant is the most dominant slang used in the song. Fifth journal written by Vonny Elisa Oktavia (2017) with the title “An Analysis of slang words in the lyrics of far east movement song as the forms of language development and it’s used in the daily”. She focuses on the slang word founded in the lyrics of Far East ovement songs. Also analyzing the slang words founded in the lyrics using the word forms and how it is used in daily life. On her journal only concern on three form of slang. They are; Blending, Clipping, and Coinage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fifth journal are previous study analysis of slang language on movie. First journal written by Chynantia Rachmiwati with the title &nbsp;“AN</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ANALYSIS OF THE SLANG LANGUAGE USED IN THE MOVIE “JUNO”. She used descriptive analysis of how slang language is used among youngster from the movie entitled “Juno”. And to analyze the slang languages and utterances in the movie she used descriptive analysis method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second journal written by Soraya Nur Latifah with the title “AN ANALYSIS OF SLANG WORDS IN “DEADPOOL”MOVIE. On she analysis the types of slang used by the characters in Deadpool movie were mostly secondary slang and the main objectives of this study were analyzing the morphological aspect which focused on word formation process and sociolinguistic aspect which focused on social factors</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">and dimensions that influence the use of slang word in Deadpool movie. She used descriptive qualitative method to analyse the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Third journal by Galang Persada with title “A SOCIO LINGUISTICS STUDY OF SLANG WORDS USED BY HARRY POTTER IN THE MOVIE ENTITLED “HARRY POTTER AND THE HALF BLOOD PRINCE”. On his journal The purposes is to analyze and classify and find the meaning of slang words of the main character’s slang words used in the movie “Harry Potter and The Half Blood Prince”,. And then he found that there 19 slang words and acronym is the most dominant slang words. He also found slang words that spoken by harry potter also dominate by denotative meaning. Fouth journal written by Tiarma Ika Yuliana with the title ANALYSIS OF AMERICAN SLANG IN MOVIE “LAUGH OF LOUD”. She used the descriptive qualitative method and data source of her research is taken from the movie script of Laugh of Loud (LOL) directed by Lisa Azuelos, Karim Ainouz and Nans Delgado with the main the data is American slang. Based on the research result, she found there are 35 slang words or phrases in the movie of LOL, the slang is divided into four categories: (1) 8 slang words or phrases as the neutral syntactic level, (2) 10 slang words or phrases as typical informal situations, (3) 2 slang words or phrases as typical of spoken language, and (4) 15 slang words or phrases as creative. The meaning of slang words or phrases as informal situation category can be found in a dictionary. Fifth journal by cahyo anjar widyanto with the title “ANALYSIS ON SLANG IN THE SCRIPT OF 8-MILEFILM”. He identifies the problems are as follows: 1. What are the syntactic forms of slang expressions in the script of8-milefilm?, 2. What is the kind of meanings of slang expression in the script of 8-milefilm?, 3. What are the reasons of using slang expressions in the script of 8-milefilm?. In the research, the writer chooses slang expressions in the script of 8-mile film as the object of the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The writer also conducted two journal by the previous students related to the same topics to analyze slang language in daily conversation. First journal from Wahyu Trimastuti with the title “AN ANALYSIS OF SLANG WORDS USED IN SOCIAL MEDIA. The objectives research of this journal is alay language and the data obtained came from BlacBerry messenger, twitter, instragram, path, line and facebook. She found that in Alay ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Alay</span><span class="font0">’ is one of slang language that used in talk between teenagers. ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Alay</span><span class="font0">’ language for communication has many errors in Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second journal written by Kasmawati “Gender Analysis of Slang Language in Student’s Daily Conversations”. Her journal there was a significant difference between male and female students’ percentage in using slang language. She found that male and female students of English</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">education department used slang language in different way and frequency.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. The Analysis Types Of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of types slang based on the theory proposed by Patridge (2004:204). The analysis was presented one by one according to each type and gave the examples.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cockney Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Cockney slang is in form of English slang which originated from End East of England. This slang has been popularized by film, music, and literature. Cockney slang is the brightest spot in England because it has a very pronounced accent for example there is a change in consonantal variation of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">th</span><span class="font0"> to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">f</span><span class="font0"> or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">v</span><span class="font0"> sound, as in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">muvah</span><span class="font0"> for mother or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fank you</span><span class="font0"> for thank you.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public House Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Public house slang is considered as public house group of words or phrases that makes up for the smallness of the recorded vocabulary by the nature of the subject. For example: Booze-shunter, means a beer drinker. c. Workmen’s Slang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Workmen’s slang are laborers either town and farm laborers. Here example of Workmen's slang for the town laborer: Screw up means without money, therefore unable to move about at will. d. Tradesmen’s Slang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tradesmen’s Slang is some of the words are related to origin slang and the users are the worker too, but the difference is the Tradesmen’s slang considers four as typical: tailors, butchers, chemist, and builders. Here the example of Tradesmen’s slang: House of parliament = meeting of tailor’s assistant e. Slang in Art</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Slang in Art, it is quickly adopted by society in seventeenth century. Here the example: Walled means same as hung, which, to some extent, it displaced.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Slang in Publicity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Slang in Publicity is used for commerce, because on publicity much of modern commerce depends. A firms needs the catchy phrase or rhymes that can impress the public. Here the example: Sunlight means soap.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Slang in Theatre</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Slang in Theatre began to exercise a powerful influence on ordinary and informal spoken English and theatrical slang gradually gained a status in the first part. Here example of the slang in theatre: Toga Play means a play on classical theme.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Slang in Public School and University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Slang in Public School and University, the user of this slang is student, in public house, as in board</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">and private schools. Here the example of public school slang: Wrux’ means a rotter or humbug.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Society Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Slang in society over the object and practice of slangter’s, calling show a joyously or jauntily. Here example of the society slang: Cyrano means a huge nose.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">J. Slang in Medicine</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Medicine slang is more interesting to laymen than is law slang from very nature of the case, but will confine ourselves to example current in the present century. The example: Dope means an anesthetic; to dope, to give an anesthetic to.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">k. </span><span class="font0">Soldier’s Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Soldiers’ Slang is slang terms that comes from around the army community that is commonly used by the soldier’s slang. Example: Officers and instructors, words of command, such as carry on.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. The Analysis meaning of slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of types slang based on the theory proposed by Geoffrey Leech (1974). The analysis was presented one by one according to each type and gave the examples.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. Conceptual Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Conceptual meaning or denotation (cognitive meaning) is the literal or sense of a word. Conceptual meaning is the basic propositional meaning which corresponds to the primary dictionary definition. For example: Boy = human, male, adult. b. Connotative Meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Connotative is the kind of values and attitudes invoked by a word apart from its core meaning. Example: old age woman wearing sari. Sari (in Indian context must have seemed definite connotation in the past). Present: woman wearing salwar, T-shirt, jeans. c. Stylistic Meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stylistic meaning is a piece of language which conveys about the social circumstance of it uses, communicated of the social circumstances of language use; where words are used to establish relationships between people and to delineate social roles. Sample of stylistic meaning like the word yo, this is a stylistic way to say hello or greeting his friend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">d. Affective Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Affective meaning has more directly a reflection of the speaker’s personal attitude or feelings toward the listener or the target of the utterance. Example: I hate you, you idiot e. Reflected Meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Reflected meaning is when one sense of a particular word affects the understanding usage of all other senses of the word (in cases of multiple conceptual meaning) Example: “the could not but be gay in such jocund company” (the word “guy” was frequently used in the time of William words worth but the word now is used for homosexuality). f. Collocative Meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Collocative (collocation) meaning is describes words that regularly appear together within certain contexts and communicated through association with words which tend to occur in the environment of another word. The sample of Collocative meaning is the phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin’ bitch.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">g. Thematic Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Thematic meaning is what is communicated by the way in which the message is organized in terms of order and emphasis, concerns itself with how the order of words spoken affects the meaning that is entailed. Example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs. Smith donated the first prize.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first prize was donated by Mrs. Smith.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In the first sentence “who gave away the prize” is more important, but in the second sentence “what did Mrs. Smith gave is important”. Thus the change of focus change the meaning also.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">VII. CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this analysis, the writer analysis three of song genres, there are pop, rock, and rap. Pop song “That’s What I Like” by Bruno Mars, rap song “Ch- Check It Out” by Beastie Boys, and rock song “Smoke On The Water” by Deep Purple. From analyzing of the three lyric songs that are the authors of the analysis, each lyric has a word slang that includes primary slang and secondary slang. From those three songs lyric which were found by writer, the writer found 37 slang words. Society slang is the dominant types of slang language and collocative meaning are the dominant meanings of slang word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Allan, K and K Burridge. 2006: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Forbidden Word</span><span class="font0">. New York: Cambridge Chaer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Creswell, J. W. (2003).</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed Method approaches. </span><span class="font0">London: Sage Publications, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cyntami Rachmijati An Analysis Of The Slang Used In The Movie”Juno”vol 3, no2 (2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Defi Nofrizal An Analysis Of Word Forms And Meanings Of Slang Language In Eminem’s Song Lyrics Abstract of Undergraduate Research, Faculty of Humanities, Bung Hatta University. Vol 2, no 2 (2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Felicia Pratto, in 1999.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Social dominance theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Galang Persada A socio linguistics study of slang words used by Harry Potter in the movie entitled” Haary Potter And The Half Blood Prince”. VOL1,NO2 (2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Holmes.j.1992.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction to sociolinguistics</span><span class="font0">. London: Longman press Keraf, Gorys. 1994.Alan C. L. Yu (2004) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Reduplication in English Homeric Infixation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kasmawati Amir, Gender Analysis On Slang Language In Students Daily vol3, n02 (2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kuspiyah, H. (2017). Analysis On The Use Of Slang On Eminemâ€™Slyrics. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Channing: Journal of English Language Education and Literature</span><span class="font0">,</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">1</span><span class="font0">(1),51-64.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, G. 1981. Semantics: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">the study of meaning. </span><span class="font0">2nd edition. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mai Samir, El Falaky.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistic Study of Egyptian Slang. International Journal of Language and Literature</span><span class="font0">, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 75-84 December 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mai Samir, El Falaky.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistic Study of Egyptian Slang.International Journal of Language and Literature</span><span class="font0">, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 75-84 December 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Muhammad Taufiq Arie Sandi Widya Gama Mahakam University. Critical Discourse Analysis of Eminem’s “Love the Way You Lie Part II”. Script Journal Volume 1, Issue 1, April 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">P, Natalie and Ester. &nbsp;2006</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The &nbsp;study of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">language.</span><span class="font0">Cambridge:CambridgeUniversity press Trudgill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Patridge, Eric. 1970. Slang Today and Yesterday. London: Routledge Kegan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rani Evadewi1, Analysis Of English Slang Words Used In Eminem’s Rap Music.Jufrizal2 English Department Faculty of Languages and Arts Universitas Negeri Padang. Ejournal of English language and literature. Vol7, no1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Soraya Nur Latifah An Analysis Of Slang Words In “Deadpool” Movie. A journal English education program language and arts department faculty of teacher training and Education University of mataram. E1D012068. Vol1 no,3(2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tiarma Ika Yuliana Analysis Of American Slang In Movie “Laugh Of Loud” vol1, no7 (2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vonny Elisa Oktavia</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font0"> An Analysis Of Slang Words In The Lyrics Of Far East Movement Song As The Form Of Language Development</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And It’s Used In The Daily Life Vol 1, No 1 (2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wahyu Trimastuti, An Analysis Of Slang Words Used In Social Media vol 5, no2 (2017)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yule, George (1986).</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Dictionary of American slang.</span><span class="font0"> London: Harper Row New word: Longman Group UK Limited.</span></p>