---
layout: full_article
title: "Master Installation Design And Transformer Need Analysis   in  Faculty of Engineering Udayana University Denpasar"
author: "IGN Janardana, Wayan Arta Wijaya"
categories: jeei
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jeei/full-56358 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jeei/id-56358"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jeei/full-56358"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">Journal of Electrical, Electronics and Informatics, p-ISSN: 2549–8304 e-ISSN: 2622–0393</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">30</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Master Installation Design and Transformer Need Analysis in Faculty of Engineering Udayana University Denpasar</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">I G N Janardana<sup>1</sup>, W ArtaWijaya<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1,2</sup> Electrical Engineering Department Faculty of Engineering Udayana University Badung, Indonesian </span><a href="mailto:janardana@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">janardana@unud.ac.id</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font3">—Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University, PB. Sudirman Denpasar has 5 building units (buildings A, B, C, D, AF). Currently the AF building is undergoing renovation and is planned to be on 4 floors. The entire building will be equipped with the installation of 2 elevator units. The construction of the two new buildings and the installation of the 2 elevator units caused new problems of electricity shortages, changes in safety settings, unbalanced loads, and changes in the size of the main cable and the needs of the transformer and its capacity. The AF building and building A are supplied from sources on the transformer which are joined with other faculties, while Buildings B, C, D and E are fed by one transformer No. 124303818 with a capacity of 160 kVA. The plan to build an Alumni Building does not yet have electricity. Based on the analysis of the design, the total amount of power needed in all buildings in the Sudirman Denpasar Faculty of Engineering is the result of the AF Building planning = 134,280 watts, the Alumni Building planning results (building area and building functions are considered equal = 134,280 watts), so the total needs power to the two buildings = 271 560 Watt with a load deviation of 65%, then 0.65 x 271 560 W = 176 514 Watt. Then the total power requirement of the entire building is 259,340 watts. The measurement result of Cos ⱷ 0.92, then P (kVA) = 281,891,3043 Ampere = 281,8913 kVA. So that the transformer needs that must be prepared by the Faculty of Engineering to meet the power requirements at the Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University Denpasar with 80% transformer efficiency is a 350 kVA transformer with a placement position around the Faculty of Engineering area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Index Terms</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">—</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Electric power, Electrical Installation, Transformer</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION<sup>1</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Faculty of Engineering of Udayana University Denpasar has 5 building units (buildings A, B, C, D, AF). Currently the AF building is undergoing renovation and is planned to be on 4 floors. The entire building will be equipped with the installation of 2 elevator units. The construction of the two new buildings and the installation of the 2 elevator units caused new problems of electricity shortages, changes in safety settings, unbalanced loads, and changes in the size of the main cable and the needs of the transformer and its capacity. The AF building and building A are supplied from sources on the transformer which are joined with other faculties, while Buildings B, C, D and E are fed by one transformer No. 124303818 with a capacity of 160 kVA. The Alumni Building plan does not yet have a electricity source</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Corresponding author I G N Janardana – </span><a href="mailto:janardana@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1">janardana@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on these problems, the Faculty of Engineering of Udayana University is very urgent to review the need for electric power that is able to burden all the electrical system devices to avoid repeated blackouts and power quality is maintained. Then in this study an analysis of power requirements will be carried out due to the construction of the AF building and the alumni building of the Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University along with the addition of elevators.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;REVIEW OF LITERATURES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;State of the Art</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research on the analysis of electrical power requirements, room installation and load requirements calculation based on PUIL 2011, the design of air installations on, and the results obtained at the Kaba-kaba Estate villa with a total load requirement of 32,890.95 VA, with a grounding system using 3 plates [ 1] .</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The study entitled &quot;Electrical Installation System Planning in Renon Denpasar Bali Residential</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Development Project&quot; analyzed the electrical power requirements, electrical installation planning and cooling systems [2].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research on &quot;Analysis of the Effect of Load and Harmonics Imbalance on Load in Neutral Wire and Transformer Power Loss&quot;. The results of the analysis found that the higher the level of load imbalance and harmonic distortion, the higher the level of neutral wiring, resulting in increased transformer losses [3].</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research on &quot;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of Grounding System As Building Equipment Security at Udayana University Denpasar</span><span class="font3"> &quot;&nbsp;found results for the earthing system on the campus of the Faculty of Engineering Denpasar is still possible by installing one rod or 2 rods &lt;&nbsp;L [4].</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Electric Power Systems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">An electric power system can be grouped into three main components, as follows [5], [6]:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generating System</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transmission System</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Distribution System</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power Installation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equipment used in power installations is [6], [7]. :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Safety</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Delivery</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contacts</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pushbutton</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Contactor</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Panel</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic Electric Power System Planning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Several factors are influential and need to be considered in planning the distribution system in order to obtain optimal results, namely [5] :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Technical Factors</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Economic Factors</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. .Social Factors</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Electric Power Needs</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2.5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Calculation of Indoor Lighting</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Calculation of number of lights in a room [8] [9] [10] &nbsp;:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ExA</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Number of lights n = </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>φ</sup></span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>lampuX</sup></span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>η</sup></span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>Xd</sup></span><span class="font3">...................(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Where,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">n = number of lights</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">d = depreciation factor</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">E = The intensity of lighting in the field of work (lux)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A = area of work (m 2 )</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Φ Armature = light flux (lumen)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ƞ = lighting efficiency</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.2 Power requirements for Air Conditioner (AC)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Increasing the efficiency of AC engine efficiency so that with 1 PK power can be obtained by cooling up to 12,000 Btu / h AC Cooling Load / conditioning requirements in the room are influenced by [8] [9] :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The number of calories caused by room fillers (devices and other supporting materials).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Volume and specifications of the room (walls, glass, wood, etc.).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Estimated cooling load requirements are as follows [8] :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Humans: 250 - 760 Btu / person (male = 760 Btu / h, female = 680 Btu / h)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meeting rooms: 500 - 750 Btu / m 3 (ideal).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Free space : 150 - 400 Btu / m 3</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.3 Power requirements for the elevator</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The existence of an elevator is a substitute for the function of the stairs in reaching each floor in a multi-storey building, therefore the existence of an elevator cannot be ruled out considering it can make energy and time efficient.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. 5.4 Power requirements for equipment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In its operation, a building will certainly be equipped with supporting equipment such as computers, LCD, Wi-Fi and others. Everything requires electrical power which is very necessary to be calculated so that electrical power remains available adequately.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;6 Earthing System</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Earthing system is a series / network starting from ground poles / electrodes, connecting conductors to ground terminals which function to channel excess current to earth, so that the equipment can avoid the effects of lightning and other foreign voltages [11] :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;7 Types of Electric Power Quality Problems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Problems power quality such as symptoms of transition ( Transient ), the symptoms of changes in variables (voltage, current, etc.) that occurred during the transition from soft operating conditions ( steady state ) to another state [12] .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark5"></a>III. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Research methods</span></h3>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Location</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The study was conducted at the Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University, Denpasar and the Electrical Installation Laboratory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Steps</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collecting technical data on the existing electrical system's main installation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collecting data on the existing building loads: A, B, C, D, D and E.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collecting data on AF building planning and Alumni buildings</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collecting technical data on elevator capacity</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Measurement of earth resistance</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data collection for transformer installation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of total load requirements and transformer capacity requirements .</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the latest electrical power requirements in buildings A, BC, D, E.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of electrical power requirements in the AF building plan and alumni building.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of electrical power requirements and elevator capacity.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of power requirements for external lighting.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of total electric power requirements.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of transformer power requirements</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transformer placement analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark7"></a>IV. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Results and discussion</span></h3>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Electrical Systems at the Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University, Denpasar</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Currently, it is planned to build an AF building and an alumni building with almost the same area. The entire load at the Denpasar Engineering Faculty is supplied from two transformers, namely at the secretariat building and building A is supplied from the source at the transformer which is incorporated with other Faculties, while Buildings B, C, D and E are supplied by one transformer No. 124303818 series with a capacity of 160 kVA.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Electrical Power Requirements in AF</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Building Plans, Alumni Building and Lift Plans</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Faculty of Engineering of Udayana University is currently planning the construction of a building located on Jalan PB. Sudirman Denpasar . The building was built on an area of 384m 2 and planned to be built with 4 floors .</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data from the measurements of the building's existing electric power, the total real power needed in buildings A, B, C and the combined buildings D and E is 82,826 watts or 82,826 kW. The measurement data is real data with the condition of all equipment operating. The results of the analysis of the new building plan using formula 1, formula 2 and the planned elevator specification data obtained the total number of loads in all buildings in the Sudirman Denpasar Faculty of Engineering are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Building Planning AF = 134,280 W</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alumni Building Planning (building area and building functions are considered the same) = 134,280 watts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The total power requirements of the two buildings = 271 560 W. With a load deviation of 65%, then; 0.65 x 271 560 W = 176 514 W</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Then the total building power requirements from the measurement power data in buildings A, B, C, D and E are added to the results of the 82.826 Watt planning power is 176,514 Watt + 82,826 = 259,340 watts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">To determine the transformer capacity requirements that begin with a Cos pengukuran measurement of 0.92 are: P (kVA) = 25 9.34 0 / 0.92</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">= 281,891, 3043 VA</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">= 281, 8913 kVA</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">So that the transformer capacity needed is a transformer 281,8913 + (20% x 281,8913) = 338.2695 kVA, with the transformer on the market is 350 kVA.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.4 Grounding System</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Udayana University Faculty of Engineering Campus Denpasar with sandy clay texture . The earthing system installed at this time is the rod type. Based on the measurement results, the soil resistance value = 0.23 ohms, so that the ground ρ is 28.89 Ohm-meters. The results of the analysis to get the earth resistance value &lt;3 Ohm, obtained type 2 (two) rods with s &lt;L obtained depth of 8 meters each with a distance between the electrodes of 2 meters obtained earth resistance value 2.4940 ohms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark9"></a>V. </span><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusion and Recommendation</span></h3></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis of the design it was concluded that the total amount of power needed in all buildings in the Sudirman Denpasar Faculty of Engineering is the result of the AF Building planning = 134,280 watts, the Alumni Building planning results (building area and building functions are considered equal = 134,280 watts), so the total power requirements of the two buildings = 271 560 Watt with a load deviation of 65%, then 0.65 x 271 560 W = 176 514 Watt. Then the total power requirement of the entire building is 259,340 watts. The measurement result of Cos ⱷ 0.92, then P (kVA) = 281,891,3043 Ampere = 281,8913 kVA. So that the transformer needs that must be prepared by the Faculty of Engineering to meet the power requirements at the Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University Denpasar with 80% transformer efficiency is a 350 kVA transformer with a placement position around the Faculty of Engineering area.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Recommendation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the results of research to keep maintaining the quality of electric power after electric power is fulfilled, it can be recommended to conduct data collection of load data on a periodic basis for subsequent load growth.</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>References</span></h3>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Janardana, IGN. 2016. Sistem Pembumian Tipe Rod Sebagai Pengaman Peralatan Ruang Studio Teknik Arsitektur Gedung B Fakultas Teknik Universitas Udayana Jalan PB. Sudirman Denpasar. Denpasar : PS Teknik Elektro Unud.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hutaruk.TS.1987, Pengetanahan Netral dengan sistem Tenaga dan Pengetanahan Peralatan. Jakarta : Erlangga.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Saini, M., dkk. 2010. Pengembangan Sistem Penangkal Petir Dan Pentanahan Elektroda Rod Dan Plat Pada Laboratorium Teknik Konversi Energi Politeknik Negeri &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ujung &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pandang. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Academia.edu.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://www.academia.edu/8536126/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.academia.edu/8536126/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simamora, J., dkk. 2016. Pengaruh Penambahan Asam Sulfat(H2SO4) pada Bentonit untuk Penurunan Nilai</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tahanan Pentanahan. Bandar Lampung : ELECTRICIAN-Jurnal Rekayasa dan Teknologi Elektro., Volume 10, No. 1.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zuhal. 1991.Teknik Tenaga Listrik Dan Elektronika Daya. Bandung : Gramedia.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sutikno, dkk. 1997. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">External &amp;&nbsp;Internal Grounding</span><span class="font3">. Bandung :DIVLAT PT. Telkom.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Widyaningsih, W.P. 2013. Perubahan Konfigurasi Elektroda &nbsp;Pentanahan Batang Tunggal &nbsp;Untuk</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mereduksi Tahanan Pentanahan. EKSERGI Jurnal Teknik Energi., Vol : 9, No. 2 Mei 2013. 47-51.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Syofian, A. 2013. Sistem Pentanahan Grid Pada Gardu Induk PLTU Teluk Sirih. Jurnal Momentum., Vol : 14, No. 1 Februari 2013.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nugroho, D. 2016. Konfigurasi Elektroda Batang Pada Sistem Pentanahan. Jurnal : Transistor., Vol : 6, No. 1. Juli 2006. 7-22.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rizal, Y., dkk, 2014. Analisis Kinerja Sistem Pentanahan PT. PLN (Persero) Gardu Induk 150 kV Ngimbang-Lamongan Dengan Metode Finite Element Method (FEM). Surabaya : Jurnal Teknik POMITS 1</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yudha, D.O. dkk., 2015. Implementasi Sistem Pentanahan Grid Pada Tower Transmisi 150 kV( Aplikasi Pada Tower SUTT 150 kV Antara Gardu Induk Indarung Dengan Gardu Induk Bungus).e jurnal.bunghatta.ac.id., Vol :5. No. 1. 2015.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Persyaratan Umum Instalasi Listrik 2011(PUIL 2011). Amandemen 1. Jakarta : Badan Standardisasi Nasional. ICS : 13.260; 91.140.50.</span></p></li></ul>