---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Procedures Applied in Translating Immigration Terminologies"
author: "Wayan Shanti Nilayani"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-64637 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-64637"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-64637"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i02.p07"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2020.v27.i02.p07</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Procedures Applied in Translating Immigration Terminologies</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Wayan Shanti Nilayani <sup>1</sup>Denpasar, Bali <sup>1</sup>e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:shanti.nilayani@gmail.com"><span class="font3">shanti.nilayani@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font3">Translating technical terminologies that belong to special field is challenging, especially to those who are not mastering the field. In translating the immigration terminologies found in the regulations concerning immigration, the translators applied various translation procedures in order to maintain the meaning. The aim of this research is to identify the translation procedures applied in translating the immigration terminologies found in the data source. The data were collected from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang Nomor 6 Tahun 2011 tentang Keimigrasian, Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 104 Tahun 2015 tentang Perubahan Atas Peraturan Presiden Nomor 69 Tahun 2015 tentang Bebas Visa Kunjungan,</span><span class="font3"> along with their translations</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Qualitative research approach is applied in this writing. The theory used to analyze the data is the theory of translation proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet. The result of the research showed that in translating the immigration terminologies found in the data source, the translator applied 5 (five) out of 7 (seven) translation procedures. These 5 (five) procedures are borrowing, calque, literal, transposition, and modulation. The other 2 (two) translation procedures that were not applied are equivalence and adaptation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: translation, immigration, terminology</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font3">Menerjemahkan istilah teknis yang terdapat dalam bidang khusus merupakan sebuah tantangan, terutama bagi mereka yang tidak menguasai bidang tersebut. Dalam menerjemahkan istilah-istilah keimigrasian yang ditemukan dalam beberapa peraturan tentang keimigrasian penerjemah menerapkan berbagai prosedur penerjemahan untuk mempertahankan makna. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan oleh penerjemah dalam menerjemahkan istilah-istilah keimigrasian yang ditemukan dalam sumber data. Data dalam penulisan ini bersumber dari Undang-Undang Nomor 6 Tahun 2011 tentang Keimigrasian, Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 104 Tahun 2015 tentang Perubahan Atas Peraturan Presiden Nomor 69 Tahun 2015 tentang Bebas Visa Kunjungan, beserta dengan terjemahannya. Penelitian ini adalah penelitian kualitatif. Teori yang digunakan untuk menaganalisis data adalah teori penerjemahan oleh Vinay dan Darbelnet. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa dalam menerjemahkan istilah keimigrasian yang ditemukan dalam sumber data, penerjemah menerapkan 5 (lima) dari 7 (tujuh) prosedur penerjemahan. Kelima prosedur ini adalah </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">borrowing, calque, literal, transposition,</span><span class="font3"> dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">modulation.</span><span class="font3"> Dua prosedur penerjemahan lainnya yang tidak digunakan adalah </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">equivalence</span><span class="font3"> dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">adaptation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">: penerjemahan, keimigrasian, istilah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Bali as one of the tourism destinations in Indonesia is visited by more than 10.000 foreigners in a day for various purposes. Although Bali is a small island, its international airport named I Gusti Ngurah Rai International Airport is one of the busiest airports in Indonesia besides Soekarno-Hatta International Airport in Jakarta and Juanda International Airport in Surabaya. The international airport is considered as a gate since it connects a country to the other countries and also as the lane for foreigners to enter and exit the territory of a country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In an international airport, there are several institutions that must exist such as CIQ that stands for customs, immigration, and quarantine. These institutions are responsible to control and secure the flow of people and goods entering or exiting the territory of a country. Immigration, as one of the CIQ elements, deals with the traffic of people entering or exiting the territory of a country. The responsibility of immigration is to conduct a clearance to people who enter or exit the country. This clearance procedure involves the travel document and stay permit examinations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Matters concerning immigration in Indonesia are regulated by several regulations. The main regulation used as a guidance in regulating immigration matters is the Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6 of 2011 concerning immigration. To accommodate the need for information in society regarding immigration matters, the Government of Indonesia, in this case is the Directorate General of Immigration as the authorized institution, has provided the law and other regulations concerning immigration on their official website </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/"><span class="font3">(www.imigrasi.go.id)</span></a><span class="font3"> to be freely downloaded. Besides, the Directorate General of Immigration has also provided the translation of the laws in several foreign languages such as English and Chinese for foreigners who do not speak the Indonesian language. This writing discusses the translation procedures applied in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">translating the immigration terminologies found in the regulations in Indonesian and its translation in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As it is believed that Indonesian Language and English could not be having the same linguistic system, therefore it is not possible to produce a translation that has the same form as the source text. However, meaning is the most important thing that should be maintained by the translators. Finding a lexical in the target language (TL) that has the closest meaning as in the source language (SL) is a challenge for the translator, especially in translating a technical terminology that does not exist in the TL. Translators, especially those who are not mastering the field, will face a problem in translating a text belongs to a special field consist of a great number of technical terminologies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating the terminologies of a particular field, the translator is challenged with several problems. One of them is the absence of the word in the TL. As stated by Goddard and Wierzbicka (2014), there is certainly no reason to expect that all languages will have words corresponding in meaning exactly to the English words. However, the absence of the word does not prove the absence of a concept. The fact that the words are never be able to capture fully or perfectly is not a good reason not to try to get as close to them as possible (Goddard and Wierzbicka, 2014).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Most people know and understand very well what visa or passport is, but not many people know what is meant by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Perjalanan Laksana Pasport, Surat Perjalanan Lintas Batas, Tindakan Administratif Keimigrasian,</span><span class="font3"> etc. These terminologies are rarely used by people unless they are legal practitioners, immigration officers, or people who often deal with immigration matters. The mentioned terminologies are the immigration products issued by the Indonesian Government that may not exist in other countries, therefore there is a possibility that the terminologies are not available in other countries. In translating these</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">terminologies, the translator is expected to be able to transfer the meaning into TL without changing or shifting its meaning or message. For this purpose, translators apply various translation procedures in the process of translating the terminologies to maintain the meaning in TL. This writing discusses about the translation procedures applied by the translator in translating the immigration terminologies found in the data source. The theory that is used to analyze the data is the translation theory proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000). According to Vinay and Darbelnet (2000), there are 7 (seven) translation procedures that are divided into 2 (two) methods, direct and oblique translation. This writing is expected to be helpful and useful as a reference for the similar research that will be conducted in the future. It is also expected to give a contribution to the studies of translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Methodology is an essential part in a research since it shows the way how the research is conducted. This study belongs to qualitative research that applies the theory of translation proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000) to analyze the data. The data in this study are primary data taken from several regulations concerning immigration. The regulations both in Indonesian language and its translation in English were observed and the terminologies related to immigration were identified. The data were collected through documentary method taken from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang Nomor 6 Tahun 2011 tentang Keimigrasian</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 104 Tahun 2015 tentang Perubahan Atas Peraturan Presiden Nomor 69 Tahun 2015 tentang Bebas Visa Kunjungan</span><span class="font3"> that are translated into Law Number 6 of 2011 concerning Immigration and Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 104 of 2015 on the Amendment to the Presidential Regulation Number 69 of 2015 on the Visit Visa Exemption. The data were analyzed by descriptive qualitative method then presented by formal and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">informal method which mean the data are presented in a form of table and paraphrase using complete explanation or description.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The theory of translation used in analyzing the data is the theory proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000) that is supported by the theory proposed by Molina and Albir (2002). Vinay and Darbelnet (2000) categorized 7 (seven) translation procedures into 2 (two) methods. The first method is direct or literal translation and the second method is oblique translation. Direct translation consists of several procedures such as borrowing, calque, and literal translation while oblique translation consists of transposition, modulation, adaptation, and equivalence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Direct Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In some translation tasks, it is possible to transpose the SL message element by element into TL, because it is based on either (i) parallel categories, in which case we can speak of structural parallelism, or (ii) on parallel concepts, which are the result of metalinguistic parallelisms. But translators may also notice gaps, or “lacunae”, in the target language (TL) which must be filled by corresponding elements, so that the overall impression is the same for the two messages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">To overcome a lacuna, usually a metalinguistic one (e.g. a new technical process, an unknown concept), borrowing is the simplest of all translation methods. This procedure is usually used by the translators to create a stylistic effect in the translation product. The decision to borrow a SL word or expression for introducing an element of local colour is a matter of style and consequently of the message. The borrowing procedure is applied in translating the following terminologies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1 – The Application of Borrowing Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL (Indonesian)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL (English)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor </span><span class="font3">untuk warga negara Indonesia dikeluarkan bagi warga negara Indonesia dalam keadaan tertentu jika Paspor biasa tidak dapat diberikan. (Pasal 27 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor </span><span class="font3">for the Indonesian citizen shall be issued for the Indonesian citizen in a specific circumstance in case of ordinary Passport can not be given.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Article 27 Paragraph (1), Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Menteri atau Pejabat Imigrasi yang ditunjuk berwenang melakukan penarikan atau pencabutan Paspor biasa, Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor, dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">surat perjalanan lintas batas </span><span class="font3">atau pas lintas batas yang telah dikeluarkan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Pasal 31 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Minister or a designated Immigration Officer shall be authorized to withdraw or revoke an Ordinary Passport, Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Surat Perjalanan Lintas Batas </span><span class="font3">or Border Crossing Pass issued.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Article 31 Paragraph (1) Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor</span><span class="font3"> (SPLP) is a document in lieu of passport that is provided in a specific state that is valid for a certain period of time. SPLP is one kind of travel document that has the same function as a regular passport. This document is given to Indonesian nationalities to replace their lost or damaged passport. Besides, it is also given for certain cases such as the unavailability of the regular passport application form in the Indonesian Embassy or Consulate abroad, repatriation, and etc. In other countries,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">this kind of travel document has similar function as emergency passport or temporary passport. The SPLP types are divided into SPLP for Indonesian Citizen, SPLP for foreigners, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Perjalanan Lintas Batas</span><span class="font3"> (SPLB) or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pas Lintas Batas</span><span class="font3"> (Border Crossing Pass).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Surat Perjalanan Lintas Batas</span><span class="font3"> (SPLB), also known as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pas Lintas Batas</span><span class="font3"> (PLB), is a kind of travel document issued by the Government of Indonesia for Indonesian citizen who live on the borders between Indonesia and the neighboring countries, such as in the areas between Kalimantan and Malaysia, NTT and East Timor, also West Papua and Papua New Guinea. In other countries, this document is known as Border Crossing Pass.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Both data 1 and 2 are translated by borrowing procedure. The documents that have the same function as SPLB and SPLP actually exist in other countries or in TL. However, the translator opted to apply borrowing procedures for various considerations. First, the data source used in this writing is a legal text that uses frozen language. Frozen or static language is a language that is always the same and predictable. It is usually related to the religions, laws, or customs of the community. In translating such a text, a translator tends to be attentive and accurate in choosing the term in TL since a mistake in translating the term may cause a serious issue in the future. Second, even though these products do exist in TL, there must be several features of these documents that similar documents in TL do not have, vice versa. Therefore, to avoid any meaning or message shifting, the borrowing procedure is applied to translate the terminologies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Calque</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A calque is a special kind of borrowing whereby a language borrows an expression form of another, but then translates literally each of its elements. Calque or loan translation is a word or phrase borrowed from another language by literal, word-for-word, or root-for-root translation. Calque expressions consist of imitating the manner of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expression of the SL in the TL (cited in Sharei, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 2 – The Application of Calque Procedure</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL (Indonesian)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL (English)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Selain Kantor Imigrasi sebagaimana dimaksud pada ayat (1), dapat dibentuk </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Rumah Detensi Imigrasi </span><span class="font3">di ibu kota negara, provinsi, kabupaten, atau kota. (Pasal 4 Ayat (4), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">In addition to Immigration Office as referred to in paragraph (1), an </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Immigration Detention House </span><span class="font3">can be established in State capital, province, district, or municipality. (Article 4 Paragraph (4) Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Bebas Visa Kunjungan </span><span class="font3">yang telah diberikan kepada Orang Asing warga negara dari negara tertentu dan pemerintah wilayah administratif khusus dari negara tertentu berdasarkan …. (Pasal 6 Ayat (1) Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 104 Tahun 2015)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Visit Visa Exemption </span><span class="font3">has been issued to the Foreigner of certain countries and special administrative regions from particular country under the …. (Article 6 paragraph (1), Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 104 of 2015)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rumah Detensi Imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> that is translated into Immigration Detention House is the institution under the authority of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia. Its function is as the temporary shelter for the foreigners who are imposed punishment (Immigration Administrative Action). In other countries, Immigration Detention House is known</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">as Detention Centre or Detention Facility. In the United States of America, this institution is called Detention Centre, Detention Facility, or Prison. While in the United Kingdom, it is known as Immigration Removal Centre (IRC). Even though the terminologies used in Indonesia and other countries are different, these institutions serve the same function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bebas Visa Kunjungan</span><span class="font3"> (BVK) that is translated into Visit Visa Exemption is a facility provided by the Government of Indonesia for tourists from certain countries who want to visit Indonesia for tourism purpose. They are exempted from having a visa to enter the Indonesian territory. By this facility, foreigners from certain countries can visit and stay in Indonesia for maximum 30 days. BVK can be obtained at the airport upon arrival by presenting the return or onward ticket. The return date must not exceed the validity period of the BVK. In other countries, the similar facility exists with different terminologies. It is known as Visa Waiver or Visa-Free Entry. These facilities enable foreigners from particular countries to visit and stay for certain period of time in the issuing country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating both terminologies above, the translator applied calque procedure. These terminologies do exist in TL with different terminologies. However, instead of using the terminologies that are commonly used in TL, the translator opted to borrow the expression in SL then translated it literally to TL. This procedure may be applied since the TL is a legal text that uses frozen language, therefore the translator in translating the terminologies tends to be stricter and more attentive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Literal, or word for word, translation is the direct transfer of a SL text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate TL text in which the translators’ task is limited to observing the adherence to the linguistic servitudes of the TL. In principle, a literal translation is a unique solution which is reversible and complete in itself. It is most</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">common when translating between two languages of the same family, and even more so when they also share the same culture. If literal translations arise between French and English, it is because common metalinguistic concepts also reveal physical coexistence with the conscious or unconscious imitation which attaches to a certain intellectual or political prestige, and such like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 3 – The Application of Literal Translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL (Indonesian)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL (English)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Menteri berwenang dan bertanggung jawab melakukan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Pencegahan </span><span class="font3">yang menyangkut bidang Keimigrasian (Pasal 91 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Menteri berwenang melakukan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Penangkalan </span><span class="font3">(Pasal 98 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The Minister shall be authorized and responsible for undertaking any </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Prevention </span><span class="font3">with regards to Immigration sector (Article 91 Paragraph (1) Law Number 6 of 2011) The Minister shall be authorized to undertaken any </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Deterrence </span><span class="font3">(Article 98 Paragraph (1) Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on Law Number 6 of 2011 concerning Immigration, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pencegahan</span><span class="font3"> that is translated into prevention means a temporary prohibition against people to exit the territory of Indonesia due to immigration or other reasons set forth by law. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia </span><span class="font3">(KBBI) or Indonesian Language Dictionary defines </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pencegahan</span><span class="font3"> as the process, way, or action to prevent; prevention; rejection. Oxford Dictionary defines prevention as the action of stopping something from happening or arising. Prevention from leaving Indonesian territory may be imposed to both Indonesian citizens and foreigners due to immigration or other reasons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on Law Number 6 of 2011 concerning Immigration, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">penangkalan</span><span class="font3"> means prohibition against the foreigners to enter the territory of Indonesia due to immigration reasons. KBBI states that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">penangkalan</span><span class="font3"> is the process, way, action of preventing; rejection; deterrence. Prohibition cannot be imposed to Indonesian citizens, only to foreigners. As stated by the law, all Indonesian citizens must be allowed to enter Indonesian territory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oblique Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In translating SL into TL, translators might also notice gaps or “lacunae” in TL which must be filled by corresponding elements, therefore the overall impression is the same for the two messages. This method is applied to a case in which both SL and TL have several differences of structural or metalinguistic. These differences cause certain stylistic effects cannot be transposed into TL without upsetting the syntactic order, or even the lexis. In this case more complex methods have to be used. These procedures are called oblique translation methods.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method called transposition involves replacing one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message. According to Molina and Albir (2002), transposition is a translation technique that involves the changing of grammatical category. This technique is similar to category, structural, and unit shifting, i.e. verb in SL is translated into noun in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vinay and Darbelnet (2000) stated that the base and the transposed expression do not necessarily have the same value. Translators must, therefore, choose to carry out a transposition if a translation thus obtained fits better into the utterance, or allows a particular nuance of a style to be retained. There are two types of transpositions, obligatory and optional transposition. Obligatory transposition is when the TL has no other choices because of the language system but optional transposition is the translator’s choice and they use</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">it when it is necessary and is better for the style (cited in Sharei, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 4 – The Application of Transposition Procedure</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL (Indonesian)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL (English)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Setiap </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Tempat Pemeriksaan Imigrasi </span><span class="font3">ditetapkan suatu area tertentu untuk melakukan pemeriksaan Keimigrasian yang disebut dengan area imigrasi. (Pasal 22 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Every</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Immigration Checkpoint Venue </span><span class="font3">shall be specified a specific area to perform Immigration check that referred to as Immigration area (Article 22 Paragraph (1) Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Menteri atau Pejabat Imigrasi yang ditunjuk berwenang melakukan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">penarikan </span><span class="font3">atau pencabutan Paspor biasa, Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor, dan surat perjalanan lintas batas atau pas lintas batas yang telah dikeluarkan (Pasal 31 Ayat (1), Undang-Undang No. 6 Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Minister or a designated Immigration Officer shall be authorized </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">to withdraw </span><span class="font3">or revoke an Ordinary Passport, Surat Perjalanan Laksana Paspor, and Surat Perjalanan Lintas Batas or Border Crossing Pass issued (Article 31 Paragraph (1) Law Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">In translating both data 7 and 8 the translator applied transposition procedure. There is grammatical change category occurred in the process of translating these data. The data 7 shows that the change of head and modifier in the noun phrase both in SL and TL occured due to the different linguistic system between SL and TL. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tempat Pemeriksaan Imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> (TPI) that is translated into Immigration checkpoint venue is a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">checkpoint venue that exists in the seaport, airport, border crossing post, or other places. TPI is used as an entrance or exit point of the territory of Indonesia. Every people who enter or exit the Indonesian territory are obliged to pass the Immigration clearance conducted by the Immigration Officer at the Immigration Checkpoint Venue. Person in charge of transport tool (plane, boats, etc.) who enter or exit the Indonesian territory with transport tool are also obliged to pass the immigration check at Immigration Checkpoint Venue.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating data 8, the change of word class occured. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penarikan</span><span class="font3"> that belongs to noun is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to withdraw</span><span class="font3"> that belongs to verb. Based on KBBI, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">penarikan</span><span class="font3"> means the process, way, action of withdrawing something. In Immigration, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">penarikan</span><span class="font3"> is the activity of travel and/ or other immigration document withdrawal conducted by the immigration officer based on various reasons.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>3.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Modulation is a variation of the form of the message, obtained by a change in the point of view. This change can be justified when, although a literal, or even transposed, translation results in a grammatically correct utterance, it is considered unsuitable, unidiomatic or awkward in the TL. According to Molina and Albir (2002), modulation is a technique in which the point of view, focus or the cognitive category of the source text are changed. The change of point of view can occur in the lexical or structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 5 – The Application of Modulation Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Indonesian)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Pemberian </span><span class="font3">Visa</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">diplomatik dan Visa dinas merupakan kewenangan Menteri Luar Negeri dan dalam</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(English) Provision </span><span class="font3">of diplomatic and official Visa is an authority of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and in the</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">pelaksanaannya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">operational is</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">dikeluarkan oleh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">issued by foreign</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">pejabat dinas luar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">service officer in</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">negeri di Perwakilan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">the Representative</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Republik Indonesia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">of the Republic of</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(Pasal 37, Undang-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Indonesia (Article</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Undang No. 6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">37, Law Number 6</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;Setiap orang yang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Every people who</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">masuk atau keluar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">enter or exit the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Wilayah Indonesia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Indonesian</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">wajib melalui</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Territory shall be</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">pemeriksaan yang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">obliged to pass</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">dilakukan oleh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">through a check</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Pejabat Imigrasi </span><span class="font3">di</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">conducted by the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Tempat pemeriksaan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Immigration</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Imigrasi. (Pasal 9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Officer </span><span class="font3">at the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Ayat (1), Undang-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Immigration</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Undang No. 6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Checkpoint Venue.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Tahun 2011)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(Article 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Paragraph (1) Law</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Number 6 of 2011)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on KBBI, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemberian</span><span class="font3"> means something that is given; the act or process of giving something. In the data 10, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemberian</span><span class="font3"> is translated into provision that means the act of supplying somebody with something that they need or want; something that is supplied. In the process of translating this lexical, there is change of point of view occured. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pemberian</span><span class="font3"> that means the act of giving something was translated into provision that means the act of providing something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on Article 1 Number 7, Ministerial Regulation of the Minister of Law and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia Number 30 of 2016 concerning Immigration Intelligence, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pejabat Imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> is defined as the officer who has passed a special training program of immigration with a technical expertise of immigration and has an authority to undertake the duties and responsibilities based on the Law Number 6 of 2011 concerning Immigration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on KBBI, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat</span><span class="font3"> is defined as a government employee who holds an important</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">position (leader) in an institution. In Indonesian Immigration, these important positions are held by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat struktural. Pejabat struktural</span><span class="font3"> (lit. structural official) in Immigration institution are such as the Director General of Immigration, the board of directors, the Head of Immigration Office, the head of department, the head of section, etc. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pejabat struktural</span><span class="font3"> is a terminology to call high ranking employee who holds important position.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating the data 10, the translator applied modulation procedure. Instead of translating the lexical </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat</span><span class="font3"> literally into official, the translator opted to translate it into officer in order to maintain the meaning. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pejabat Imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> is a terminology used to call the immigration officers who have passed a special training program. Even though it is called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat</span><span class="font3">, it does not mean </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> is high ranking officials. However, compared to the other employees at the same level, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat imigrasi</span><span class="font3"> has more authority and power. The change of point of view occurred in translating the lexical </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pejabat</span><span class="font3"> into officer. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pejabat</span><span class="font3"> that is usually associated with a position with more power and authority is translated into officer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the conducted analysis, it is found that in translating the SL into TL the translator applied only 5 (five) out of 7 (seven) translation procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000). The 5 (five) translation procedures are borrowing, calque, literal translations, transposition, and modulation. These translation procedures were applied to maintain the message in SL. Like the other legal texts, the data source used in this writing also uses frozen or static language that means a language that is always the same and predictable. It is usually related to the religion, laws, or customs of the community. In translating frozen language, the translator tends to be attentive and accurate. The other 2 (two) procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (2000) that were not applied are equivalence and adaptation. These procedurees were not applied</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 27 No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">since adaptation and equivalence procedures are usually used to translate movie title, idiom, or proverbs. By all means, these procedures seem not applicable to be used to translate legal texts such as the data source used in this writing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2011. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6 of 2011 Concerning Immigration. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;URL:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/law"><span class="font3">http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/polic</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/law"><span class="font3">ies/law </span></a><span class="font3">(Downloaded on 18 December 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2011. Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 6 Tentang Keimigrasian. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;URL:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpa"><span class="font3">http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpa</span></a><span class="font3"> p/Undang-Undang/uu-6-tahun-2011.pdf (Downloaded on 14 October 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2015. Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 104 Tahun 2015 Tentang Perubahan Atas Peraturan Presiden Nomor 69 Tahun 2015 Tentang Bebas Visa Kunjungan. Available from: &nbsp;&nbsp;URL:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/presidential-regulation"><span class="font3">http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/polic</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/presidential-regulation"><span class="font3">ies/presidential-regulation </span></a><span class="font3">(Downloaded on 20 October 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2015. Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 104 of 2015 on the Amendment To The Presidential Regulation Number 69 of 2015 on The Visit Visa Exemption. Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/presidential-regulation"><span class="font3">http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/polic</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/en/policies/presidential-regulation"><span class="font3">ies/presidential-regulation </span></a><span class="font3">(Downloaded on 21 October 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2016. Peraturan Menteri Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia Republik Indonesia Nomor 30 Tahun 2016 tentang Intelijen Keimigrasian. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;URL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;http://</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpap/PeraturanMenteri/Tahun2016/permenkumham%20no%2030%20tentang%20intelijen%20keimigrasian.pdf"><span class="font3">http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpa</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpap/PeraturanMenteri/Tahun2016/permenkumham%20no%2030%20tentang%20intelijen%20keimigrasian.pdf"><span class="font3">p/PeraturanMenteri/Tahun2016/permenkumh</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpap/PeraturanMenteri/Tahun2016/permenkumham%20no%2030%20tentang%20intelijen%20keimigrasian.pdf"><span class="font3">am%20no%2030%20tentang%20intelijen%2</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="http://www.imigrasi.go.id/phocadownloadpap/PeraturanMenteri/Tahun2016/permenkumham%20no%2030%20tentang%20intelijen%20keimigrasian.pdf"><span class="font3">0keimigrasian.pdf </span></a><span class="font3">(Downloaded on 31 December 2019)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. 2016. Merriam-Webster Dictionary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Available from:</span><a href="http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary"><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;http://www.merriam-</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary"><span class="font3">webster.com/dictionary,</span></a><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;accessed on</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">December 23, 2016 at 09.29 p.m.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goddard, Cliff and Anna Wierzbicka. 2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words &amp;&nbsp;Meanings</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Molina, L &amp;&nbsp;A.H. Albir. 2002. “Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach”. Dalam </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Meta</span><span class="font3">, Vol. XLVII, No. 4. Hal. 499-512</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sharei, Vahideh. 2017. “A Comparative Study of the Strategies Employed in “The Old Man and the Sea” Translated from English into Persian on the Basis of Vinay and Darbelnet’s Model”. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Practice in Language Studies</span><span class="font3">: Volume 07, Number 04, 281 - 286</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vinay, Jean-Paul and Jean Darbelnet. 2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Methodology for Translation.</span><span class="font3"> In Venuti (ed.) 2000. London and New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">165</span></p>