---
layout: full_article
title: "The Comparison of Verb Formation between English and Buton Tomiya Language"
author: "Windaryati ., Antonius M. K Naro"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-69263 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-69263"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-69263"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">| </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">47</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 4 No. 2, September 2020 DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i02.p01"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i02.p01</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Comparison of Verb Formation between English and Buton Tomiya Language</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Windaryati</span><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, Antonius M. K Naro </span><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Department</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Faculty of Social Sciences Education and Humanities, Muhammadiyah Maumere Teachers Training Institute Maumere, NTT </span><a href="mailto:wawanlabira@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wawanlabira@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font1">The focus of this research is the comparison of verb formation between English and Buton Tomiya (BT) language, to know the similarities, differences. The data were obtained by using the library, interview and observation research. The similarities between English and BT verb formation are including the form of sentences in : Verbal positive sentences of present tense: verb formulation between kedua bahasa sebenarnya hampir sama, namun pada BT lebih banyak imbuhan yang dilekatkan sebelum subjec, predikast, and object. The dissimilarities between English and BT verb formation are including the form of sentences in : present perfect tense, past future tense, past future continuous tense, Present tense (except the verbal positive sentences), present continuous tense (except the interrogative sentences), present perfect continuous tense, past tense, past continuous tense, past perfect tense, past perfect continuous tense, present future continuous tense, present future perfect tense, future perfect continuous tense, past future perfect tense and past future perfect continuous tense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords—contrative, verb formation, English language, Buton Tomiya Language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The dialect uniqueness of the same language family has been contributing to the preservation of ethnic identity across the islands in Indonesia. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">In fact,</span><span class="font1"> there are many ethnic groups spread from Sabang to Marauke has different characteristics and characteristics from one language to another. The language and dialect are used to communicate among people within the ethnic group. In addition, they also have different cultural and social backgrounds with various types of shape. Therefore, various languages and cultures must be maintained to maintain diversity in unity as the legacy of the Indonesian state (Wacana, 2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Flores is one of the islands in South East Island Province which has many regions along with its countless regional language. The languages in Flores Island are languages belonging to the Austronesia language family. Blust (1977) also emphasized that the Polynesian Malay group which is a derivative of the Austronesian language consists of two groups, namely the West Polynesia Malay group and the Central/Eastern Polynesia Malay group. West Polynesia Malay Group down languages in the Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam, Malagasy, western Indonesia (Sumatra, Java, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Bali, Lombok, and western Sumbawa) while middle/eastern Indonesia decreases languages on the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">islands of Sumba, Flores, Timor, Central and southern Maluku.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buton Tomiya language is a language is used by local people in Koja Doi Island, a small island to the north of Flores Island around 2 hours sailing by traditional boat. The whole population of the island is originally from tribe in southeast Sulawesi around a century ago along with their cultures and language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The study of Buton language is very rare. It’s proven with a little work on the Buton language in various ways. A study was done by Susiati and Rismaniye with title Languages of geographical languages and dialect in southeast Sulawesi (2018). The study aimed to figure out the differences and the similarities of in Southeast Sulawesi. Another study conducted by Hanan, (2010) divided the language in Sulawesi into seven groups, wrong the other is the Muna-Buton group whose members consist of Muna-Buton, South Buton, Wolio, Layolo, and Wakatobi. Wakatobi language as a language which are in the sub-cluster of Muna-Buton spoken on four islands, namely Wangi-Wangi, Kaledupa, Tomia, and Binongko islands. La Ino. (2014) classified the style in Southeast Sulawesi consists of two groups. The first group is Bungku-Tolaki which includes of the languages Wawonii, Kulisusu, Moronene, and Tolaki. The second group is Muna-Buton which consists of Busoa, Kambowa, Muna, Wolio, Cia-Cia, and Wakatobi. </span><span class="font2">La Ino. (2016) </span><span class="font1">stated that based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">lexicostatistic calculation results of Muna-Wakatobi language relationship. The results of these calculations indicate that the two languages are in the sub-family category language or language differences with a reasonably close relationship between language relationships.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From those literatures reviewed, it is revealed that there has been no research on verb formation of Buton Tomia language. Yet, verb is so common in language use that they hardly need any introduction according to which they denote actions, activities, states, events, attitudes, processes, changes or existence enabling speakers to produce compressible utterances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The starting point of studying verb formation may be the mapping of all verb types. Once we present all possible verb types, it may spare us a lot of subsequent explanations, and its real advantage lies in offering a logical view upon their possible combination to create tenses. Classifying verbs is important, as they express a multitude of grammatical categories, such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">person </span><span class="font1">(first, second, third) and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">number </span><span class="font1">(singular, plural). Furthermore, in a syntactical approach, they express the predicate, offering the following possible characteristics: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">tense </span><span class="font1">(present, past, future), </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">aspect </span><span class="font1">(simple, continuous or progressive, perfect (simple), perfect continuous or progressive), </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">voice </span><span class="font1">(active, passive), and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">mood </span><span class="font1">(finite: indicative, imperative, subjunctive; non-finite: infinitive, gerund, participle).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In general linguistics, analysis of verb is concerned with the study of morphemes - the minimum meaning indivisible unit of a language. The task of computational morphology is to extract grammatical, syntactic, and semantic information from verb by using an expanded lexicon, which is treated as a separate part of a grammar. Isidore. (1975) stated that parsing of verb is a technique that aims to study the structure, type, morphophonemic, syntactic, and semantic properties of verb automatically. In Natural Language Processing it can be done at two levels.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Theodora. (1990) stated that traditional linguistic analysis of verbs is concerned with the study of their forms, and analysis of grammatical, morphemic, and semantic properties. Analysis of grammatical properties (e.g. markers of aspect, tense, auxiliary, person, number, particle, etc.) is necessary for understanding their forms and functions in the sentence. Here we deal with Buton Tomiya verb formation and compared it with English verb formation because understanding the structure of verbs can supply useful information to understand the structure of words of other parts-of-speech. Moreover, the understanding of the formation and function of verbs can give some clues to explore the nature of language cognition by the users.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;METHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study undertook the verb formation by making a comparison and contrast between English</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">language and Buton language using contrastive analysis. It was concerned with the comparison and contrast of the two languages to determine their areas of similarities and differences with their implication on language learning and teaching (Darmawan Suryoputro, 2019). The method was proposed by Whitman (1970). There are four steps as components of contrastive analysis: (1) taking two languages, L1 and L2, and writing formal descriptions of them (or choosing descriptions of them), (2) picking forms from the descriptions for contrast, (3) making a contrast of the chosen form, and (5) making a prediction of the contrast.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research took place at in Kojadoi Island, East Alok, Sub District of Sikka Regency Flores Island. The data were obtained from 20 adult native speakers of Buton Tomiya through interview and study literature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FINDING</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buton Tomiya verb formation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tomiya Buton Verbal Form Buton Tomiya verb forms are only known as Polymorphic because of verbal BT monomorphic, not including free morphemes. That form is a form that cannot stand alone except in the imperative mode (Verhaar: 2004). This pre-categorical form is called the main word (Ramlan: 2001).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Polymorphemic Verbs Formed through the Process of Affixation In BT the process of forming verbs with affixation consists of two forms, namely the affixing process of pronominal affixes and ordinary affixes. The process of affixing the pronominal affixes is obliged to be attached to the basic form except in the imperative mode which functions as the subject of the verb clause and Simultaneously functions as the filler of the predicate in the sentence.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefixs of Buton Tomia Verb Forming The verbforming prefixes in Buton Tomia consist of two forms, namely pronominal prefixes and ordinary prefixes, while pronominal prefixes are distinguished again from two forms namely realist and realistic forms.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prefiks Buton Tomia :</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Realist pronominal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Pro nominal realist referred to here is attached to the basic form which states that the perpetrators of the activities occurred, both past and ongoing by the basis (kridalaksana: 2001). the realist pronouns are (Ku), (u), (no), (ko), (to), (i).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The basic forms of verbs, nouns, adjectives adverbs and numerals can be attached directly to this prefix without going through the process of affixation with ordinary affixes. for example, we take the example of the basic form of the verb:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;saii: create, can be placed with realist pronominal prefixes become: Kusaii, Usaii, Nosaii, Kosaii, Tosaii isaii.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guru : guru, from the basic form of nouns to being:Kugur, uguru, noguru, koguru, toguru, iguru.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">- Da’o: bad, from the basic form of the adjectives to be: Kuda’o, Uda’o, Noda’o, Koda’o, Toda’o, Ida’o.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Realistic Pronominal Prefix</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The iris pronominal prefix is a prefix attached to the basic form which states that the perpetrator carries out activities by the basis not or has not yet occurred (Karidalaksana: 2001). In the process of verb formation, infix insertion (um) in this basic form productively always follows verbs with realist prefixes. Which includes the original prefixing irons in BT are (Ku); (ko), (a), (ka), (ta), (to).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ordinary preffix</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ordinary prefixes are prefixes attached after the pronouns prefixes. These prefixes are: (pa), (po), (he), (to), (me), (ho), (pepe), (hopo), (hoko), (hoto), (para), (pisi), and (hiki). The usual prefixes above can be attached to the basic form of the verb: pamanga = eat from the root word manga (eat), poga’a = divorced from the basic word ga’a (separate), hokomate = abused from the word mate (died).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The similarities and the differences of English and Buton Tomia verb formation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Similarities of Verb Formation between English and Buton Tomiya Language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tabel 1.1 The Data Analysis of the Similarities between English and BT in verb formation</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">2) . The differences of verb formation between Engish and Buton Tomia language</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 1.2 The Data Analysis of differences between English and Buton Tomia language in verb formation</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tense</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Buton Tomia</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">{ft C Oj ‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰» C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft Oi £</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I go to market</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">S +V+ Adverb of place</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) kulako ka daoa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern: S + V + Adverb of place</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">We have a similarity in English and BT present sentences. The similarity is in the positive verbal sentences. But if the subjects were the third singular person (he,she,it), there will be a difference where English will used the (V+s/es). This pattern are not found in BT.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tense</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">English</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Buton Tomiya</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">5ft S Oi H ‰» S Oi 5ft Oi £</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) My father is a Fisherman Pattern : S + auxiliary (to be) + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) She doesn‟t goes to school Pattern : S + aux (does)+Not + V + Adverb of place. (?)Why do you hate me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Why + aux (do) + S + V + O ?</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Te amasu te patai-tai</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prefiks te + S + P</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) Di’iakai no lako ka sekolah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern: S+Ka’i +prefiks no +P+O (?)Noahai’ko’omarik aaku</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Noaha +prefiks ‘i+S+P+O</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The form of present tense is almost same with present sentences in BT The difference just in present tense of English, they used auxiliary but BT didn‟t use it, they used prefiks.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">5ft S ω -W</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">O 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">S O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰» S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft 4) £</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Mr. Ary is reading a book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + aux (to be) + (V+ing) + O/C (-) They are not cooking now</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + aux (tobe) + not + (V+ing) + Adverb of time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) La Ari no bacateboku</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+pref No+ P + prefiksTe+O (-) ‘Yammai ka’iho no sai manga</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :S + Kai(not) + Suffix Ho+ P</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">In present continuous tense and BT continuous sentences, the form of sentences were difference. English used V+ing but in BT didn’t using before the verb. The differences were in English positive and negative sentences, they used auxiliary and BT didn‟t use it.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">{ft C Oj</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">H ‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰» S 4» {ft Oi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">⅛</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)I have bought a new shirt</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Have +</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">V3 + O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) I haven‟t seen you for a long time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Haven‟t + V3 + Adverb Of Time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Where have you been?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Where +</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Have + S + aux (been)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Di yaku po’olimo balu te kombo wo’ou</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : prefiks Di +S + prefix Po+Olimo + P + prefiks +O (-)Yaku meaho ku simiinggko i’impi alo mellengo Pattern :S+ Meaho + suffix Ho +P+Adverb of time (?)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mina’ima’umpadoi na ‘Iko’o</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : mina’ima’umpa +prefiks Na+prefiks I+S</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">In English present perfect tense, they used the change of the verb form into V3, but in BT used prefiks to change of verb form. The form of sentence is almost same.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">5ft S 4» ‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&lt;ft 3 O 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰» ‰» 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&lt;ft 4) £</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I have been painting the door for an hour.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Have + aux (V+ing) + O+adverb of time (-) we have not been studying English for two month</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Have not + aux + (V+ing) + )/C (?)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Have dewi been studying for an hour? Pattern : Have + S + aux + (V+ing) + adverb of time?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Yaku po’olimo kamalo’e na heloppo selama’a Sajamu</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + po’olimo + P + O+adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-)Ikami meaho belajar tanga inggrisi Dua kombammo</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern: S+meaho+P+O+ad verb of time (?)Nopo’olimo ka’i Wa Dewi belajar sajamu ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Preffix No +Po’olimo + S+P+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">In English present perfect continuous tense, they used auxiliary before the verb, but BT didn‟t used it. English used (V+ing) that usually means (sedang+V) in BT. But in this case, Bahasa Indonesia didn‟t use “sedang” before the verb in sentences.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4» {ft</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I went to the garden yesterday Pattern : S + V2 + Adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) They didn‟t go to school last week</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + aux (did) + not + V + Adverb of pace + Adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Did you come to my house two hours ago?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Did + S + V + Adverb of pace + Adverb of time.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Inggawi ku lako ka koboo Pattern : C+S+P+adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-)Yamma ika’i no lako ka sikolaa’a ‘ahaji ihiyammo</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+ka’i + preffix No +P + Adverb of place + Adverb of time (?)Ummina ka’i naIko’o ‘ka sapo 2 jamu ba’ai?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :Preffix Um +mina+Ka’i+preffI +S+adverb ofplace+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">In BT it always adds affixes to it.There are no Just by adding the past adverb of time such as “ba’ai” (Past) or “yang lalu” (ago), in the sentences. English used the change of verb form into V2 or the second form of auxiliary in the sentences but BT didn‟t.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4» {ft 3 4» ‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft 3 O 3 fl</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft 3 ‰</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) they was playing football when putri came to my house.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Aux + (V+ing) + O/C +conj+S+V+adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) My mother wasn‟t cooking when I came back from school</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + Aux + not + (V+ing) + Adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Were Irsan still studying at nine p.m. last night ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Were + S + (V+ing) + Adverb of time?</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Iyammai ‘anne’e no golu dimai’a wa putri ka sapo su</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :S+anne’e +preff No+P+O+ S+V+S+adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) Te’inasu ka’iho no saimanga pas kuwaliako (SEKOLAH???) Pattern: Preff Te+S+ka’i+suff ho+ preff No+P+O/C (?) ‘I la irsan anne’eho nobelajar I’jam 9 ‘ikondoWIA?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Preff I+S+ anne’e+suffho+ preff No+P +O/C</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Past continuous tense and past continuous sentences in BT are different.In past continuous tense in English; they used the past auxiliary and Ving. But BT didn‟t use the auxiliary, but almost used preffix and suffix.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">{ft C a» ‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">«Si ⅛ &amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Kiki had prepared dinner for her husband before he came home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + had + V3 + adverb of time +conjuc +S+V+adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Had you locked the door before you went to bed last night?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Had + S + V3 + concj+P+adverb of time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I wa kiki po’olimo saddia te hekoturu ako te inano sebelum nofaliako</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Preff I+ S+ Po’olimo+P+O+con juc+V</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?)’U po’olimo ka’i silloti’e na heloppo i waktu meaho umoturu ‘inggawi utu?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + po’olimo + ka’i+ P +O/C</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Past perfect tense and past perfect sentences in BT have some differences, in past perfect tense they used the past form of auxiliary and V3 in the sentences. But in BT didn‟t used auxiliary, they used .</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">⅛&gt; 5ft C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">«Si</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)I had been trying to help you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + had + aux + (V+ing) + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) We had not been studying Buton Language for 6 months</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + had not + aux + (V+ing) + adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Had I been waiting for him for one hour?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Had + S + aux + (V+ing) + adverb of time?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Yaku po’olimo soba hammbakko Pattern :S+ po’olimo+ P + O/C + suffix Ko</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-)’ikami meaho belajar te tanga Buton appa lima komba</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :Preff I + S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">+ meaho + V +adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?)Po’olimo ‘u hentaoneappasajamu ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : po’olimo +S+V+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The form of sentences in past perfect continuous tense in English and Bahasa Indonesia were very different. English used the second form of have/has (had) but BT still used “telah/po’olimo”. English also used auxiliary in the sentences, and used V+ing to shouw the continuous moments. But BT didn‟t used auxiliary and didn‟t use</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">“ po’olimo” to show the continouos sentences.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">{ft C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">{ft 5 O 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">C</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">cυ</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">£</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I will be studying for an exam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + will + aux + (V+ing) + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) They wo‟t be playing football then</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + will not + aux + (V+ing) + C (?) Will they be singing tomorrow?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Will + S + aux + (V+ing) + adverb of time?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Yaku ‘a belajar ako te ujian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+’a+V+C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-)Iyammai ka’imo a komulia golu</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : preffI+S+ka’imo+V +C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?)Ammay ‘a mekadangki ka’i ‘ilange atu?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+’a+V+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The difference in future continuous tense and BT is the auxiliary. They used auxiliary “be” in English, and used ‘a auxiliary in BT. In English they used (V+ing) as the character of every continuous sentences. But in BT furute continuous sentences, they didn‟t used “V-ing”. Preffix ‘a in BT have the same meaning with will in Englis.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">cυ {ft</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">«Si</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">cυ</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I will have returned tomorrow Pattern : S + will have + V3 + adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Will they have arrived in Koja Doi Island at 9 a.m ? Pattern : Will + S + have + V3 + Adverb of place + Adverb of time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Iyaku kuhumaliako ‘ilange Pattern : preff I + S + V+adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) ‘ameaho ‘a ratomo na’ammai ‘ipulo ‘ijamu 9 rea-reaana?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : ‘a +P+preff Na +S+adverb of place+ adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The form of sentences in both language were almost same, the difference of sentences pattern in English and BT in the form of verb in predicate. English used the V3 but Bahasa Indonesia used preffix.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">&lt;Λ S a» ■w</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5ft 3 O 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">⅛ &amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oj</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 ‰» 3 ta</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) I‟ll have been working at this office for two years by the end of this coming July</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + will have + aux (been) + (V+ing) + adverb of place +adverbof time +C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) We won‟t have been having a meeting more than 3 hours by 11:00 a.m. Pattern : S + will not + have + aux (been) + (V+ing) + adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Will he have been playing Volyball for 3 years at 2019 ? Pattern : Will + S + have + aux (been) + (V+ing) + adverb of time ?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Yaku ‘ po’olimokaraja di kantoro mi’ana appa dua ta’u dihia’ana di akhiri july hadamai ana Pattern :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">S+po’olimo+V+adverb of place +adverb of time+C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-)’ikami mea ‘a po’afa-afa labi 3 jamu ‘ijamu 11</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : pref ‘I+S+mea ‘a+ V+adverb of time</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?)‘apo’olimoka’idi’iakol ia voly appa 3 ta’u di ta’u 2019 ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : ‘a+po’olimo+ V+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">In future perfect continuous tense, they used the auxiliary “been” in the sentences. And thay also used “V+ing”, BT didn‟t use “ ‘a and po’olimo” in the sentences. These things that make differences between English and BT future perfect continuous sentences.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Oj 5«</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5« 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) She would send a trousers from Maumere</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + would + V + adverb of place</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) She would not be the champion</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + would not + P + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Woud she comeback tomorrow ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Would + S + V + adverb of time?</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+)Di’ia ‘a kahute sala mina Maumere</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :S+’a+P+te (auxiliary )+adverb of place (-)di’ia mea ‘a kobe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+ mea+’a + C (?) di’ia ‘a faliako ‘ilange?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S+’a+P+adverb oftime</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="4" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The form of sentences in past future tense and past future sentences in BT is is different. The differences are English is using would (the past of will) in the sentences. In BT is using ‘a (akan) and affixes.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Oj 5« 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‰»</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5« 3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3 O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oj</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5« 3 ‰</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) We would be studying together for the exam</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + would + aux (be) + (V+ing) + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?) Would they be having a discussion last night ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : Would + S + aux (be) + (V+ing) + adverb of time</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Kami ‘a anne’e no sisinga ako te ujian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">S+’a+(anne’e)+V+C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(?)‘a anne’e no diskusi nggafi utu?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : ‘a+anne’e+prefNo+</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">V+adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="4" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The differences between past future continuous tense and BT sentences are English used the second form of will (would) and used auxiliary “be” in the sentences. BT didn‟t use it in the sentences, they using ‘a, preffiks No and anne’e (serdang).</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">5« 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oj</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">5« 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Yuli should have attended the party if she had got the invitation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + should + have + V3 + C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) He wouldnot have built the house by Oktober last year.</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(+) Wa Yuli sammpuuno no hadiri tepesta aradia’ia no afate undangan Pattern : S+samppuuno+preff No +V+C</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(-) Di’iaka’i ‘a anne’ehetadetesapo di kombaaompuluta’ulalu. Pattern :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">S+kai(auxiliary)+anne’e + V+O + Adverb of time</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Pattern : S + wouldn‟t + have + V3 + O + Adverb of time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">In past future perfect tense, Engish used the second form of shall/will (should/would) and the V3 in forming the sentences. But the form of sentences were same with BT.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The similarities and the dissimilarities</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The finding in this research is found that between English and Buton Tomiya Verb formation pattern there are some similarities and dissimilarities in terms of forms and functions. As the following : 1. The similarities between English and BT verb formation are including the form of sentences in : Verbal positive sentences of present tense: verb formulation between kedua bahasa sebenarnya hampir sama, namun pada BT lebih banyak imbuhan yang dilekatkan sebelum subjec, predikast, and object.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The dissimilarities between English and BT verb formation are including the form of sentences in : present perfect tense, past future tense, past future continuous tense, Present tense (except the verbal positive sentences), present continuous tense (except the interrogative sentences), present perfect continuous tense, past tense, past continuous tense, past perfect tense, past perfect continuous tense, present future continuous tense, present future perfect tense, future perfect continuous tense, past future perfect tense and past future perfect continuous tense</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">past continuous tense, past perfect tense, past perfect continuous tense, present future continuous tense, present future perfect tense, future perfect continuous tense, past future tense, past future continuous tense, past future perfect tense and past future perfect continuous tense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The dissimilarities in both languages commonly caused by the verb form that changed in English caused by Auxiliary,time and BT change of verb form with affixes. Example : In past tense, the from of sentences was S + V2 + O/C, such as “I went to the school last week”, but BT only used S + V + O/C (the past adverb of time), such as “yaku lako ka sekolah ‘inggawi”. The use of auxiliary also always caused dissimilarities of verb form in both languages, because BT areusing affixesand never used auxiliary in the sentences. Example : In present tense nominal positive sentences used S + auxiliary + P, such as “My Father is a Fisherman”, but in BT only used S + P, that was “Te amasu te patai-tai”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In relation to the conclusions, suggestion are staged as follow :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher suggest that as people from Buton Tomiya, we must know about the verb formulation of Buton Tomiya Language, the differences between the form of sentence in our own language and the international language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher hopes that the thesis could be one of the related references for those who have interested in English and BT. It is xpcted that they can deepen their knowledge in both languages.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">IV. CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. Conclusions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After analyzing the data in BT verb formation in term of form and function, conclusions can be drawn as following : Between English and BT verb formation in term pattern have similarities, some tenses in English are having same form of sentences. Both of English and Buton Tomiya (BT) in verbal positive sentences of present tense used V + S + O/C. Sentences of future tense in Engish and BT used S + will + P(V) + O/C in positive sentences, S + Will not + P (V) + O/C in negative sentences, will + S + P (V) + O/C ? in interrogative sentences, in Bahasa Indonesia “will” means “ ‘a ”. Interrogative sentences of present continuous tense also have the same of Verb form in both languages. The dissimilarities between English and BT general sentences pattern are including the form of sentences in : Present tense (except the verbal positive sentences), present continuous tense (except the interrogative sentences), present perfect tense, present perfect continuous tense, past tense,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abbas, H. (1981). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Struktur Bahasa Wolio</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bynon, Theodora. (1990). Historical Linguistics. London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Darmawan Suryoputro, 2019, The Comparison of the Phonological Features of Sikka Language and English</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font1">Vol. 4, No. 1, 2019, 64-72 DOI: 10.22236/JER_Vol4Issue1.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whitman, R. L. (1970). Contrastive analysis: Problems and procedures. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Learning, 20</span><span class="font1">(2), 191-197.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;La Ino. (2016). “The Reconstruction of Protolanguage Muna and Kambowa” in International Journal of Linguistics Literature and Culture (IJLLC), Vol. 2 No. 3 September 2016 ISSN: 2455-8028 page 125 – 140.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;La Ino. (2014). “Kekerbatan BahasaMuna, Wolio, dan Tolaki dalam Angka: Suatu Analisis Leksikostatistik” dalam Jurna lLangua Vol. 4 No. 1 April 2014. Lembaga Kajian Ekolinguistik; Medan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dyen, Isidore. (1975). Linguistic Subgrouping and Lexicostatistic. The Hague Paris: Mouton.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ramlan. (1987). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sintaksis Ilmu Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Karyono.</span></p></li></ul>