---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Procedures in Translating Proper Names from English into Indonesian"
author: "Ni Putu Devi Lestari, I Made Winaya, I Gst. Ayu Gede Sosiowati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humanis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 24.4 Nopember 2020: 386-393</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i04.p06"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i04.p06</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-4, SK No: 23/E/KPT/2019</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Procedures in Translating Proper Names from English into Indonesian</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Devi Lestari*, I Made Winaya, I Gst. Ayu Gede Sosiowati </span><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[</span><a href="mailto:devilestari0317@gmail.com"><span class="font3">devilestari0317@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">], [</span><a href="mailto:made_winaya@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3">made_winaya@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font3">], [</span><a href="mailto:sosiowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">sosiowati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Translation procedure is a procedure or a method to translate the unit of language from the source language to the target language. Every linguistic part needs to be translated. It means including the proper names in the literary work. This study is aimed at identifying and analyzing the types of the proper name and their translation procedures in the novel entitled Pembunuhan di Orient Express. The problems in this study are discussed based on the theory of proper name and the theory of the translation procedure by Newmark (1988). The method used to collect the data was documentation method. This study applied the descriptive qualitative method in analyzing the data. The result of the analysis was presented using an informal method. The analysis showed three types of proper names in the data sources. They are people’s names, the name of an object, and the geographical term. The translator uses seven methods from 18 translation procedures that were proposed by Newmark (1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keyword</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: proper name, translation, translation procedure, novel</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prosedur dalam penerjemahan adalah sebuah prosedur atau sebuah metode untuk menerjemahkan suatu unit bahasa dari suatu bahasa ke bahasa lainnya. Setiap bagian linguistik harus diterjemahkan. Itu berarti termasuk dengan proper name dalam sebuah karya sastra. Studi ini bertujuan untuk mengindentifikasi dan menganalisis tipe-tipe dari proper name dan tipe prosedur dalam penerjemahan dalam sebuah novel berjudul Pembunuhan di Orient Express. Masalah dalam studi ini dikaji dengan teori proper name dan teori prosedur penerjemahan milik Newmark (1988). Metode yang digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data adalah metode dokumentasi. Studi ini mengaplikasikan metode deskriptif kualitatif dalam menganalisis data. Hasil dari analisis tersebut ditampilkan dengan metode informal. Studi ini menunjukkan tiga tipe proper name yang terdapat dalam sumber data. Itu terdiri atas nama seseorang, nama untuk sebuah objek, dan istilah geografi. Penerjemah menggunakan tujuh metode dari 18 prosedur penerjemahan yang diajukan oleh Newmark (1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: proper name, terjemahan, prosedur penerjemahan, novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">386</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Info Article</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;24<sup>th</sup> December 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;28<sup>th</sup> October 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Published &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;30<sup>th</sup> November 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Communication is an important aspect of the human being. It is not only about giving and receiving information but also includes the exchange of ideas and culture. This activity can be in the written form called literary work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novel is a literary work that enjoyed by many people. It has information about one particular idea or culture through the characters and the setting in the form of the proper name. In order for other people with different language to understand the particular idea and the culture of a country, translation is important to be conducted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Catford (1965:20) defined translation as the replacement of textual material by equivalent material in the target language. Larson (1984:3) stated that translation is a change of form in the sense of semantic structure. Furthermore, Nida and Taber (1982:2) stated that translation is needed to be applied in every linguistics part, including the proper name in the literary work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Proper name is a noun or a group of a noun that has individual application. It contains people's name, the name of an object, and the geographical term. It can be found in literary work in which the translator tries to deliver the story through the character and the setting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Furthermore, the previous studies (Zabir and Haroon, 2018; Eriko, 2016; Majed and Bakri, 2014; Isaiah, 2009, Mussche and Willems, 2010; Nazarabadi and Ghareghani, 2016) showed how proper names in a particular language or country were translated into other languages. It is showed that the proper name is important to be translated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nord (2003: 183) stated that translating the proper name can be difficult for the translator since it may be non-descriptive. However, it contains specific information on a particular thing. The translator needs to deliver the information as the same as the source language. In translating the proper name, the translator needs to know about the translation procedure. Translation procedures are needed to transfer the idea in the target language effectively. Molina and Albair (2002: 498) stated that the method or the process to translate the unit of language also</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">can help the people to study how the translation works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The previous studies (Dewi, 2016; Mashhady, 2015; Farghal and Bazzi, 2017; Affifah, 2012) also showed the translation procedures that were used to translate the word or the proper name from the source language into the target language. It shows how important for the translator to know about translation procedure in translating the proper name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study aimed at analyzing the type of proper name in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Murder on the Orient Express</span><span class="font2"> and the translation procedures that are applied by the translator in the novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">MATERIAL AND METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected from a novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Murder on the Orient Express</span><span class="font2"> by Christie (1991) and its Indonesia translation entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pembunuhan di Orient Express</span><span class="font2"> by Buditjahja (2017). It is a famous novel mystery all the time. Both of the data sources have many interesting proper names that can be analyzed further.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Documentation method and note-taking technique were used to collect the data. The first step was reading the source language and the target language novel. The next step was comparing both data of the novels to find the proper name. Last, it was taking a note on the proper names that were found in the source data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed using descriptive qualitative method. It was done through some stages. The first step began with identifying the types of proper names. The next step was analyzing the translation procedure, which applied in the novel. The result of the analysis were presented using the informal method in the form of description.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">THEORETICAL BASIS</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Literature Review</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Yunita (2017) analyzed the methods to translate the proper name and the quality of the translation in Sherlock Homes’ novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Sign of Four</span><span class="font2">. In solving the problem, the theory of Newmark (1988), Fernandes (2006), and Nababan (2003) were used in this study. The result showed that geographical term is the most used proper</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">name in the story. Moreover, the translator uses 13 techniques to translate the proper name. The study has a good methodology to analysis the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zarei (2014) analyzed the important of proper name translation. In this study, the theory of Van Coillie (2006), Jaleniauskiene and Cicelyte (2009), and Algeo (1973) were used to explain the reason and the technique of doing the proper name translation. Moreover, the study used a qualitative method to analyze the data. The result showed that there are several techniques of doing translation for the proper name. It is also important to give different aspect to translate a particular proper name. The study has a good explanation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sabzalipour (2015) used the theory of Farahzad (1995) and Fernandes (2006) to find out about the translation strategies in translating the proper name. The result showed transliteration is the most used by the translator to translate the proper name. The study is good at classifying the proper name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Other previous studies, Dweik (2016) and Shirinzadeh and Tengku (2014) tried to use different types of data from a song lyric and student translations. However, both of them do not elaborate on the discussion of the problem very well.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Proper Name</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Algeo (1930: 2) defined a proper name as a name that can be in the form of a noun or a group noun. It has individual application within the text. Furthermore, Newmark (1988:214) stated 3 categories of the proper name. It consists of people’s name, the name of an object, and the geographical term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">People’s name is a name that related to someone’s name. It can be in the form of a full name or only the first name and the last name or the nickname. It also can be in the form of a combination between the name and the honorific title.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The name of an object is a name that related to the non-living thing. It does not belong to people’s names and geographical term categories. It can be the name of a book, a play, a company or an organization, a brand and, a proprietary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The last category is the geographical term. It is a noun related to the name of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">earth landscape. It can be the name of a country, a city, a street, a mountain or a river.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thus, these categories are classified as a proper name in this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Translation Procedure</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark (1988: 81) stated that translation procedure is a procedure or a method in translating the smaller unit of language from the source language to the target language. Newmark (1988: 81) also proposed 18 translation procedures. It consists of literal translation, transference, naturalization, cultural equivalent, functional equivalent, descriptive equivalent, synonym, through-translation, shift or transposition, modulation, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;recognized-translation,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">translation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;label, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;compensation,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">componential analysis, reduction and expansion, paraphrase, couplets, and note.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">These translation procedures are needed to transfer the idea of the proper name into the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study discusses the types of a proper name and the translation procedure of it. Three types of proper names can be found in the novel. Moreover, the translator uses seven translation procedures in translating the proper name.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Types of the Proper Name</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In this research, three types of proper names are found in the data source. They are people’s names, the name of an object, and geographical terms.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>People’s Name</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This type of proper name can be seen in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Data 1:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Arbuthnot </span><span class="font2">did not answer. (1991:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">10).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Arbuthnot </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tidak menjawab.</span><span class="font2"> (2017:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">22).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Arbuthnot is an older British soldier who has ever served in India. This character is also a passenger in the Orient Express. Since it is related to someone’s name in the story,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">this proper name is classified as people’s name.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Name of Object</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This type of proper name can be seen in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data 2:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“At what time does </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Simplon Orient</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">leave?&quot; (1991: 12).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Pukul berapa </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kereta Simplon</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Orient </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">berangkat?”</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 27).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Simplon Orient is the name that refers to a specific train in the story. It is a train owned by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Compagnie Internationale des Wagons Lits</span><span class="font2">. Because this proper name refers to the non-living thing, it is classified as the name of an object.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Geographical Term</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This type of proper name is seen in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data 3:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mais oui.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Stamboul</span><span class="font2">, it is a city I</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">have never visited.” (1991: 8).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mais oui. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Istanbul </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">memang kota</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yang belum pernah kukunjungi.” </span><span class="font2">(2017: 27).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stamboul is the old name of a central city in Turkey around the 19th and 20th centuries. It is a place that passed by the Orient Express in the story. Since it is related to the name of the geographical landscape in the form of a city, this proper name is classified as a geographical term.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Translation Procedures in Translating the Proper Names</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">18 translation procedures are purposed by Newmark (1988). The translator uses 7 types of translation procedures to translate the proper name for the source language into the target language. It is shown in the following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Transference</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Transference is a translation procedure in which the translator translates the word into the target language as the same as the source language. It is shown in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Data 4:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;“Your name?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Edward &nbsp;Henry &nbsp;Masterman</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1991: 49).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Namamu?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Edward &nbsp;Henry &nbsp;Masterman</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2017: 124).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Edward Henry Masterman is a character in Murder on the Orient Express. Since it is related to the name of the character, this proper name is classified as people’s name. In transferring this name into the target language, the translator keeps the form the same as the source language. This translation procedure is called transference.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Naturalization</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Naturalization is a translation procedure in which the translator tries to adjust the word from the source language into the appropriate word in the target language. It is shown in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Data 5:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It was five o’clock on a winter’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">morning in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Syria</span><span class="font2">. (1991: 7).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Musim dingin, pukul lima pagi di</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Suriah</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 13).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this case, Syria is the name of a country in Western Asia. It is classified as the geographical term. The translator tries to adjust the word in the spelling and pronunciation of the target language, as shown in this process:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Syria /ˈsɪriə/ ----</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">» Suriah</span><span class="font2"> /suriah/</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Since there is an adjustment in the spelling and the pronunciation of the target language, this proper name is translated by using naturalization.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Descriptive Equivalent</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Descriptive equivalent is a translation procedure in which the translator adds some words of description in order to transfer the meaning or information in the target language. This translation procedure is shown in the following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Data 6:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Think of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">As You Like It</span><span class="font2">, with the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forest of Arden and Rosalind.” (1991: 112).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ingat saja </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">karya Shakespeare As</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You Like It </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dengan ʻRimba Ardenʼnya and Rosalind itu.”</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 294).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">As You Like</span><span class="font2"> is the name of a play written by Shakespeare in 1595. Since it is the name of a literary work, this proper name is classified as the name of an object. In translating this proper name, the translation uses several words to describe the name. Thus, this translation of proper name uses descriptive equivalent to deliver the idea in the target language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Through-Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Through-translation is a kind of translation procedure in which the translator translates the intuitional term, the collocation, and the name of the organization into the acceptable form in the target language. It is shown in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Data 7:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“You belong to </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">League of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Nations</span><span class="font2">?” (1991: 67).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Anda ditugaskan oleh </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Liga</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bangsa-Bangsa</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">?”</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 169).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this case, League of Nations is the name of an international organization. It has a mission to create world peace. Since it is a non-living in the form of the organization name, this proper name is classified as the name of an object.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In translating this proper name, the translator uses the recognized form in the target language. League of Nations is known as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Liga Bangsa-Bangsa</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. Thus, this proper name uses trough-translation in transferring the idea in the target language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Translation Label</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Translation label is a translation procedure in which the translator uses an approximate equivalent in the target language in order to translate the new institutional term or collocation. It is shown in this following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>Data 8:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;“We can open our </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Court of Inquiry</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">without more ado.” (1991: 12).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Kita bisa memulai </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">acara</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pemeriksaan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ini tanpa harus menunggu lebih lama lagi.”</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 109).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Court of Inquiry is the name of the institutional term. It is related to the process of investigation by the official or the police. In translating this proper name, the translator uses the new and approximate term in the target language. Court of Inquiry becomes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">acara pemeriksaan</span><span class="font2"> as the new term. Thus, this translation procedure is called a translation label.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>Reduction and Expansion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Reduction and expansion is a pair of translation procedure that is proposed by Newmark (1988). The reduction is a translation procedure in which the translator removes one or several parts of the word in the target language. Meanwhile, expansion is a translation procedure in which the translator adds some part in the target language. These translation procedures are shown in these following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>Data 9:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“That handkerchief is not mine,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Monsieur,” said </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Countess</span><span class="font2">. (1991:115)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Saputangan itu bukan punya saya,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Monsieur.” </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Countess Andrenyi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menyela.</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 301)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Countess is the honorific title for a woman who holds the rank of count. This proper name refers to the Hungarian couple in the story. Furthermore, this proper name is classified as the people’s name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In translating this proper name, the translator adds the new element in the target language. It is done to make a clear idea of the proper name in the target language. The translator uses expansion to translate Countess into Countess Andrenyi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A different translation is shown below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>Data 10:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Poirot sprang up. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">M. Bouc</span><span class="font2">!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1991: 12).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Poirot cepat-cepat memutar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tubuhnya, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bouc</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">!”</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 27).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this case, M. Bouc stands for Monsieur Bouc. This proper name consists of the honorific title and the name of the character. Since it refers to a specific character in the story, this proper name is classified as people’s name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The translator transfers the idea of this proper name by removing the honorific title in the target language. Although the translator removes one part of the proper name, it does not make the proper name loses its idea. Since Bouc is a Poirot's best friend, losing the honorific title in the target language is acceptable.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>Couplets</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Couplets is a kind of translation procedure in which the translator uses two or more types of translation procedure to translate the unit of language. It is shown in the following data:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark52"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark53"></a>Data 11:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dr. Constantine </span><span class="font2">screwed up his</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">face thoughtfully. (1991: 12).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Dokter Constantine </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mengerutkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kening, mulai berpikir keras.</span><span class="font2"> (2017: 27).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dr. Constantine stands for Doctor Constantine. Dr. is a written abbreviation for the doctor. This proper name consists of the general term (Doctor) and followed by the name of the person (Constantine). It is classified as people’s names in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In translating this proper name, the translator uses two types of translation procedures. The translator uses naturalization to transfer the general term into the target language, as shown in this process:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Doctor /ˈdɒktə(r)/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dokter</span><span class="font2"> /dokter/</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is shown that the translator tries to adjust the spelling and the word form in the target language for the general term. However, in translating the name of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">person, the translator keeps the proper name as the same as the source language by using transference. Thus, the translator uses naturalization and transference to transfer the idea of one proper name. This translation procedure is called couplets.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the foregoing analysis, two points can be drawn as the conclusion, as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A proper name is a name in which it has individual applications within the text. Three types of proper names can be found in the data source. They are the people’s names, the name of an object, and the geographical term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In translating those proper names, the translator uses seven types from 18 translation procedures that are proposed by Newmark (1988). It consists of transference, naturalization, descriptive equivalent, through-translation, translation label, reduction and expansion, and couplets. Furthermore, the translator can choose the effective procedure or method to transfer the idea of the proper name in the target language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark55"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Affifah, Wachidatul. (2012). Translation Methods and Procedures Preference of English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Department &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Students</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Airlangga on Translating Fables. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anglicist</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 1.2, 36-42</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Algeo, John. (1930). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">On Defining Proper Names</span><span class="font2">. University of Gainesville.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Al-Quran, Majed and Al-Azzam Bakri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2014). Why Named? A socio-cultural and Translational View of Proper Names in Jordan. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Humanities and Social Science</span><span class="font2">, Vol. 4.5, 103-113</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bariki, Isaiah. (2009). Translating African Names in Fiction. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ikala</span><span class="font2">. Vol 14. 23, 43-61</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Buditjahja, Gianny. (2017). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pembunuhan di Orient Express</span><span class="font2">. PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Catford, J. C. (1965). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation.</span><span class="font2"> Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Christie, Agatha. (1991). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Murder on Orient Express</span><span class="font2">. Harper Collins Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dewi, Sintya A. (2016). Procedures of Translation in the English Novel The Hunger Games: Mockingjay &nbsp;into</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesian. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Humanis</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;Vol.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">15.1, 56-63</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dweik, Bader S and Al-Sayyed, Sa'ida. (2016). Translating Proper Noun from Arabic into English: Barriers and Procedures. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Translation</span><span class="font2">. Vol.5. 181-194.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Farghal, Mohammed and Bazzi, Hiba. (2017). Translation of English fiction titles into Arabic. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The International Journal for Translation &amp;&nbsp;Interpreting Research</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 9. 2, 115-137</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, M. (1984). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation</span><span class="font2">. University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffery and Svartvik, Jan. (1975). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Communicative Grammar of English</span><span class="font2">. Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mashhady, H., at all. (2015). Newmark's Procedures in Persian Translation of Golding's Lord of the Flies. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of English Language &amp;&nbsp;Translation Studies</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 3. 1. 57-69</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Molina, L. and Albir, Hurtardo. (2002). Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meta: Translators' Journal</span><span class="font2">, Vol. 47, 498-512</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mussche, E. and Willems, K. (2010). Proper Names and Cultural-specific Items in the Arabic Translation of Harry Potter. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meta: Translators' Journal</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 55.3, 474-498</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">case study of investigating the translation of Proper Nouns in &quot;Rise of Guardians&quot; and &quot;Cloud with a Chance of Meatballs II&quot;. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Review of Applied Linguistcs Research (RALR)</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 2.2, 44-68</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter. (1988). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font2">. Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter. (1981). Approaches to Translation. Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nida, Eugene. A. and Charles R. (1982). The Theory and Practice of Translation. E.J Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nord, C. (2003). Proper Name in Translating for Children: Alice in Wonderland as a Case in Point. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meta: Translatorsʼ Journal</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 48, 182-196</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sabzalipour, M. and Pishkar, K. (2015). Translation Strategies of Proper Nouns in Children's Literature. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Applied Linguistics and Language Research</span><span class="font2">. Vol 2.6, 73-79.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sato, Eriko. (2016). Proper Names in Translational Contexts. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Practice in Language Studies</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 6.1, 1-10</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shirinzadeh, Seyed Alireza and Tengku Mahadi, Tengku Sepora. (2014). Translating Proper Nouns: A Case Study on English Translation of Hafez’s Lyric. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Canadian Center of Science and Education</span><span class="font2">. Vol.7.7, 8-16.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vinay, Paul; Darbelnet, Jean. (1995). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Comparative Stylistics of French and English: &nbsp;&nbsp;A Methodology for</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;John &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Benjamins</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yunita, Widiyantari. (2017). Proper Names in Sherlock Homes' Novel 'The Sign of Four' into Its Indonesian Translation</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1<sup>st</sup> English Language and Literature International Conference</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 1, 394397.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nazarabadi, Najmeh B. and Ghareghani, F.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2016). Subtitling and Dubbing: A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zabir, A. and Haroon, H. (2018). Procedures in Translation of Proper Names in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire into Malay. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">GEMA: Journal of Language Studies</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 18. 2. 108</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">123.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zarei, R. and Norouzi, S. (2014). Proper Nouns in Translation: Should They be Translated?. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Applied Linguistics and Eenglish Literature</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 3.6, 152-160.</span></p>