---
layout: full_article
title: "THE STRUGGLE OF SYMBOLIC CAPITAL IN RUSSIAN TOURIST MARKET OF BALI TOURISM"
author: "Gede Ginaya, A.A. Ngr. Anom Kumbara, I Nyoman Darma Putra, I Nyoman Sukiada"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-60587 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-60587"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-60587"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Feb 2020 Vol. 13, Number 1, Page 36-47</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">THE STRUGGLE OF SYMBOLIC CAPITAL IN RUSSIAN TOURIST MARKET OF BALI TOURISM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gede Ginaya<sup>1</sup>, A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Darma Putra<sup>3</sup>, I Nyoman Sukiada<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>Tourism Department Politeknik Negeri Bali,<sup>2,3,4</sup>Cultural Studies Study Program, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">email: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">g</span><a href="mailto:inaya@pnb.ac.id"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">inaya@pnb.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, <sup>2</sup>anom_kumbara@unud.ac.id,</span><a href="mailto:3idarmaputra@yahoo.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>3</sup>idarmaputra@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">, <sup>4</sup></span><a href="mailto:nyomansukiada@yahoo.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">nyomansukiada@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;19-12-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;25-01-2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;29-02-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A professional tour guide is regarded as a front-liner of the tourism and the ambassador of his/her country. Therefore, the performace of a tour guide is very important as a quality assurance of services in order to fulfill the tourists’ satisfaction. One of the important things to satisfy the tourists is through mastering the language, because if the tour guide speaks the language fluently and accurately, the commucation will be well maintained and all information can be successfully delivered. In this case, mastering Russian language, which is categorized into one of the latest foreign languages in the tourism business of Bali, is deemly needed by the Russian tourists in order to get sufficient information about the culture of the indigenous community. This study aimes at investigating the mastery level of the tour guide’s Russian language related to the struggle of symbolic capital between foreign representatives and local tour guides. By applying a descriptive qualitative research, the data was collected through observation, interview, and document review. The theory used to undertake this study is Bourdieu’s social practice theory which involves capital, habitus, and field. The data that has been classified is analyzed by qualitative descriptive method with an inductive-metodological paradigm which is seting up the discussion from particular principles to the general in order to obtain a conclusion. The result of data analys is presented by formal and informal method. The study reveals that the mastery of Russian language for a professional tour guide has been proven to compete with foreign tour guides in preserving the Balinese culture and empowering local community in tourism participation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: Russian language, professional tour guide, capital symbolic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism in Indonesia has now increased from year to year in line with the government's commitment, especially the Ministry of Tourism to promote Indonesia, which consists of thousands of islands, so that there are several well-known and newly introduced tourist</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">destinations. Some of these tourist destinations are spread from the western to eastern parts of Indonesia, such as North Sumatra with Lake Toba attractions and Samosir island, Bangka Belitung (Babel) as new tourist destinations, Kalimantan Island with its mascot of orangutans and Dayak culture, Bali and beyond (Bali) such as NTB, NTT, Maluku, and Papua, which are incorporated in Corridor VI for Eastern Indonesia. Especially for Bali, which already has a name as the best tourist destination in the world, it is expected to help promote other tourist destinations, as this goal of tourism development was exibited at the Bali and Beyond Travel Fair (BBTF) 26-29 June 2018. The annual event took place in Bali Nusa Dua Convention Center (BNDCC) cooperated with other tourist destinations in Indonesia including 10 newly-developed destinations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bali is famous as a tourist destination, because it has a variety of tourism potential such as natural beauty, cultural uniqueness, and the social life of the majority of the Hindu community. Balinese culture as an asset or attraction has made Bali a lot of foreign tourists visiting from Asia, Australia, Africa and Europe. Today lots of tourists from Eastern Europe, especially Russia, also come to Bali. Russia's new tourist visit is relatively new after the collapse of the Communists from the Soviet Union in the era of the 90s (Fadillah, 2006: 1) which made the Russian country open to its citizens to travel abroad and this proves the existence of a global cultural flow, especially the ethnoscape proposed by Appadurai. Compared with other tourists, especially from Western European countries, America and Japan, Russian tourists are classified as new tourists visiting Bali. Additionally, the arrival of Russian tourists to Bali is a breath of fresh air amidst the saturated market share of Western and Japanese tourists. The community enthusiastically studied Russian at foreign language course institutions so that they could handle Russian tourists at a travel agency that handles Russian tourists. Not only limited to guides who have experience learning Russian, young people who do not have a license guide also learn Russian. After they master the Russian language and take part in a training guide at a travel agency, they attend a tour guide training organized by the Provincial Tourism Office to obtain a tour guide identification card or license.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mastery of Russian language (Bagarić and Djigunović 2007: 95) by the tour guides is very influential on the assessment of Russian tourists as service users who make visits to a tourist destination and ultimately encourage maintaining the company’s image and even increase the number of tourist visits. One important factor in maintaining the company's reputation is the quality of service. Service is an action taken to fulfill the customer desire for a product or service they need, this action is done to give satisfaction to customers to fulfill what they need.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">The purpose of each service company is to provide what customers or consumers consider quality feelings. 'Feelings' means that the quality expected is already in the minds of consumers (Prihatno, 2010). Businesses in the service sector that want to be able to compete based on service quality must feel they have better service than their competitors. Business profits are usually due to the relatively better quality of the product or service. The satisfaction of Russian tourists is determined by some of the quality of services received by these tourists. The quality of service received by Russian tourists can be provided by airlines that transport tourists, travel agents through office staff, guides, tourist transport and drivers, hotels where tourists stay, restaurants, objects and tourist attractions when tourists do tour activities. In this case, the tour guide’s delivering speech in Russian language is a very important factor to provide the counter from negative stigma made by foreign tour guides as Russian native speakers that the local tour guides are lack of mastering Russian language. As a matter of fact, there is an imbalance of the management of the Russian tourist market in Bali tourism, as it is according to Bourdieu (2012) social domination occurs. A communication that takes place between the local community and foreign investors originating from Russia in the development of Bali's tourism can just happen symbolically with a party that is consciously or unconsciously dominated. Likewise with those who dominate, of course, have several factors or strong reasons so that the process of domination occurs. In interacting or communicating, there is usually a party that engages in an attitude of dominance with the aim that the party that is dominated obeys to the dominant. This attitude of domination can be the basis of an act of social violence that results in injustice towards the dominated party.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Haryatmoko (2010: 3) said that the covert attitude of domination produces obedience, critical attitude, skepticism, which covers or justifies injustice. If domination continues, it will result in discrimination, violence, and injustice. Covert domination that occurs in social interaction can not just happen. There is a reason why an attitude of domination can occur from those who dominate against those who are dominated. The background of the dominant party can be the reason because in the life of the community since the past until the present there is already a name strata or levels of society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are differences in the elements of society from the highest to the lowest, that the highest elements of society such as the owners of travel businesses and tourist accommodation will symbolically have the highest authority as well. These reasons can be strong why the attitude of dominance can occur in the management of the Russian tourist market in travel agencies and tourist accommodation. This is in accordance with the opinion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">of Haryatmoko (2010: 17) that all people are always in control and controlled. This dominance takes place in the situation, resources (capital), and the actor's strategy. Mapping the relations of power and capital composition. Therefore, the key concept of Pierre Bourdieu's thought about symbolic domination is divided into four parts namely, capital, class, habitus, and symbolic power or violence (Alfianto, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the description of the background above, in order to be able to examine more deeply the mastery of Russian language from the point of view of service quality and tourist satisfaction, a study was conducted to investigate the improvement of the tourguide Russian language mastery as a quality service that gives satisfaction to tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Research Metodology</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Research on improving Russian language mastery and tourist satisfaction is qualitative descriptive. The data used are primary and secondary data. Primary data is data that is directly obtained based on observations when guides explain some of the tourist objects in Bali, and direct interviews with 25 Russian-language guides as respondents of this study determined based on snowball sampling techniques. Snowball sampling technique is one of the non-probability sampling techniques in qualitative research by looking for key informants in field research that helps researchers find other key informants or open access to respondents to be studied (Bungin, 2001). In making observations, in addition to observing guides in explaining tourism objects, it is also possible to observe competent involvement techniques (Muhammad: 207), namely researchers involved in the discussion and observing the use of the language of the speakers. Whereas secondary data is data obtained from the search results of questionnaires in several travel agents that handle Russian tourists in Bali. This questionnaire is usually filled by Russian tourists before leaving for their country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Subsequent data were analyzed with qualitative descriptive methods based on an inductive methodological paradigm. That is, a paradigm that departs from something specific to something common (Ginaya, 2018). With descriptive analysis method, the data that has been collected in the form of an increase in mastery of Russian language and tourist satisfaction is described in full so that finally obtained a conclusion regarding the increase in mastery of Russian language by guides and factors that influence the increase in mastery of Russian language including service dimension factors against Russian tourists in determining tourist satisfaction. The results of the study are presented with formal and informal methods. According to Sudaryanto (1993: 145) informal presentation methods are presenting the</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">results of analysis with descriptions or ordinary words, while the formal presentation method is the formulation with signs and symbols According to Muhammad (Ginaya, 2018) symbols or signs are used for present or formulate the results of the analysis so that the meaning of the method, the relationship between the methods, and the characteristics of the method can be known and understood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Results and Discussion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Russian tourists who visit Bali as an international tourist destination have hopes of experience about natural charm and especially cultural uniqueness. As a customer or customer service tourism industry in general, the hope of Russian tourists is a motivation to satisfy the needs of tourists themselves. In this case Russian tourists who come to Bali have traveled very far so that they have high expectations of quality of service in order to get satisfaction. The expectations of tourists can be illustrated as the motivation to purchase a product and service related to basic human needs and desires, as stated by Maslow in his motivation theory. This section will describe the results of the study obtained through direct observation and interviews of guides in handling Russian tourists in Bali and the results of document studies. The results of the study were described in a descriptive qualitative manner by describing the mastery of pramuwista Russian language which increased along with the dynamics of the confusion of Russian tourists over the years and the factors influencing the increase in Russian language instruction by guides in relation to the dimensions of service for tourist satisfaction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Russian Language Mastery of the Tour Guide</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The satisfaction of Russian tourists towards the services provided by guides is directly related to the performance of guides themselves, especially from aspects of language acquisition. If the level of mastery of Russian is low, then the performance of guides is below expectations and tourists are not satisfied. Conversely, if the level of mastery of Russian is high, then the performance of guide guides meets expectations and satisfied tourists. The arrival of Russian tourists to Bali about 20 years ago with the dynamics of his visit on the island of the gods requires guides with Russian language specialization to handle them. The role of the Russian-language tour guide is very important whose job is to provide information</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">services to tourists where their Russian language mastery has experienced dynamic development if traced from the beginning of its arrival to the present.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">At the beginning of the arrival of Russian tourists in Bali mastery of their Russian language is so minimal, but tourists still understand it and try to do a communication in the context of survival where guides try hard to make tourists understand the information conveyed, on the other hand tourists also try to capture the idea delivered with language media that is still minimal. Apart from the perfection of a language communication tourists have been well served. This is evidenced by the increasing enthusiasm of tourists to buy optional tours and visit various attractions with guides. Complaints in the form of language acquisition delivered by Russian tourists at the beginning of his arrival in Bali were the lack of mastery of Russian language guides. This is considered normal considering that Russian language is a foreign language that is classified as very new among tourism actors in Bali. But over time these assumptions are refuted because guides have learned a lot to improve their Russian language skills through intensive practice with tourists and the help of digital technology to access material in Russian and with Google translate is easy in vocabulary mastery. Even through social media they can interact with tourists or fellow guides with Russian-language text literacy. This is a very positive development in mastering Russian language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To determine the level of satisfaction of Russian tourists on the quality of tour guides through mastering Russian language in Bali, it was analyzed descriptively from the results of field observations and direct interviews with guides who handled Russian tourists as primary data sources. The results of this observation and interview were also supported by the results of the document study as secondary data in the form of questionnaire forms completed by Russian tourists before they departed to their countries. Every travel agency that handles Russian tourists in Bali must provide the questionnaire form and give it to guides who pick up Russian tourists for transfer-out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the results of observations and direct interviews with 25 Russian-language guides as respondents to this study, it was found that the guide had mastered Russian at the intermediate level (advanced) to advanced level. This was demonstrated through the results of their performance when explaining information on tourist attractions such as the Batuan temple, Goa Gajah, Tirta Empul, Besakih, Tanah Lot, Taman Ayun, Uluwatu, and natural attractions such as the Batur geo-park site, frequent terrace cultural heritage Jatiluwih, Ubud monkey forest, Bedugul botanical garden. The tourist attraction has been worldwide and requires an explanation of the philosophical, religious, historical aspects that relate to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Balinese culture and cannot be separated from the beliefs held by the Balinese people, namely Hinduism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Explanations provided by guides are carried out in Russian fluently and complete information. They explained the various functions and grammar of Russian language. This is the focus of this research considering that Russian language has 6 types of case forms, namely nominative (N), accusative (A), datif (D), genitive (G), instrumental (I), and prepositional (P). The use of the case form in a sentence context will show how varied Russian-language guides are in terms of accuracy. Therefore, the expression of sentences that are expressed will experience a change in the context that is subject to a case form both in the noun and adjective. The imposition of this case will be more complex because the Russian language noun is classified in masculine, feminine, neutral form and each gender noun is divided into singular and plural. In addition, the verb undergoes conjugation depends on the subject and changes occur in accordance with the form of the times and aspects of both the perfective and imperative aspects. Table 1 below shows changes in noun forms in 6 types of case forms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tabel 1. The form of noun in Russian cases</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Noun</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Case</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Masculine</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">feminin</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Neutral</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Plural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">plural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">singular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">plural</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билет</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билеты</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзеты</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делo</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делa</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyet/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetiy/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazeta/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazeti/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dila/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dila/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрь</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaри</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeля</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeли</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeниe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeния</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slowar/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slawari/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidyelya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">nidyeli/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazheneniye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhneniya/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Мyзeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдь</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaди</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имия</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнa</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshad/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imiya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imena/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билет</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билеты</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзеты</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делo</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делa</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyet/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetiy/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">gazetiy/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyela/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyela/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaр</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaри</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлю</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeли</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeния</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeний</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slovar/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavari/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nyedelyu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nyedeli/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazheniya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhenii/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдь</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaди</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имия</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнa</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshady/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imiya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imena/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">G</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билета</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билетoв</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзеты</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзет</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">дел</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyeta/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetov/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetiy/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazet/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyela/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyel/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaря</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeл</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeли</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeния</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeний</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavarya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavarei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nyidel/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nydeli/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhneniya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">имeн</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeя</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeйя</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдь</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaди</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeни</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/imen/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeiya/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshady/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/imeni/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">D</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билету</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билетaм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетaм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делaм</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyelu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/delam/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Слoвaрю</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрям</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлям</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeнию</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeниям</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/slawaryu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavaryam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelyam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhniniyu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhninyam/</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeю</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeям</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaди</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдям</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeни</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнaм</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeyu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeyam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadyam/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/imeni/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">/imenam/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Билетом</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билетaми</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетoй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетaми</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делoми</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делaми</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetom/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetoi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/dyelom/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/delyami/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрeм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрaми</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлeй</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлями</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeинeм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeинями</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavarem/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavarami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelyeii/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelyami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhneinem/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhneinyami/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeeм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeями</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдью</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдями</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнeм</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнaми</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeyem/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeyami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadyu/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadyami/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imenem/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imenami/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">P Билетe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Билетаx</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">гaзетax</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">делax</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyete/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/bilyetakh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/gazetakh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/delye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/delakh/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaрe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">слoвaряax</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">нeдeлиxи</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeним</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">yпрaжнeнияx</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavare/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/slavaryakh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/nidelikh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/upradnenim/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/uprazhneniyakh/</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзee</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">мyзeяax</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaди</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">плошaдяx</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeни</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">имeнax</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzye/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/muzeyakh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadi/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/ploshadyakh/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imeni/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">/imenakh/</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Tabel 2 below shows the resembled meaning for the variant of nominative case. Tabel 2. The resembled meaning of noun in nominative case</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Masculin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Feminin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Neutral</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Singular &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Meaning singular &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plural &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;meaning singular plural meaning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Билет &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Билеты</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/bilyet/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/bilyetiy/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">слoвaр &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;слoвaри</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/slowar/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/slawari/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">мyзeй &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Мyзeй</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/muzei/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/muzei/</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Tiket &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;гaзетa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;гaзеты &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;koran &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;делo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;делa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bisnis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/gazeta/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/gazeti/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/dila/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/dila/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">kamus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;нeдeля &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;нeдeли &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;minggu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;yпрaж- &nbsp;&nbsp;yпрaж- &nbsp;&nbsp;latihan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/nidelya/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/nidyeli/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;нeниe &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;нeния</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">museum плошaдь &nbsp;плошaди lapangan /uprazh- &nbsp;/uprazh-</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/ploshad/ &nbsp;&nbsp;/ploshadi/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;neniye/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;neniya/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">имия &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;имeнa &nbsp;&nbsp;nama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">/imiya/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/imena/</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The use of the noun variant in the context of sentences in different cases (6 cases) is as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N : skolka bilyet stoit dlya tanets kecak?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">How much does the ticket cost for the Kecak dance?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A : Viy mozhetye kupit bilyetiy zdyes.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Can you buy the tickets here?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;G: Miy khotim kupit pyaty bilyetov dlya tanets Kecak. Skolka oni stoit vmyestye?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">We want to buy 5 tickets for Kecak Dance. How much are they altogether?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D : Daitye mnye etu bilyetu. Ya budu smotrety eta tanets.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Give me the ticket I want to see the dance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I : Davaitye payekhat v Uluwatu se etom bilyetom. Miy budyem smotrem tanets Kecak tam.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Let’s go to Uluwatu with this tcket. We can see Kecak dance there.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P : Skazhitye mnye pozhaluista dyebushka. Mnye nuzhno podpisith v etom bilyetye?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Excuse me, Lady. Do I need to sign on this ticket?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Improved mastery of Russian language by guides is also found in written litrations when guides interact with social media such as the WhatsApp (WA) application. The progress</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">of the level of mastery of Russian language by guides significantly influences the quality of service to satisfy Russian tourists as shown in a questionnaire where Russian tourists on average give a range of values 1 - 2 about mastering Russian language guides which means excellent for value 1 and good for value 2. The value given by Russian tourists is certainly very beneficial for all parties not only to tour guides but also companies or travel agents that employ guides, so that the sustainability of visiting Russian tourists is guaranteed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Russian-Speaking Tour Guide and Service Dimension</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Factors that influence the level of mastery of Russian language tour guides can be stated that besides Russian tourists who have the motivation to get satisfaction from the quality of services provided by guides on the other hand tour guides have the motivation to improve their Russian language mastery to provide quality service which is prime to tourists and makes them still exist from the tight competition in dealing with Russian tourists. The competition does not only occur among guides themselves as healthy competition, but also from the large number of foreign representatives from Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan who take part in handling Russian tourists in Bali. This competition with foreign representatives becomes unhealthy, besides the foreign representatives as native speakers are also exhaled by the issue that mastering Russian language guides is minimal. This competition is what triggers guides to strive to improve the mastery of Russian language in order to dismiss these unfounded issues otherwise they only become spectators in their own country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Increased mastery of Russian language guide as a quality of service that gives satisfaction to Russian tourists is inseparable from the dimensions of service to tourists who have their respective influences in determining tourist satisfaction on service quality, namely tangibility, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, and empathy. Tangibility factor is shown through the physical appearance of guides who characterize professional people and imbued with the local cultural work ethic, namely guides wearing traditional Balinese clothing. This appearance is certainly a positive impression for Russian tourists who have come to Bali to gain experience about local culture. Reliability factors are determined by providing information according to needs, timely service, and avoiding errors when providing services. Communication errors will not occur along with the increasing level of mastery of Russian language guides. The responsiveness factor is done by appreciating tourists, professionals in providing services, helping tourists with deftness, and attitude when serving. Guides should be more appreciative of tourists in providing services especially for Russian tourists who have</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">different characteristics from tourists from Australia, America, and other Western European countries.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The assurance factor can be done through the use of clear and easy-to-understand Russian language, knowledge of guides about extensive tourism products and culture, security of Russian tourists during the handling of guides, as well as being honest and clean in serving. Communication is important in handling Russian tourists, because the use of Russian language is good and right coupled with knowledge about tourism products and culture can increase tourist confidence in guides, especially in the purchase of optional tours and can provide accurate and accurate information to tourists. In terms of emphaty factors, namely respecting Russian tourists with the use of language that is polite, friendly, and always smiling in serving, and paying attention to tourists' requests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mastery of Russian language tour guides have experienced a very significant increase along with the increasingly intensive interaction between guides and Russian tourists in addition they have also utilized the development of information and communication technology. In addition, competition with foreign representatives who also handle Russian tourists in Bali has spurred guides to improve Russian language mastery. Increased mastery of Russian language by guides has a positive impact on the quality of service that gives satisfaction to Russian tourists. The service quality includes five service dimension factors, namely tangibility such as the physical appearance of guides who impress Russian tourists, reliability with the communicative competence of guides can improve services to tourists, responsiveness by understanding the characteristics of Russian tourists can satisfy tourists, assurance with knowledge of tourism products and culture can increase Russian tourists' trust in guides, and empathy with the use of polite language, friendly attitude, and respect for tourists provides a special satisfaction for Russian tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can be suggested to guides to keep maintaining the mastery of the Russian language that has been achieved so far and even improved to provide excellent service quality to the satisfaction of Russian tourists and cling to honesty as the most important aspect of the service dimension, thus building a positive image among guides as the spearhead (front-line) tourism and ambassadors (ambassadors) of countries and nations in the tourism sector.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alfianto, D. (2017). Dominasi Sosial dalam Novel Max Havelaar Karya Multatuli (Kajian Dominasi Simbolik Pierre Bourdieu). Bapala, 4(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonymous (2006). Kumpulan peraturan di bidang kepariwisataan buku I. Denpasar: Dinas Pariwisata Provinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonymous. Bahasa Rusia. Websites: </span><a href="https://id.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bahasa_Rusia"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://id.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bahasa_Rusia</span></a><span class="font2"> diakses tanggal 23 Pebruari 2018.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Atmaja, I Made Nada. 2008. Kode etik pramuwisata. (Makalah disampaikan pada Kursus Sertifikasi Pramuwisata Universitas Hindu Indonesia, Denpasar 2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bagarić, V., &amp;&nbsp;Djigunović, J. M. (2007). Defining communicative competence. Metodika, 8(1), 94-103.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bourdieu, Pierre (2012). &quot;The Form of Capital.&quot; In Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education, by John G. Richardson, 241-258. New York: Greenwood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bungin, B. (2001). Metodologi Penelitian Sosial: Format-Format kkuantitatif dan Kualitatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Byrne, G., Lubowe, D., &amp;&nbsp;Blitz, A. (2007). Using a Lean Six Sigma approach to drive innovation. Strategy &amp;&nbsp;Leadership, 35(2), 5-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Celce-Murcia, M. (2008). Rethinking the role of communicative competence in language teaching. In Intercultural language use and language learning (pp. 41-57). Springer, Dordrecht.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fadillah, Nanang S. (2006). Jalan-Jalan ke Rusia. Buku percakapan Rusia Indonesia Kesaint Blanc (Anggota IKAPI) Jl. Lentong No.9 Narogong Raya KM6, 8 Rawa Lambu bekasi timur-Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fandy, T. (2008). Service Management, mewujudkan layanan prima. Penerbit Andi, Jogjakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ginaya, G., Rejeki, I. N. M., &amp;&nbsp;Astuti, N. N. S. (2018). The effects of blended learning to students’ speaking ability. International journal of linguistics, literature and culture, 4(3), 1-14.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ginaya, G. (2018). The Balinese calendar system: From its epistemological perspective to axiological practices. International journal of linguistics, literature and culture, 4(3), 2437.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Haryatmoko (2010). “Kekuasaan Melahirkan Anti-Kekuasaan, Menelanjangi Mekanisme dan Teknik Kekuasaan Bersama Michel Foucault” dalam Basis edisi Konfrontasi Foucault dan Marx, No. 01-02, Tahun ke-51, Januari-Februari 2002.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kalebos, F. (2016). Faktor-Faktor Yang Mempengaruhi Kepuasan Wisatawan Yang Berkunjung Ke Daerah Wisata Kepulauan. Jurnal Riset Bisnis dan Manajemen, 4(3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kotler, P. (2000). Marketing management: The millennium edition. Marketing Management, 23(6), 188-193.Kotler, P. (2002). Manajemen Pemasaran Edisi Milenium. Jakarta: PT. Prenhallindo. Mahsun, M.S., 2005. Metode penelitian bahasa: tahapan strategi, metode dan tekniknya. PT RajaGrafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ovsiyenko, Y.G. (1999). Russian for beginners. Moscow: Russky Yazyk Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V. A., &amp;&nbsp;Berry, L. L. (1985). A conceptual model of service quality and its implications for future research. the Journal of Marketing, 41-50.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prasetio, A. (2012). Pengaruh kualitas pelayanan dan harga terhadap kepuasan pelanggan. Management Analysis Journal, 1(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prihatno, P. (2010). Memulihkan Citra Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta untuk Meningkatkan Jumlah Wisatawan. Wahana Informasi Pariwisata: MEDIA WISATA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schiffman, K., &amp;&nbsp;Kanuk, L. L. Wisenblit. 2010. Consumer Behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Selang, C. A. (2013). Bauran Pemasaran (Marketing Mix) Pengaruhnya Terhadap Loyalitas Konsumen Pada Fresh Mart Bahu Mall Manado. Jurnal EMBA: Jurnal Riset Ekonomi, Manajemen, Bisnis dan Akuntansi, 1(3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto. (1993). Metode dan aneka teknik analisis bahasa: pengantar penelitian wahana kebudayaan secara linguistis. Duta Wacana University Press.Sumarwan, U., 2014. Perilaku konsumen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suwintari, I. A. E. (2012). Kepuasan Wisatawan terhadap Kualitas Pelayanan Tourist Information Counters di Jalan Padma Utara Legian, Kuta. Volume 2 No. 2 Tahun 2012, 2(2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tjiptono, F. (2008). Service management mewujudkan layanan prima. Yogyakarta: Andi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">47</span></p>