---
layout: full_article
title: "Influence of Intellectual/Emotional/Spiritual Intelligence, Independence, and Tri Hita Karana on Auditor Performance"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Made Asri Dwija Putri, Ni Gusti Putu Wirawati"
categories: jiab
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jiab/full-50974 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jiab/id-50974"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jiab/full-50974"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Putri and Wirawati, Influence of Intellectual....</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> 85</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Influence of Intellectual/Emotional/Spiritual Intelligence, Independence, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> on Auditor Performance</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Gusti Ayu Made Asri Dwija Putri<sup>1</sup></span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Ni Gusti Putu Wirawati<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>1,2</sup>Faculty of Economics and Business, Udayana University, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">email: </span><a href="mailto:igamasri@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">igamasri@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/JIAB.2020.v15.i01.p08"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">https://doi.org/10.24843/JIAB.2020.v15.i01.p08</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Jurnal Ilmiah Akuntansi dan Bisnis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(JIAB)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Volume 15</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Issue 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">January 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Page 85 - 92</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">p-ISSN </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">2302-514X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">e-ISSN </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">2303-1018</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ARTICLE INFORMATION:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Received:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">09 July 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Revised:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">11 October 2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Accepted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">06 January 2020</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Auditor performance is the result of work rendered in carrying out one’s duties within a certain period of time. The quality of auditing is improved if the auditor shows good performance. The aim of this research is to determine how intellectual/emotional/spiritual intelligence, independence, and the culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> affect auditor performance in public accounting firms in Bali. This research was conducted in seven public accountant firms in Bali and questionnaires were used to collect the data. Purposive sampling was employed to determine the sample, and multiple linear regression was applied as a technique of analysis. This research contributes to the literature as it considers </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> as a factor that affects auditor performance. Hopefully, this research can give guidance to public accounting firms in terms of how intellectual/emotional/spiritual intelligence, independence, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2"> influence auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2">, auditor, intelligence, independence.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Public accountants are very important for a company to help provide opinions on financial statements. Reliable and quality audit results will assist investors in making up decisions. The auditor must maintain good performance to maintain the trust of users of audited financial statements. Audit failure can occur if the auditor issues the erroneous opinion because it fails to meet the applicable requirements. An audit failure occurred in 2002 in the United States involving The Big Five Arthur Anderson who collaborated in manipulating Enron’s financial statements. The company’s financial statements got an unqualified opinion by Arthur Anderson Public Accounting Firm. However, the company went bankrupt after the statement was issued. The opinion could be said to be of no quality, because it was unable to predict the condition of the company in the future. The management of Enron and Arthur Andersen knew about the unprincipled practices, but in order to maintain the trust of investors and the public, both parties had fabricated financial statements starting from 1985. Andersen also violated the attitude of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">professionalism as an independent accountant by publishing erroneous reportsand misleading audits. Public Accounting Firms’ (PAF) reputation will be at stake when the opinions given are not in accordance with the actual conditions of the company (Geiger &amp;&nbsp;Rama, 2006)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Low audit quality reflects the low quality of auditor (Novia &amp;&nbsp;Ariyanto, 2016). The term performance is often used to assess the achievement of individuals or groups. Kalbers &amp;&nbsp;Timothi (1995) states that the auditor’s performance is an assessment of the work, it is conducted by supervisors, coworkers, self, and subordinates. According to Agus (2003), there are three dominant standards considering performance namely quantity, quality, and timeliness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Possessing a good performance is not enough to be an auditor, it also requires a more comprehensive abilities consisting of intellectual, emotional, and spiritual intelligence as well as the application of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture. Several studies related to the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana </span><span class="font3">such as Dewi, Yuniarta&amp;Julianto (2017) and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suparsabawa &amp;&nbsp;Kustina (2018) state that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture can affect performance. Yuliana &amp;Latrini (2016) shows that intellectual intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance. Research conducted by Choiriah, (2013) found that there is a relationship between intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, and spiritual intelligence on auditor performance. Accountants who are only intellectually smart may not necessarily be able to provide optimal performance in conducting the audit process, but accountants who are also emotionally and spiritually smart certainly provide better performance in producing quality audit reports. Auditor performance can be seen from the ability of someone to master and manage themselves and the ability to foster relationships with others. According to Goleman, (2003) this ability is called emotional intelligence that will give effect to a person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Research conducted by Meirnayati (2005), Choiriah (2013) and Yuliana and Latrini (2016) shows that intellectual intelligence has a very significant role in improving performance. If an auditor has high intellectual intelligence, the auditor can conduct checks well in determining or recommending audit opinions, as result better performance is achieved. If an auditor has good intellectual intelligence, then he will be able to understand and carry out their duties properly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">H<sub>1</sub>: Intellectual intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Research conducted by Wijayanti, (2012) states that emotional intelligence will facilitate an auditor in conducting examinations, have strong motivation, self-control or emotions, empathy, and social skills that will help the auditor in tracing audit evidence and information related. An auditor who has emotional intelligence will have an empathetic attitude so that he can be more responsive to the needs of his clients and will also always motivate him to always be committed to audit quality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">H<sub>2</sub>: Emotional intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An auditor with good spiritual intelligence is able to synergize all components of his intelligence and achieve good performance as well. Biberman and Whittey (1997) suggests the relationship between spiritual intelligence and work. Spiritual intelligence is proven to have an influence on a person’s behavior at work. Research conducted by Wiersma (2002)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">also provides evidence about the influence of spiritual intelligence at work. It is sometimes difficult to gather information from the management, employees and other related parties. These difficulties can be overcome by the spiritual intelligence possessed by the auditor. Spiritual intelligence is shown by someone’s awareness to use his experiences as a form of applying values and meanings. Through his spiritual intelligence, it is expected that an auditor can think creatively, be far-sighted, act honestly, and be free from other parties’ influence in conducting the audit process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">H<sub>3</sub>: Spiritual intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An accountant does not only need to have competency as an auditor but also independence in conducting audit. The auditor is also expected to be independent in conducting the audit. Independence is a mental attitude held by the auditor to be impartial in conducting an audit. Christiawan, (2002) states that public accountants are obliged to be honest with all interested parties who have put their trust in their work. Auditor who upholdshis independence, will not be affected and influenced by various forces originating from outside in considering the facts found in the examination (Trinaningsih, 2007). When an auditor does not have independence any longer, his working quality will be questioned by the public. H<sub>4</sub>: Independence influences auditor performance positively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The quality of Public Accounting Firm (PAF) performance is largely determined by the performance of the auditor. According to Gunawan (2009) the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> can improve organizational performance. One way to improve one’s performance in a line of work is to apply cultural values. Balinese in their social life apply a lot of values contained in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture. Furthermore, Saputra’s research (2012) states that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture is able to strengthen the influence of the internal locus of control on the performance and satisfaction of internal auditors. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture reflects the harmonious relationship between humans, nature and God. Some previous studies discuss the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> such as research done by Gunawan (2009), Pertiwi and Ludigdo (2013) state that the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> contains noble values that can be applied in improving performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">H<sub>5</sub>: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture has a positive effect on auditor performance.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This research refers to the Theory of Attitudes and Behavior developed by Triandis, (1980), states that a person’s behavior is determined by attitudes related to what people want to do, what they think they will do ( social rules), what they can do (habits) and with the consequences of the behavior they think about. The data used in this study were primary and secondary data. The population in this study were all auditors who work at the Public Accounting Firm (PAF) in Bali which are members of the Indonesian Institute of Certified Public Accountants (IICPA) in 2017.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nonprobability sampling method with a purposive sampling technique was applied. It is the method of determining the sample with certain considerations, where sample members are chosen to make the sample represent the characteristics of the population (Sugiyono, 2016: 85). The criteria used as the basis for selecting sample members in this study were as follows: (1) auditors who work in each PAF in Bali as partners, managers, senior auditors, junior auditors and other auditor positions. Determination of this criterion was done with the consideration that although only authorized to conduct an audit, because not all auditors have the right to issue or determine the audit opinion, the results of the audit can determine the quality of the audit process; (2) Auditors who have work experience of at least 1 year. This criterion was chosen because the auditor who has at least 1-year work experience has the time and experience to adapt and assess the conditions of his work environment. A questionnaire was used to collect the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, intellectual intelligence is proxied into three indicators, namely language ability (verbal), logical ability, and numerical ability. The establishment of a research instrument refers to indicators developed from Goleman (2003). The instrument used to measure intellectual intelligence consisted of 7 statement items. The results were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were rated on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Emotional intelligence is a series of someone’s abilities to provide self-confidence, manage emotions when facing pressures so that he can use cognitive abilities to the full, provide motivation to himself, as well as the ability to work and interact with others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The formation of research instruments refers to indicators developed from Goleman(2003). In this study, emotional intelligence is proxied into five indicators, namely self-introduction, self-control, motivation, empathy and social skills. The results of the answers were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were rated on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Spiritual intelligence is intelligence that is demonstrated through the ability of auditors to take action in accordance with the professional code of ethics, the ability to survive in life and work life and the ability to always behave honestly when carrying out duty. The establishment of a research instrument refers to indicators developed from Goleman (2003). In this study, spiritual intelligence is proxied into three indicators, namely self-integrity, respect, and unwillingness to cause unnecessary losses. The instrument used to measure spiritual intelligence consisted of 6 statement items. The results of the answers were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were rated on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Independence is the auditors’ mental attitude to be free from the influence of other parties or not take sides in conducting audits up to the statement of opinion. Independence is proxied into three indicators, namely the duration of the relationship with the client, the independence of the execution of work, and the independence of the report. The results of the answers were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were scored on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture is a manifestation of Balinese cultural values that contain harmony in the Balinese social life with its indicators, namely the harmony of human relations with humans, the harmony of human relations with their environment, and the harmony of human relations with God. The research instrument used to measure the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> was adopted from a concept developed by Windia (2007) and Suardikha (2012). The results of the answers were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were scored on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Auditor performance is an implementation of audit tasks that has been completed by the auditor within a certain period of time. In this study, auditor performance is proxied into three indicators, namely the quality of workers, the quantity of work, and the timeliness of report completion. The instrument used</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to measure auditor performance consisted of 9 statement items. The results of the answers were then measured using a modified Likert scale, where the respondent’s answer choices were rated on a 4-point scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Questionnaires were distributed directly to the study location and given to respondents. The questionnaire was a list of questions and written statements about the influence of intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, spiritual intelligence, independence, and culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> on auditor performance. The results of the answers were then measured by a 4-point Likert scale, where the highest score is 4 and the lowest score is 1. The criteria for determining the score for each statement item namely, respondent’s answer with a score of 4 for Very Agree (VA), a score of 3 for Agree (A), score 2 for Disagree (DA) and score 1 for the Strongly Disagree (SDA).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Validity test is used to measure the validity of a questionnaire and the reliability test aims to find out the consistency of the measuring instrument used, therefore, the results obtained is the same in examining the same object and technique with different times. Before multiple linear regression analysis (multiple linear regression) is used to test existing hypotheses, the normality test, multicollinearity test and heteroscedasticity test were first performed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Multiple linear regression analysis (multiple linear regression) is used to test the existing hypothesis, which is to see the influence of intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, spiritual intelligence, independence, and culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> on the performance of auditors at public accounting firms in Bali. The analysis results are expressed in the form of multiple linear regression equations as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y = α + β<sub>1</sub>X<sub>1</sub> + β<sub>2</sub>X<sub>2</sub> + β<sub>3</sub>X<sub>3</sub> + β<sub>4</sub>X<sub>4</sub> + β<sub>5</sub>X<sub>5</sub> +</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ε ............................................................(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Exlanation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Y &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= auditor’s performance</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">α &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= constant</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">β<sub>1...</sub> β<sub>5</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;= regression coefficient</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X<sub>1</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= intellectual intelligence</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X<sub>2</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= emotional intelligence</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X<sub>3</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= spiritual intelligence</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X<sub>4</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= independence</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X<sub>5</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= error</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The coefficient of multiple determination is a measure of the suitability (godness of fit) of the regression equation, which is a variation of the dependent variable that can be explained by the independent variable. When the adjusted R<sup>2</sup> value is smaller, the ability of the independent variables to explain the variation of the dependent variable is more limited. If the score is close to one means that the independent variables provide almost all the information needed to predict variations in the dependent variable (Ghozali, 2016: 95).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">F statistical test aims to determine the feasibility of multiple linear regression models as an analysis tool that tests the effect of independent variables on the dependent variable. The test was carried out using significance level 0.05 (α = 5%). T test is used to test if each independent variable significantly influences the dependent variable. This test can be done by looking at the results of the regression conducted with the SPSS program, namely by comparing the significance level of each independent variable 0.05 (α = 5%).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the profiles of 38 respondents who filled out the questionnaire in this study obtained the characteristics of research respondents. Characteristics of respondents are profile of the respondents who participated. The respondent’s profile consists of gender, length of work at the relevant PAF, position, and education. The measurement is obtained through processing field data with the help of questionnaires that had been distributed, the details of the respondents can be seen in Table 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gender criteria of the respondent can be used as a reference to find out the proportion of male and female respondents. Based on Table 2 it can be seen that there are 18 respondents (47.37%) and 20 female respondents (53.63%). The length of work criteria can be used as a reference to find out how long the respondents have been an auditor at the relevant PAF. Based on Table 2 it can be seen that there are 36 people (94.74 percent) who have been working 1 to 5 years. There are 2 people (5.26 percent) who have been working 6 to 10 years. There is no respondent who works up to 20 years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Criteria for the position of respondent can be used as a reference to determine the position of the respondent in this study. Based on Table 2. it can be seen that there are 12 senior auditors (31.58 percent),</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 2. Data Characteristics of Respondents</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Characteristics of Respondents</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Number</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">(Person)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Percentage (%)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Gender Male</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">47.37</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Female</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">53.63</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">100</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Length of work 1-5 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">36</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">94.74</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">6-10 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">5.26</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">&gt; 10 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">100</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Position Partner</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Supervisor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Manager</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Senior Auditor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">31.58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Junior Auditor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">26</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">68.42</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">100</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Education</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">D3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">10.53</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">S1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">76.32</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">S2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">13.16</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">S3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">100</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Source</span><span class="font2">: Data Processed, 2018</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">26 junior auditors (68.42 percent), while partner, supervisor and manager are not found in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Criteria for the level of education of respondents can be used as a reference to find out the latest education of the respondents in this study. Based on Table 2. it can be seen that there are 4 participants with Diploma degree (10.53 percent), 29 respondents (76.32 percent) with Bachelor degree, 5 participants (13.16 percent) with Master degree, and there are no respondents with Doctoral degree.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This research has passed the validity and reliability test and the classical assumption test. The model feasibility test results show that the calculated F value obtained is 17.397 with a significance value or p-value of 0.000 which is smaller than the value of α = 0.05, so it can be concluded that the variables of intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, spiritual intelligence, independence and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> culture simultaneously have significant influence on auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 3. Results of Multiple Linear Regression Analysis</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Model</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Standardized</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Unstandardized Coefficients &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coefficients</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Std. Error &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Beta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;t &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sig.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1 (Constant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X2</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">-8.461 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3.688 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-2.294 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.028</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.322 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.145 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.247 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.222 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.033</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.207 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.087 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.239 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.376 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.024</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.426 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.165 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.268 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.589 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.319 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.145 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.223 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.196 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.035</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.318 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.108 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.299 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.933 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.006</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Source</span><span class="font2">: Data Processed, 2018</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the results of the regression analysis in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 3, the following equation can be made: Y = -8,461 + 0,322X1 + 0,207X2 + 0,426X3 +</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">0,319X4 + 0.318X5 + ε.............................</span><span class="font0">(2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First hypothesis (H<sub>1</sub>) states that intellectual intelligence has a positive effect on auditor</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">performance. The results show that H<sub>1</sub> is accepted, that there is a positive influence between intellectual intelligence and auditor performance. The auditor’s performance increases if he possesses higher the intellectual intelligence. Conversely, the performance will decrease if the auditor has lower intellectual intelligence. This research is in line with Fabiola (2005)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">stating that intellectual intelligence is a cognitive ability possessed by individuals to adapt effectively to complex and ever-changing environments that are influenced by genetics. The cognitive ability that is meant is someone’s ability to understand and interpret every information he gets. It can be said that the higher the intellectual intelligence, the better the auditor’s performance. This is in line with the theory put forward by Eysenck (1998).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second hypothesis (H<sub>2</sub>) shows that emotional intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance. The results of the analysis state the second hypothesis (H2) can be accepted. The results showa positive influence between emotional intelligence and auditor performance. Auditor’s performance will increase if he has higher emotional intelligence. Conversely, the performance decreases if he has lower emotional intelligence. Emotional intelligence is someone’s ability to deal with frustration, the ability to control emotions, the spirit of optimism and the ability to establish relationships with others (Fabiola, 2005).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Third hypothesis (H<sub>3</sub>) states that spiritual intelligence has a positive effect on auditor performance. The results show that the triple hypothesesare accepted, which means that the spiritual intelligence variable has a positive effect on auditor performance. The auditor performs better if he has higher spiritual intelligence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fourth hypothesis (H<sub>4</sub>) states that independence has a positive effect on auditorperformance, so H<sub>4 </sub>is accepted. The results showed that independence influenced the auditor’s performance. The independence of a public accountant is one of the very important characteristics of the public accountant in carrying out accounting checks on its clients. Independence is the main basis of public trust which is very important to assess the quality of audit services. Arumsari (2014) states that there is a relationship between auditor independence and auditor performance. An auditor with high independence will not be easily influenced and controlled by other parties in conducting the examinationand expressing his opinion, as result he will obtain better achievement. The results of this study are also consistent with research conducted by Trisnaningsih (2007) and Arifah (2012) which show that independence has a positive effect on auditor performance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The fifth hypothesis (H<sub>5</sub>) states that the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> influences auditor performance, therefore (H<sub>5</sub>) can be accepted. The results showed an influence between the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and auditor performance. Auditor’s performance will increase if he applies </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> more. Applying </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> in working will lead the auditor to conduct quality audit. The results of this study are in line with research by Gunawan (2009), Dewi et al (2017) and Suparsabawa and Kustina (2018).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This research has been able to provide empirical evidence that intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, and spiritual intelligence have a positive effect on auditor performance. These three intelligences have a positive effect, which means that the level of intelligence of an auditor increases, the performance of an auditor increases. These three types of intelligence are important for an auditor in improving performance. The study also found that independence has a positive effect on auditor performance. Independence is a basic attitude that must be maintained by an auditor in improving performance. In addition, the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3"> has a positive effect on auditor performance as well. This implies the role of the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana </span><span class="font3">culture which contains universal noble values which is an important foundation applied for an auditor.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Agus, D. (2003). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen Supervisi: Petunjuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Praktis Bagi Para Supervisor</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Apriyanti. (2014). Pengaruh Kecerdasan Emosional, Kecerdasan Spiritual dan Perilaku Etis Terhadap Kinerja Auditor Pemerintah (Studi Empiris pada BPK-RI dan BPKP Perwakilan Provinsi Riau). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ekonomi Universitas Riau Pekanbaru</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Arumsari, A. L. (2014). Pengaruh Profesionalisme Auditor, Independensi Auditor, Etika Profesi, Budaya Organisasi, dan Gaya Kepemimpinan terhadap Kinerja Auditor Eksternal (Studi Kasus pada BPK RI Perwakilan Provinsi Bali). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">EJournal Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha Jurusan Akuntansi Program S1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Biberma, J, and Whittey, M. 1997.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A</span><span class="font3"> Postmodern Spiritual Future For Work. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal</span><span class="font3"> of Organizational Change Management, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 30-188</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chermiss, C. (1998). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Working With Emotional Intelligence. The Consortium For Research On Emotional Intelligence in Organizations</span><span class="font3">. New Jersey: Rugrets University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Choiriah, A. (2013). Pengaruh Kecerdasan Emosional, Kecerdasan Intelektual, Kecerdasan Spiritual, dan Etika Profesi Terhadap Kinerja Auditor Dalam Kantor Akuntan Publik. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Christiawan, Y. J. (2002). Kompetensi dan Independensi Akuntan Publik: Refleksi Hasil Penelitian Empiris. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Akuntansi Dan Keuangan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">4</span><span class="font3">(2), 79–92.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ciarrochi, J., Deane, F. P., &amp;&nbsp;Anderson, S. (2002). Emotional Intelligence Moderates the Relationship between Stress and Mental Health. Personality and Individual Differences. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Personality and Individual Differences</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">32</span><span class="font3">(2), 197–209.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dewi, P. N. K., Yuniarta, G. A., &amp;&nbsp;Julianto, P. (2017). Pengaruh Implementasi Budaya </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">, Efisiensi Night Auditor, Dan Kualitas Tenaga Kerja Terhadap Kinerja Hotel Berbintang Di Kabupaten Buleleng. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">E-Journal S1 Akuntansi Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2</span><span class="font3">(8).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fernando, J., Mulki, J. P., &amp;&nbsp;Marshall, G. . (2005). A Meta-Analysis of The Relationship Between Organizational Commitment and Salesperson Job Performance. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Business Research,58</span><span class="font3">(1), 705–714.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Febiola Meirnayati. 2005. Analisis Pengaruh Kecerdasan Intelektual, Kecerdasan Emosi dan Kecerdasan Spiritual Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tesis</span><span class="font3"> Program Pasca Sarjana Universitas Diponogoro, Semarang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Geiger, M. A., &amp;&nbsp;Rama, D. V. (2006). Audit Firm Size and Going Concern Reporting Accuracy. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accounting Horizons</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">20</span><span class="font3">(1), 1–17.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ghozali, I. (2006). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Aplikasi Analisis Multivariate Dengan Program SPSS. Cetakan Keempat</span><span class="font3">. Semarang: Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goleman, D. (2003). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Emotional Intelligence</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Business and Management</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gunawan, K. (2009). Pengaruh Budaya Organisasi, Kepuasan Kerja dan Motivasi Kerja terhadap Gaya Kepemimpinan dan Kinerja Organisasi (Studi pada Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD) di Bali). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Aplikasi Manajemen</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font3">(2), 441–449.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hanafi, R. (2010). Spiritual Intelligence, Emotional Intelligence And Auditor’s Performance. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Akuntansi Dan Auditing Indonesia</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(1), 29–40.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hofstede, G. (1983). The Cultural Relativity of Organizasional Practices and Theorities. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of International Studies</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(2), 75– 89.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hofstede, G. (1991). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Culture and Organizations, Software of the Mind</span><span class="font3">. New York: McGraw-Hill Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hofstede, G., Neuijen, B., Ghayv, D. D., &amp;&nbsp;Sandes., G. (1990). Measuring Organization and Sosial Cultures: A Qualitatives Study a Cross Twenty Cases,. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Administrative Sciane Quartely</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">35</span><span class="font3">(2), 286–316.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Idrus, M. (2002). Kecerdasan Spiritual Mahasiswa Yogyakarta, Psikologi Phronesis. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ilmiah Dan Terapan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">4</span><span class="font3">(2), 116–133.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ikatan, A. I. (2002). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Standar Profesional Akuntan Publik (SPAP)</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: Salemba Empat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Indriantoro, N. (2000). An Empirical Study of Locus of Control and Cultural Dimensions an Moderating Variable of The Effect Of Participative Budgeting on Job Performance And Satisfaction. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ekonomi Dan Bisnis Indonesia</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">15</span><span class="font3">(1), 97–114.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Isabella. (2011). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pengaruh Kecerdasan Emosional, Kecerdasan Spiritual Dan Kecerdasan Intelektual Terhadap Kinerja Auditor Dalam Kantor Akuntan Publik</span><span class="font3">. Katolik Soegijapranata Semarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kalbers, L. P., &amp;&nbsp;Timothi, J. F. (1995). Pengaruh Current Ratio Dan Debt To Equity Ratio Terhadap Profitabilitas Dengan Intellectual Capital Sebagai </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Auditing/ : A Journal of Practice &amp;&nbsp;Theory.</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(1), 64–86.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Maryani, T., &amp;&nbsp;U. Ludigdo. (2001). Survei Atas Faktor-faktor yang Mempengaruhi Sikap dan Perilaku Etis Akuntan. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Tema</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">2</span><span class="font3">(1), 49– 61.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meirnayati, F. (2005). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Pengaruh Kecerdasan Intelektual, Kecerdasan Emosi dan Kecerdasan Spiritual Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tesis.</span><span class="font3"> Universitas Diponogoro, Semarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meyer, J. P., Gellatly, I. R., Paunonen, S., &amp;&nbsp;Goffin, R. (1989). Organizational Commitment and Job Performance: It’s the Nature of the Commitment That Counts. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Applied Psychology,74</span><span class="font3">(1), 152–156.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mitroff, L. ., &amp;&nbsp;Denton, E, A. (1999). A Study of Spiritualty in The Work Place. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sloan Management Review</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">40</span><span class="font3">(4), 83–92.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mowday, R. T., Porter, L. W., &amp;&nbsp;Steers, R. M. (1992). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Employee-Rganization Linkages: The</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychology Of Commitment, Absenteeism, And Turnover</span><span class="font3">. New York: Academic Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nouri, H., &amp;&nbsp;Parker, R. J. (1996). The Effect of Organization Commitment on The Relation Betwen Budgetary Participation an Budgetary Slack. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Behavioral Research in Acounting</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">(1), 76–90.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Novia, M. T., &amp;&nbsp;Ariyanto, D. (2016). Profesionalisme Sebagai Pemoderasi Pengaruh Independensi pada Kinerja Auditor. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">E-Jurnal Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(3), 1895–1923.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pande, P. M. (2012). Pengaruh Kecerdasan Intelektual, Kecerdasan Emosional, Dan Kecerdasan Spiritual Pada Kinerja Alumni Fakultas Ekonomi Universitas Udayana (Studi Empiris Mahasiswa MAKSI dan PPak). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">E-Jurnal Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">1</span><span class="font3">(1), 1–17. </span><a href="https://doi.org/"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/</span></a><span class="font3"> 10.24843/jiab.2019.v14.i01.p12</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Robbins, S. P., &amp;&nbsp;Judge, T. A. (2008). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perilaku Organisasi Edisi ke-12</span><span class="font3">. Jakarta: Salemba Empat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Saputra, K. A. K. (2012). Pengaruh Lokus Of Kontrol Terhadap Kinerja Dan Kepuasan Kerja Auditor Dengan Kultur Lokal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana </span><span class="font3">Sebagai Variabel Moderasi. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Akuntansi Multiparadigma</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font3">(1), 86–100.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sugiyono. (2016). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bisnis (Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&amp;D)</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suparsabawa, I. N. R., &amp;&nbsp;Kustina, K. T. (2018). Pengaruh Penerapan Good Corporate</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Governance Dan Budaya </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana </span><span class="font3">Terhadap Kinerja Manajerial Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Riset Akuntansi (JUARA)</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">(1), 58–68.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Triandis, H. C. (1980). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Values, Attitudes and Interpersonal Behavior</span><span class="font3">. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Trinaningsih, S. (2007). Independensi Auditor Dan Komitmen Organisasi Sebagai Mediasi Pengaruh Pemahaman Good Governance, Gaya Kepemimpinan Dan Budaya Organisasi Terhadap Kinerja. In </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Prosiding Simposium Nasional Akuntansi</span><span class="font3"> (Vol. 10, pp. 1–56).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wiersma, M. L. (2002). The Influence of Spiritual “Meaning-Making” On Career Behaviour. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Management Development</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font3">(7), 497–520.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wijana, D. G. A., &amp;&nbsp;Ramantha, I. W. (2015). Integritas Sebagai Pemoderasi Pengaruh Komitmen Organisasi Pada Kinerja Auditor. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">E-Jurnal Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">10</span><span class="font3">(3), 841–851.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wijayanti, G. L. (2012). Peran Kecerdasan Emosional Dan Kecerdasan Spiritual Dalam Meningkatkan Kinerja Auditor. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ilmiah Mahasiswa Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">11</span><span class="font3">(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yuliana, G. S., &amp;&nbsp;Latrini, Y. (2016). Pengaruh Kecerdasan Emosional, Kecerdasan Spiritual, Kecerdasan Intelektual dan Independensi pada Kinerja Auditor. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">E-Jurnal Akuntansi</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">16</span><span class="font3">(2), 1034–1062.</span></p>