---
layout: full_article
title: "Indonesian – English Code-Mixing in Novel Touché by Windhy Puspitadewi"
author: "Zawranisa Meigasuri, Putu Lirishati Soethama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p04"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/JH.2020.v24.i02.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-4, SK No: 23/E/KPT/2019</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-5076, e-ISSN: 2302-920X Humanis: Journal of Arts and Humanities</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 24.2 Mei 2020: 135-142</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Indonesian – English Code-Mixing in Novel </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Touché</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Windhy Puspitadewi</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Zawranisa Meigasuri*, Putu Lirishati Soethama </span><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University [</span><a href="mailto:zawranisa.mei@gmail.com"><span class="font3">zawranisa.mei@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">], [</span><a href="mailto:lirishatinya@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">lirishatinya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study aims to find out the types of code-mixing, to identify word class categories of the words being mixed, and to explain the factors of using mixed languages in Touché novel. Data were taken from Touché novel by Windhy Puspitadewi and were collected by using documentation method. The sample data were selected by using purposive sampling method. This study used qualitative method to analyze the data and the results are presented in formal and informal method. In order to analyze the code-mixing, the theory of factors in using codemixing proposed by Tej K. Bhatia and William C. Ritchie (2013) was used. The result showed that from 85 Indonesian – English code-mixing data that had been collected, it was found that 39 data are insertion code-mixing, 36 data are alternation code-mixing and 10 data are congruent lexicalization. The categories of words being mixed are varied such as words (i.e. nouns, adjectives, etc.), phrases (i.e. noun phrases, adverb phrases, etc.), and clauses (i.e. dependent and independent clauses). There are four factors found in using code-mixing in the novel: social roles and relationships of participants, situational factors, message-intrinsic factors, and language attitudes, dominance and security.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: Sociolinguistics, code-mixing, novel</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menemukan tipe-tipe campur kode, mengidentifikasi kelas kata dari kata-kata yang dicampur, dan menjelaskan faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan bahasa campuran pada novel Touché. Data untuk penelitian ini diambil dari novel Touché karya Windhy Puspitadewi menggunakan metode dokumentasi. Sampel data dipilih dengan menggunakan metode pengambilan sampel bersyarat. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif untuk menganalisa data dan hasil penelitian disajikan menggunakan metode formal dan informal. Untuk menganalisa pencampuran kode, teori faktor penggunaan campur kode yang dikemukakan oleh Tej K. Bhatia dan William C. Ritchie (2013) digunakan. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa dari 85 campur kode Bahasa Indonesia dan Inggris yang telah dikumpulkan, ditemukan 39 data tergolong campur kode sisipan (insertion), 36 data adalah campur kode bergantian (alternation), dan 10 data merupakan leksikalisasi sebangun (congruent lexicalization). Kategori kelas kata dari kata-kata yang dicampur bervariasi seperti kata (yaitu kata benda, kata sifat, dll), frasa (yaitu frasa nomina, frasa keterangan, dll), dan klausa (klausa utama dan pembantu). Ada empat faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan campur kode di</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Info Article</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Publised</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font0">11<sup>th</sup> July 2019 8<sup>th</sup>May 2020 31<sup>st</sup> May 2020</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">dalam novel yaitu peran sosial dan hubungan para partisipan, faktor situasional, faktor makna intrinsik, dan sikap bahasa, dominasi dan keamanan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">: Sosiolinguistik, Campur kode, Novel</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Language used in society is very diverse and depends on many aspects. The field that studies the connection between language and society is called sociolinguistics. Sociolinguistics has become a popular field of study that concerns with language and human social system, such as the way language is used in different social context, how the language works and its social relation (Holmes, 2013). Sociolinguistics investigates language and society that often involving many aspects such as sex, age, social class, educational background of the speaker. Besides, sociolinguistics also cope the phenomenon of people that acquire two or more languages. In one speech community, each individuals may be bilingual. This causes people switch and mix the languages depend on the situation and the people whom they are interacting with. This phenomenon is called code-switching and code-mixing. Wardhaugh (2006) states code-switching (also called code-mixing) is languages that can occur in conversation between speakers’ turns or within a single speaker’s turn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Phenomenon of code-switching and code-mixing has become an interesting topic to be discussed, especially because it reflects the language use related to globalization era in real life thesedays. English plays an important role as international language in the world and people are expected to comprehend the language. It helps people from dissimilar background to communicate. Due to more than one language skill that a person could have, often people are not aware that they mixed the languages. Hence, the mixing occurs in spoken and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">written form, such as daily conversation, teaching, television program, social media, magazine, advertisement, as well as in literary work namely novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study discuses the use of two languages: Indonesian and English that are found in Indonesian novel as written form of code-mixing. Many studies have raised the issue of code-mixing purposes in literature. As Keller and Keller (1993) said those are as identity marking, alienation, characterization and style. In a more recent work, Torres (2007) also added that it represents a reality of segments of the population that are living between cultures and languages as literary language actualizes bilingual or bicultural communities. The impact of inserting code-mixing in a novel may also vary such as indirectly affects readers’ language style. As the use of code-mixing is frequently shown in Touché novel by Windhy Puspitadewi. The novel is targeting teenage readers which impact the readers using mixed up codes. Furthermore, finding out the types of code-mixing that the author use and the factors of using code-mixing through the characters’ utterances are also interesting to be analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are some journals related to this study. Those journals will be explained below: The first journal to be reviewed was written by Mujiono, Rahayu Wilujeng, and Muhammad Suharto (2017) entitled Code Mixing as a Communication Strategy Performed by Outbound Call (OBC) Center Agents. The journal aims to analyze types and reasons that influence the used of code mixing in OBC Center Agents which has implemented in their call center activities. This journal used theory of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">code-mixing types by Musyken (2001) and Wardhaugh (2006), theory of codemixing reasons are by Bhatia and Ritchie (2004), Holmes (2013) and Gumperz (1982).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The second journal to be reviewed is entitled Code-Mixing of English in the Entertainment News of Chinese Newspaper in Malaysia by Lau Su Kia, Xiongyong Cheng, Tan Kooi Yee, and Choo Wee Ling (2011). This study sought to analyze the code-mixing in entertainment news of Malaysian Chinese newspaper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The third journal that was reviewed is entitled An Analysis of Code Switching and Code Mixing as Found in Television Advertisement. It was written by Mei Lyna Girsang (2015). This journal discussed about types of Code Switching and Code Mixing in ANTV television advertisement, the most dominant type of Code Switching and Code Mixing and the reasons of using Code Switching and Code Mixing. This journal used theory proposed by Hoffman (1991).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The forth journal to be reviewed was written by Fithrah Auliya Ansar (2017) entitled Code Switching and Code Mixing in Teaching-Learning Process. The journal aims to analyze types, reasons and functions in switching and mixing languages which has implemented in teaching-learning process in Indonesia. This journal used theory by Crystal (1987) and Eldridge (1996).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The fifth journal was written by Enggar Mulyajati (2017) entitled The Indonesian-English Code-Mixing in Just Alvin Show at Metro TV. The journal discusses about the types of code-mixing and the syntactic units that mixed in speeches of Just Alvin Show Metro TV. The theory types of code-mixing proposed by Muysken (2000) was used.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The research method in this study comprises many aspects such as data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data analysis.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Data were taken from a novel entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Touché</span><span class="font3"> written by Windhy Puspitadewi. The novel was published in May 5<sup>th</sup> 2011 by Gramedia Pustaka Utama. The novel has 208 pages. This novel was chosen because it has an interesting story, not merely about teen romance but also fantasy, friendship, adventure and family. This novel categorizes as teen literature and is one of best-selling Indonesian novel according to Goodreads, the largest website for readers and book recommendations in the world, with 2.374 ratings and 192 reviews. Some part of the dialogue are mixing Indonesian and English language in order to support characterization of the characters created by the author.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The data were collected by using documentation method which done in several steps. First, reading the whole novel intensively. Second, the dialogue that contain Indonesian – English codemixing were highlighted and listed. Finally, moving on to the identification based on types of code-mixing. Before proceeding to the analysis, sample data were selected by using purposive sampling method (Kothari, 2004).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Qualitative method was used for analyzing data in this study because not any of this analysis is dealing with numbers but rather described in detail.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Furthermore, qualitative method is used as the analysis method of classifying types of code-mixing and defining factors of using the code-mixing. Technique of analyzing data was done in several steps. First, types of code-mixing sample data that had been chosen, were analyzed and elaborated based on theory of types of code-mixing by Pieter Muysken (2000). Each words being mixed were also categorized in the word class categories based on theory of word class categorization by Robert D. Van Valin Jr. (2001). Second, factors of code-mixing sample data, were elaborated and analyzed based on theory factors of codemixing by Bhatia and Ritchie (2013).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting Data Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, formal and informal method are applied for presenting the data analysis. According to Sudaryanto (1993) formal method is a method to presenting data analysis by using number, table, diagram, and symbol while informal method is used to presenting the data analysis by elaborating words and sentences. The first problem uses formal and informal method, the table is used to presenting number of classification types of codemixing and elaboration on the process of code-mixing. The second problem, informal method is applied to explaining the findings and the analysis such as elaborating the analysis types and factors of code-mixing.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of Indonesian – English code-mixing in Touché novel focuses on the utterances produced by the characters. The analysis of types and factors of code-mixing also word class categories of the words being mixed in Touché novel are presented below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Analysis of the Types of Code-Mixing in Touché Novel</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Insertion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Insertion code-mixing occurs if a single constituent of a particular language with the words from the same language is inserted into a structure of other language. A single constituent can be either a lexical item or phrase. The sample data of insertion to be analyzed is written below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Permainan &nbsp;yang bagus bukan</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berasal dari </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">skill</span><span class="font3">.” (page 20)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A good performance does not come from </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">skill</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is the utterance by Mr. Yunus. He is inserting the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">skill</span><span class="font3">” at the end of his utterance. This code-mixing can be categorized as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">insertion </span><span class="font3">because the speaker inserted a lexical item of English into a structure of Indonesian language which dominate the utterance. The word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">skill</span><span class="font3">” is a noun word means someone’s ability to do something well. In Indonesian, it means “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ketrampilan</span><span class="font3">” or “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bakat</span><span class="font3">”. The use of the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">skill</span><span class="font3">” is considered more concise and practical than saying “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ketrampilan</span><span class="font3">”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alternation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Alternation code-mixing is when the structure from two languages occur side by side or alternated. It is presented by the clause of two languages. Clause is divided into two independent and dependent clause. Independent clause is the clause that can stand alone as a sentence because it contains a subject, a predicate and a complete thought. Dependent clause is the clause that cannot stand on its own as it is need to be attached to independent clause to form a complete sentence. The dominance between constituent of two languages is undefined. In this perspective, code-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mixing is similar to intra-sententially code-switching. The utterance written below is the sample data of alternation to be analyzed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Your touch absorbs other’s mind or feeling</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti halnya Dani menyerap tulisan</span><span class="font3">.” (page 31)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Your touch absorbs other’s mind or feeling</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">just like Dani absorbing writings</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is uttered by Mr. Yunus. He speaks English at first and mix it with Indonesian at the end. He puts the clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">your touch absorbs other’s mind or feeling</span><span class="font3">”. This code-mixing can be categorized as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">alternation</span><span class="font3">. The clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">your touch absorbs other’s mind or feeling</span><span class="font3">” is an independent clause because it has complete structure to stand by itself. The structure is subject, predicate, and object. If it is translated into Indonesian, it becomes “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sentuhanmu menyerap pikiran atau perasaan orang lain</span><span class="font3">”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">c. Congruent Lexicalization</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Congruent lexicalization &nbsp;&nbsp;code</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mixing is a material from different lexical inventories into a shared grammatical structure or to simplify the definition, it is the mixing of languages that close to each other in structure. According to Muysken, two of features in congruent lexicalization code-mixing are multi-constituent and affix borrowing. The utterance written below is the sample data of congruent lexicalization to be analyzed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Is it true </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">atau mereka hanya berusaha menjadi </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">drama queen</span><span class="font3">?” (page 30)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Is it true </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">or they just become a </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">drama queen</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is uttered by Riska. She begins the sentence with English, continuing with Indonesian and using English at the end. She puts the clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">is it true</span><span class="font3">” and the phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">drama queen</span><span class="font3">”. This code-mixing process can be classified into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">congruent lexicalization </span><span class="font3">as mentioned in Muysken’s theory about multiconstituent congruent lexicalization. The clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">is it true</span><span class="font3">” is a dependent clause because it has incomplete thought to stand by its own. As the characteristic of multi-constituent &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;congruent</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">lexicalization, an English phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">drama queen</span><span class="font3">” is inserted in the same utterance. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Drama queen</span><span class="font3">” is a noun phrase which the word “queen” performs as the head of phrase. This phrase cannot be interpreted literally, it is a common idiom for a person who shows excessive reactions over small problems. If it is observed from the syntactic structure perspective, the sample data above is a question sentence that offers two choices involving the word “or”, also known as an alternative question. The code-mixing process occurs in the first sentence of that question and as the object of the second sentence.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Analysis of Factors of Code-Mixing in Touché Novel</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social roles and relationships &nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">participants</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Social roles and relationships of participants is a factor that lead someone to mix codes when there is an unconscious agreement or disagreement on language choice. This means speaker’s code-mix depends on who are the participants and the relationship between the speaker and the interlocutor. Some examples from this factor in the novel are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maksud saya, kita sering mendengar atau membaca cerita pewaris</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">perusahaan besar mendapat tekanan sejak kecil, nggak </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">happy</span><span class="font3">,” (p.30)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dengan apa yang kumiliki ini, mana mungkin aku mau menukarnya hanya agar bisa hidup sebagai orang biasa? </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You must be joking</span><span class="font3">!” (p.30)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">All of those data are mixing of languages that taken from one sequence of event, data number (4) is the utterance by Riska and data number (5) is by Mr. Yunus. The author of the novel creates Mr. Yunus’ background as someone who is a college graduate from United States of America and describes him as someone who is frequently mixing languages of Indonesian and English in his utterance. While having a conversation with Mr. Yunus who are obviously bilingual, Riska makes an unconscious agreement on her language choice by inserting some English words within the Indonesian sentences. So does Mr. Yunus who is mixing the languages assuming that Riska knows English so well and does not get bothered with codemixing. This novel also shows that someone who is speaking with Mr. Yunus tends to mixing the codes of Indonesian – English more often compared to when speaking to other people. Both, Mr. Yunus and Riska are well aware of who the interlocutor is and they know that the interlocutor understand English. Thus, the data above prove that this factor plays a role in someone’s reason to mixing the codes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Situational factors</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Bhatia and Ritchie (2013), some languages are viewed as more &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;suited &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;particular</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">participant/social groups, settings, or topics than others. Situational factor is influencing the speaker to organize two languages according to some factors such as in which setting they are speaking at, the topics, and many other factors for</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">instance gender, religion, class, and age. Therefore, it causes each social group has different languages. Bhatia and Ritchie (2013) also state that organizing different languages in certain situation has some functions as well, for instance creating distance, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;suppressing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tabooness,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">informality, and intimacy to emotions. An example of occurance from this factor is:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Di Histoire de Ma Vie versi asli dijelaskan bahwa itulah sebabnya dia bisa menjadi </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">womanizer</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, penakluk wanita, karena dia bisa membaca pikiran mereka</span><span class="font3">.” (p. 38)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data above can be classified as having an influence from situational factor. It is can be said that the speaker is considering age of the interlocutor, one social variable according to Bhatia and Ritchie (2013). That is the utterance by Mr. Yunus to Dani, Indra and Riska who are much younger. The mixing of English is also used to avoid tabooness of the interaction. Thus the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">womanizer</span><span class="font3">” is used because it is considered more suitable and appropriate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Another proof that code-mixing is also influenced by social variable such as class is shown in almost all utterances by Mr. Yunus. As previously mentioned that Mr. Yunus is a college graduate from United States of America, he mixes Indonesian and English. Arman who is a professional chef in French tends to mix Indonesian and French. Mixing between languages has been used to show the breadth of their experience and class.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Message-intrinsic factor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">What is meant by message-intrinsic is based on linguistics and pragmatics aspects such as quotation, reiteration, message &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;qualification, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;topic-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">comment/relative clauses, hedging, interjections, idioms, and deep-rooted</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">cultural wisdom. Only five out of seven aspects occur and drive the language mixing in this novel. The example of message-intrinsic factor is discussed below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kau pasti &nbsp;pernah mendengar</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kalimat ini kan: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">What is food to one is to others bitter poison</span><span class="font3">.” (p. 194)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As shown in the data above, for something that is in form of idiom or related to cultural wisdom is preferably conveyed in the native language. This usually aims to avoid shifting in meaning and misinterpretation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language attitudes, dominance and security</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The last factor covers individual and social attitudes, language dominance, and linguistic security. For the attitudes, how the speech community views mixing positively or negatively depends on the frequency of bilinguals mix the code and whether it marks particular cultural or social identity or not. Language dominance is influenced by speaker’s language proficiency. Last, speaker’s security has to do with languages mixing of the bilinguals when they feel insecure (angry, tired, etc.). The example of language dominance factor is:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(8) “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kau punya </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">laptop</span><span class="font3">?” (p. 96)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The datum above is an utterance by Indra. The word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">laptop</span><span class="font3">” occurs several times in the novel. It is an English noun word. In Indonesian, this can be translated into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">komputer jinjing</span><span class="font3">”. Nevertheless, Indra and the other characters get used to say “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">laptop</span><span class="font3">” instead. This is a borrowing word from English. Therefore, it has been widely used in daily conversation, rather than the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">komputer jinjing</span><span class="font3">”. This proves that when a word from one language is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">continuously inserted into other language, it is dominated someone’s language.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis above, it can be concluded that there are 39 insertion code-mixing, 36 alternation code-mixing, and 10 congruent lexicalization codemixing found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Touché</span><span class="font3"> novel. It can be concluded that the most frequently occur is insertion code-mixing and congruent lexicalization code-mixing is the least frequent. In terms of word class categories, from the sample data that had been analyzed, the words being mixed are varied, such as words (i.e. nouns, adjectives, etc.), phrases (i.e. noun phrases, adverb phrases, etc.), and clauses (i.e. dependent and independent clauses).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As for the factor of code-mixing, it is proved that four factors contribute to be the trigger of using code-mixing in the novel. However, only five out of seven aspects in message-intrinsic factors are found. Those are quotation, reiteration, topic-comment/relative &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;clauses,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">interjections, and idioms and deep-rooted cultural wisdom.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. (2018). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Independent and Dependent Clauses</span><span class="font3">. Available from </span><a href="http://www.aims.edu"><span class="font3">http://www.aims.edu</span></a><span class="font3"> [Accessed on December 2018]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonim. (2018). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Word Classes and Phrase Classes</span><span class="font3">. Available from </span><a href="https://dictionary.cambridge.org"><span class="font3">https://dictionary.cambridge.org</span></a><span class="font3"> [Accessed on December 2018]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ansar, Fithrah A. (2017). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching and Code Mixing in TeachingLearning &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Process</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Education: Jurnal Tadris Bahasa Inggris Vol. 10 (1), 29-45.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bhatia, T. K., &amp;&nbsp;Ritchie, W. C. (2013). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Handbook of Bilingualism and Multilingualism 2nd edition</span><span class="font3">. UK: Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Girsang, Mei L. (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Code Switching and Code Mixing as Found in Television Advertisement</span><span class="font3">. The Explora Journal of English Language Teaching (ELT) and Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes, J. (2013). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kia, L. S., Cheng, X., Yee, T. K., &amp;&nbsp;Ling, C. W. (2011). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code-Mixing of English in the Entertainment News of Chinese Newspapers in Malaysia</span><span class="font3">. International Journal of English Linguistics Vol.1 No.1, 314.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kothari, C. (2004). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methodology Methods &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Techniques (Second Revised Edition)</span><span class="font3">. New Delhi: New Age International (P) Ltd., Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mujiono, Wilujeng, R., &amp;&nbsp;Suharto, M. (2017). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code Mixing as a Communication Strategy Performed by Outbound Call (OBC) Center Agents</span><span class="font3">. International Journal of Social Sciences &amp;&nbsp;Educational Studies Vol. 3 No. 3, 4-18.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mulyajati, E. (2017). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Indonesian-English Code-Mixing in Just Alvin Show at Metro TV</span><span class="font3">. Journal of English Language and Culture Vol. 7 No. 2, 57-63</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Muysken, P. (2000). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingual Speech: A Typology of &nbsp;Code-Mixing</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;UK:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oxford. (2011). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Learner's Pocket Dictionary</span><span class="font3">. UK: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudaryanto. (1993). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa (Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguistis)</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Torres, L. (2007). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">In the Contact Zone: Code-Switching Strategies by Latino/a Writers</span><span class="font3">. MELUS Vol. 32(1), &nbsp;&nbsp;75-96. Retrieved from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/300297"><span class="font3">http://www.jstor.org/stable/300297</span></a><span class="font3"> 07</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Van Valin, J. R. (2001). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Syntax</span><span class="font3">. UK: &nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, R. (2006). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics 5th Edition</span><span class="font3">. UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>