---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Cohesive Devices Found in Good-Bye"
author: "Putu Sandra Putri Astariani"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-62118 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-62118"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-62118"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">| </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">41</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 4 No. 1, February 2020 DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i01.p08"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2020.v04.i01.p08</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Cohesive Devices Found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Good-Bye</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Putu Sandra Putri Astariani</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Linguistic, Master Programme</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:Sandraputri.0808@gmail.com"><span class="font1">Sandraputri.0808@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font1">The basic definition of discourse is a language above sentences which is a cohesive, coherent, and functional. Cohesion and coherence are two vital elements constituting a discourse which are supported by the cohesive devices, i.e. reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunctions, and lexical cohesion. This article discusses the cohesion and coherence of discourse through the identification of its cohesive devices. An anecdote entitled Good-Bye is selected due to its simplicity yet intriguing language, therefore the subliminal messages can be delivered and revealed. By using the qualitative approach and method, the results of the analysis, covering the cohesive devices within the text, can be comprehensively described. The analysis was carried based on the theory of functional grammar by MAK Halliday from his book Halliday's Introduction to Functional Grammar by MAK Halliday (revised by Christian MIM Matthiessen), about the cohesive devices. In addition to this one, the theory of cohesive devices from the book Cohesion in English by MAK Halliday and Ruqaiyah Hasan is used as a supporting theory. Within this anecdote, four out of five cohesive devices proposed by Halliday and Hasan were found. They covered the reference, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical cohesion (reiteration and collocation). Unfortunately, substitution could not be found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1">Discourse, Cohesive Devices, Anecdotes, Cohesion, Coherence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are countless definitions of the discourse given by experts; however, the most essential one is that discourse is language above sentence that is functional, cohesive, and coherent. Halliday and Hasan (1976, p.1) take text as “a unit of language in use” which can be “any passage, spoken or written, of whatever length, that does form a unified whole”. While unlike Halliday and Hasan, Leech (in Wang and Guo, 2014:1) takes discourse as both written and spoken English. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976), two conditions must be fulfilled for a text to be coherent, i.e. a text must be consistent with the context in which it is created, the other is a text must have cohesion, which means all parts in a text must be connected by cohesive devices. In addition to Halliday and Hasan, van Dijk (1977) also shared his thought that coherence is a semantic property of discourse, based on the interpretation of each sentence relative to the interpretation of other sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As has been previously mentioned, a coherent text must be cohesive which is connected by cohesive devices, which consists of reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunctions, and lexical cohesion. The more frequent these devices are used in a text or a discourse, the more cohesive and coherent it will be.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In analyzing a discourse, accuracy, critical thinking, and good comprehension of its contents are required. These things are essential to give a deep explanation regarding what discourse is discussing and what messages are being or want to be delivered by the writer. The target or the object in discourse analysis is a unit of language above the sentence or utterance which has unity and context, can be a speech, manuscripts of recorded conversations, direct conversation, meeting notes, debates, lectures, or proselytizing religion and so forth (Purbani, 2005). They are not created on purpose and indeed portraying the real discourse in everyday life. As far as I am concerned, discourse analysis can also contribute to other disciplines since texts and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">discourses are the basic aspects of constructing any sciences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">One of the most popular discourses in public is a humorous or anecdotal discourse or anecdote. This article is trying to discover the cohesiveness of an anecdote through functional grammar and cohesion theory by applying the qualitative method. The theory, coined by MAK Halliday and Ruqaiyah Hassan, discuss a lot of things related to discourse. However, only one topic was taken to explain this issue in depth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>II.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methods and Procedures</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data used is in the form of written discourse taken from a magazine entitled Inspirasi Vol. XIV -No. 2 - July 2019 through the books.google.com page. This data is an anecdote (short humorous discourse or text). According to Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia (KBBI), an anecdote is cerita singkat yang menarik karena lucu dan mengesankan, biasanya mengenai orang penting atau terkenal berdasarkan kejadian yang sebenarnya (an interesting short story due to its funny and impressive content, it generally tells important or famous people based on actual events).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">An anecdote is commonly sarcastic and almost similar to metaphor; showing important or well-known figures who are close to everyday life; humorous, tickling, and contains a lot of jokes yet satirizes which is related to criticism purpose. An anecdote is chosen because of its simple language. Moreover, humorous discourse is more easily accepted by the community because of its light, non-wordy content, and similar situation as the society in general. In addition to what has been previously described, the most essential factor of choosing an anecdote for this research is the implied words and meaning. The subliminal messages lie within this text also becomes its challenges in analyzing this discourse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data were collected by using the documentation method supported note-taking technique. The documentation method focuses on language use either spoken or written. Sudaryanto ( 2015: 203) argues that this method is a way of obtaining data by paying attention to the use of language. The analysis was carried out descriptively by using a distributional method (metode agih). This means that the language is analyzed by using the determinants, in this case, the cohesive devices, found within it. To realize this method, the expansion technique is used (teknik perluasan) to analyze the unit of speech, besides this technique can be used to reveal the significance of a language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Although this research aims at finding all cohesive devices in an anecdote, unfortunately not all of them can be found. The results of the analysis were presented in an informal method in which data are</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">presented descriptively by using words without any presence of tables, equations, and numbers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The theory used as the basis in analyzing the data is the theory of Cohesive Devices proposed by MAK Halliday and Ruqaiyah Hasan from their book Cohesion in English. To support this, the Functional Grammar theory obtained from a book entitled Halliday's Introduction to Functional Grammar by M.A.K. Halliday and was revised by Christian M.I.M. Matthiessen was used. This book mainly talks about all elements required in discourse analysis. However, to limit the discussion, only the section of Cohesive Devices was used as guidelines. The grand theory states that five elements determine the cohesiveness of a discourse, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday (2014) stated that &quot;reference creates cohesion by creating links between elements&quot;, the point is reference connects a reference to the thing it refers to. Within a text or discourse, there are four types of frequently encountered reference, i.e. endophoric (if the elements associated with meaning are in the discourse) and exophoric (if the relationship occurs between the elements in the discourse with extralinguistic factors (elements outside the discourse), then endophoric can be divided into anaphoric (if an element refers to the previous element) and cataphoric (if an element in the discourse refers to the element afterward). Examples from each category are presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endophoric</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Three blind mice, three blind mice. See how they run! See how they run!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 31)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word they endophorically refers to the word mice (located exactly within the discourse). This kind of reference tends to be easier to discover since the readers are not required to know the context of the situation within the discourse. The words are guiding them, instead.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exophoric</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">For he’s a good jolly fellow and so say all of us. (Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this sentence, the reference he refers to an element outside the discourse. This element is unknown unless the context of the situation is recognized by reading and comprehending a whole discourse.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cataphoric</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">One boy kicks the ball and it goes through the window and the ball breaks the window. (Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cataphorical reference is being portrayed here since the word it refers to the noun phrase the ball. This phrase is exactly located after the word it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anaphoric</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Three boys are playing football and one boy kicks the ball and it goes through the window</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word it is anaphorically referring to the noun phrase the ball, which exactly presents in the previous clause. In this sentence, there are three clauses separated by a conjunction and where the ball belongs to the second clause, while the word it follows the last clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substitution and Ellipsis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Substitution and ellipsis are the cohesive devices after reference. Both may have similarities with references, but reference plays its role in the level of meaning (semantic level), while substitution and ellipsis significantly play a role in the level of phrases and clauses (syntactic level). Substitution is done to avoid repetition. While the notion of ellipsis carries the meaning of removal since it removes the elements of a sentence or discourse that has been mentioned previously. Ellipses can also be called zero substitution (replacement with empty elements). Both substitution and ellipsis can be divided into three types, namely: nouns, verbs, and clauses. Each instance is shown as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.2.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal, Verbal, and Clause Substitution Nominal: “Jan loves to drink beer. He has one every day.” One substitutes the word beer.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Verbal: “Jan loves to drink beer. He does every day.” Does substitutes the verb phrase loves to drink</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Clausal: “Does Jan love to drink beer?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I believe so [that he does, that he loves to drink beer].”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word so substitutes the clause he loves to drink beer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Halliday and Hasan in Cohesion in English (1976)).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.2.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal, Verbal, and Clause Ellipsis Nominal: “Would you like another beer?”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“Yes, another [beer] please.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word another is not necessarily followed by the word beer since it has been previously mentioned</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Verbal: &nbsp;“Jan drank beer and Tomas [drank]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">slivovice”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word drink is not required anymore since it has been mentioned in the previous clause.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Clausal: “Jan and his friends all had a beer this evening. Jan had his usual pilsner. Tomas had a summer ale and Marek [had a summer ale] too.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The clause had a summer ale is removed since it is the same as the previous one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Halliday and Hasan in Cohesion in English (1976) the explanation is excluded).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday and Hasan in Cohesion in English stated that &quot;Conjunctive elements are cohesive not in themselves but indirectly, under their specific meanings; they are not primarily devices for reaching out into the preceding (or following) text, but they express certain meanings which presuppose the presence of other components in the discourse.&quot; A conjunction can be defined as a phrase used to connect one element with the others, therefore readers can understand the connection of an idea with other ideas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conjunctions can be divided into three categories, namely Elaborating where one clause expands another by elaborating on it (or some portion of it): restating in other words, specifying in greater detail, commenting, or exemplifying; Extending which means one clause expands another by extending beyond it: adding some new element, giving an exception to it, or offering an alternative, and Enhancing where one clause expands another by embellishing around it: qualifying it with some circumstantial feature of time, place, cause or condition. (Halliday and Matthiessen, 2014: 444).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Cohesion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Lexical cohesion occurs due to the selection of certain words in the discourse. As stated by Halliday and Hasan (1976: 274) “This is the cohesive effect achieved by the selection of vocabulary”. Lexical cohesion consists of reiteration and collocation. Reiteration is a repetition of a lexicon by using the same word, or more general terms, such as synonyms and superordinates. An example of reiteration is presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and, when she had looked under it, it happened to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it. She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, ...</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accordingly ... I took leave, and turned to the ascent of the peak. The climb is perfectly easy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">...</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Henry is bought himself a new Jaguar. He practically lives in the car.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 278)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first example portrays a reiteration by using the same word, namely mushroom in the sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">There was a large mushroom growing near her</span><span class="font1"> and the same word is repeated in the sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">peeped over the edge of the mushroom, &nbsp;</span><span class="font1">&nbsp;the second example shows reiteration by using synonymy, i.e. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">climb</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ascent</span><span class="font1">. Meanwhile, the last example shows</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the use of superordinates, namely the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">car</span><span class="font1"> is the superordinate of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jaguar</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Collocation is another aspect of lexical cohesion, meaning a combination of words in pair which cannot be replaced with another combination. In other words, it has a definite pair. Examples of collocations are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">heavy rain</span><span class="font1">, instead of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thick rain</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">to look for a job</span><span class="font1">, instead of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">to search for a job</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore, Halliday and Hasan also asserted that “any two lexical items have similar patterns of collation - that is, tending to appear in similar contexts will generate a cohesive force if they occur in adjacent sentences”. This means that two collocated lexicon tends to appear in a similar context and will be cohesive when they appear in adjacent sentences, such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">candle ... flame ... flicker </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hair ... comb ... curl ... wave</span><span class="font1"> (Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 286).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark5"></a>III.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The following data are presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah keluarga sedang pergi ke Disney Land. Setelah melewati liburan yang menyenangkan dan melelahkan, mereka kembali ke rumah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Saat mereka meninggalkan Disney Land, anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Mickey.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lalu si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Minnie.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kemudian si ayah juga melambaikan tangan dan dengan lemahnya berkata, “Goodbye, Money.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Reference is found in the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mereka</span><span class="font1"> in the clause </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mereka kembali ke rumah</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saat mereka meninggalkan disney land...</span><span class="font1"> refers to the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">keluarga</span><span class="font1">. This reference is anaphoric, since it refers to the previous element. This is strengthen by the fact that the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mereka</span><span class="font1"> cannot be determined without the presence of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">keluarga</span><span class="font1"> in the previous sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substitution</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">No substitution is found even though it should be presented within the discourse. In making anecdotes, substitution is often removed and the author tends to use repeated sentences to attract the reader's attention to know what will happen next. The following sentences are showing how the discourse would be if the substitution was used:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Saat mereka meninggalkan Disney Land, anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Mickey.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lalu si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Minnie.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kemudian si ayah juga </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">melakukan hal yang sama </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dengan lemahnya berkata, “Goodbye, Money.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Substitution occurs by using the phrase melakukan hal yang sama to replace the phrase melambaikan tangan. This kind of substitution is classified as verbal substitution where the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan</span><span class="font1"> and replaced by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melakukan hal yang sama.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ellipsis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Sometimes it is very tricky to distinguish between substitution and ellipsis. However, this is portraying how ellipsis works within the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“...Setelah melewati liburan yang menyenangkan dan (liburan yang) melelahkan.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The previous sentence consists of two clauses that are paratactically connected by conjunction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan</span><span class="font1">, i.e. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">liburan yang menyenangkan</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">liburan yang melelahkan</span><span class="font1">. The ellipsis occurs in the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">liburan yang</span><span class="font1"> since it has been stated in the previous clause. Therefore, it will be ineffective to repeat the same thing, and as a result, repetition can be avoided. In addition to this phrase, another instance of ellipsis is also found in the following sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“..., anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan (anak laki-laki) berkata...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Two clauses are constructing this sentence, namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan</span><span class="font1"> and anak </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">laki-laki berkata</span><span class="font1">. These two clauses are parataxis in relationship connected by the same conjunction and. These clauses have the same phrases constructing them, namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anak laki-laki</span><span class="font1">. As a result, ellipsis occurs in the second clause to avoid repetition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“..., si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan (si anak perempuan juga) berkata...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The next case of ellipsis is found in this sentence involving two clauses namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si anak perempuan juga berkata</span><span class="font1">. Both of these clauses are connected with conjunction and are constructed by the same phrases, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si anak perempuan</span><span class="font1">. As a result, ellipsis occurs to create effective sentences and repetition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“...si ayah juga melambaikan tangan dan (si ayah) dengan lemahnya berkata...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence above consists of two clauses namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si ayah juga melambaikan tangan</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(si ayah) dengan lemahnya berkata</span><span class="font1">. These two clauses are paratactically connected with conjunctions and. Constructed by the same phrase, namely </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si ayah</span><span class="font1">, ellipsis occurs on the second clause since the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si ayah</span><span class="font1"> has been clearly stated in the first clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conjunctions found in this discourse are setelah, saat, lalu, kemudian, and dan. The analysis of each conjunction is explained as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4.1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setelah</span><span class="font1"> (After)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conjunction setelah or after in English, links the clause </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melewati liburan yang menyenangkan dan melelahkan</span><span class="font1"> and the clause </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mereka kembali ke rumah</span><span class="font1">, according to Halliday (2014) these clauses have a hypotactic relationship (unequal relationship). It belongs to the category of enhancing, to be more specific, it belongs to the category of simple-spatio temporal-enhancing which means a clause extends other clauses by &quot;embellishing&quot; these clauses, giving them features of time, place, cause, and condition. The data portrays that as conjunction, setelah shows the time feature when the family returns home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">dependent and one independent clause. Therefore, the presence of a dependent clause is exactly required by the independent one. The conjunction saat is contributing to the category classification into enhancing, which means a clause extends another clause by &quot;embellishing&quot; the clause, giving it features of time, place, cause, and condition. The occurrence of saat indicates the time or period when the boy's activity was done.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4.4.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lalu</span><span class="font1"> (Then)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Minnie.”</span><span class="font1"> is related to the previous sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Saat mereka meninggalkan Disney Land, anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Mickey”.</span><span class="font1"> Each of them is linked with the conjunction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lalu</span><span class="font1"> (then) to express the sequence of events in order. This conjunction is categorized as enhancing, specifically in simple-spatio temporal-enhancing, where a clause extends another clause by &quot;embellishing&quot; the clause, giving it a feature of time, place, cause, and condition. In this sentence, the condition described is a continuation in which the girl also does the same thing as the boy in the family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4.2.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dan</span><span class="font1"> (And)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conjunction dan (and) belongs to the category of extending, especially in positive-additive-extending where a clause expands another clause by adding new elements, providing exceptions to the clause and alternatives. There are several clauses connected by conjunction dan, i.e....</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan berkata...; Lalu si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Minnie.”; ...si ayah juga melambaikan tangan dan dengan lemahnya berkata...;</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">setelah melewati liburan yang menyenangkan dan melelahkan.</span><span class="font1"> All of these sentences have a paratactic relationship/equal relationship since they are all constructed by an independent clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4.3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Saat</span><span class="font1"> (When)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Although Halliday and Matthiessen did not explain anything about this conjunction, when has a similar meaning to meanwhile. This is categorized as durative-spatio-temporal-enhancing since it extends other clauses by &quot;embellishing&quot; these clauses, giving them features of time, place, cause, and condition. The conjunction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saat</span><span class="font1"> (when) links the clause </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mereka meninggalkan Disney Land</span><span class="font1"> with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">anak laki-laki melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Mickey.”</span><span class="font1">. These clauses have a hypothetical or unequal relationship since it is constructed by one</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.4.5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kemudian (Afterwards)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Similar to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lalu</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kemudian</span><span class="font1"> also shows the sequence of events in order. This conjunction is used to connect the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">...si ayah juga melambaikan tangan dan dengan lemahnya berkata, “Goodbye, Money”</span><span class="font1"> with another sentence, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lalu si anak perempuan juga melambaikan tangan dan berkata, “Goodbye, Minnie.”.</span><span class="font1"> Having the same category as the previous conjunction, namely simple-spatiotemporal-enhancing, this conjunction contributes to embellishing the clause connected with the feature of time and place, even in this context, situation. The sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">si ayah juga melambaikan tangan dan dengan lemahnya berkata, “Goodbye, Money” </span><span class="font1">denotes a condition where the father regrets that he had spent too much money on family’s holiday.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis, most of the conjunctions found are explicit conjunctions since they are explicitly shown or written within the discourse to link or connect the clauses. Thus the coherence and cohesion are fulfilled.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Cohesion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As the last element required to make a discourse both cohesive and coherent, lexical cohesion, unlike the other aspects, is broad. It does not have any clear patterns nor exact rules in determining this aspect. Lexical cohesion is divided into two, namely, reiteration and collocation. The type of reiteration</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">found is repetition by using the same word or clause. This is indicated in the following sentence:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Saat mereka meninggalkan Disney Land, anak laki-laki </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan dan berkata</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, “Goodbye, Mickey.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lalu si anak perempuan juga </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan dan berkata</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, “Goodbye, Minnie.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kemudian si ayah juga </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan dengan lemahnya </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">berkata</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, “Goodbye, Money.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan dan berkata</span><span class="font1"> is used three times within the discourse. Instead of using substitution, reiteration is chosen to attract the reader’s enthusiasm toward the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition to reiteration, collocation is an interesting aspect found here. It is applied in the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melambaikan tangan</span><span class="font1"> (waving hand). Based on the Oxford Online Dictionary, to wave means a movement of your arm and hand from side to side. Thus logically, the action of waving is only conducted by using hands, not leg nor head. Therefore, the word melambaikan/waving can only occur with the word tangan/hand(s) making them into a fixed pair of words or collocation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark7"></a>IV.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis, for a discourse to be cohesive and coherent, having cohesive devices is a must. The anecdote portrays how almost all of the cohesive devices are effectively used, thus the meaning and the purpose are well-delivered to the readers. In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Good-Bye</span><span class="font1">, there are four out of five cohesive devices found, namely reference, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical cohesion. Unfortunately, there is no indication of substitution is used. Based on the theory of cohesive devices proposed by Halliday and Hasan in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1"> (1976) and Halliday and Mathiessen in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font1"> (2014), all of the devices were analyzed in depth. Although substitution is missing, it can be used, yet due to the nature of anecdote that tends to repeat words to attract the attention of the reader, then substitution is not used. This study is expected to have implications and contributions to both theory and the learning process of the Indonesian language through a discourse, therefore, any suggestions and advice are welcome for the sake of the development of this article.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark9"></a>V.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Halliday MAK and Christian MIM Matthiessen. (ed.). &nbsp;&nbsp;2014. Halliday's Introductions to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Functional Grammar. Routledge, United Kingdom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Halliday, MAK and Ruqaiyah Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in English. Hong Kong: Sheck Wah Tong Printing Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://corpora.unileipzig.de/en/res?corpusId=en"><span class="font1">https://corpora.unileipzig.de/en/res?corpusId=en</span></a><span class="font1"> g_news_2016&amp;word=bath &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(accessed &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">November 26, 2019)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://elt-resourceful.com/tag/ellipsis-and-substitution/"><span class="font1">https://elt-resourceful.com/tag/ellipsis-and-substitution/</span></a><span class="font1"> (accessed 26 November 2019)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://kbbi.web.id/"><span class="font1">https://kbbi.web.id/ </span></a><span class="font1">(accessed 26 November 2019)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://staffnew.uny.ac.id/upload/131874171/pen"><span class="font1">http://staffnew.uny.ac.id/upload/131874171/pen</span></a><span class="font1"> gabdian/discourse-analysis.pdf (accessed 26 November 2019)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inspiration Magazine Vol. XIV July 2, 2019</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Karadeniz, Abdulkerim. 2017. Cohesion and Coherence in Written Texts of Students of Faculty of Education. Journal of Education and Training StudiesVol. 5, No.2 February 2017 </span><a href="https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1125748.pdf"><span class="font1">(https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1125748.pdf)</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kridalaksana, Harimurti. 2008. Kamus Linguistik. Jakarta: &nbsp;Pt. Gramedia Pustaka</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Utama.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[10</span><a href="https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/"><span class="font1">] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/</span></a><span class="font1"> (accessed 26 November 2019)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wang, Yuan and Minghe Guo. 2014. A Short Analysis of Discourse Coherence. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;460-465</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.academypublication.com/issues/past/jltr/vol05/02/27.pdf"><span class="font1">(http://www.academypublication.com/issues/past</span></a><span class="font1"> </span><a href="http://www.academypublication.com/issues/past/jltr/vol05/02/27.pdf"><span class="font1">/jltr/vol05/02/27.pdf)</span></a></p>