---
layout: full_article
title: "Coffee Tourism: from Home Products to Attractions"
author: "Vincent Leewellyn, Santi Palupi"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-57861 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-57861"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-57861"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font5">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.7. No.1. (2020): 88-100</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Coffee Tourism: from Home Products to Attractions</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Vincent Sylvester Leewellyn and Santi Palupi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Hotel Business Program, Podomoro University</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Corresponding Author: </span><a href="mailto:vinsyl1303@gmail.com"><span class="font6">vinsyl1303@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">ARTICLE INFO &nbsp;&nbsp;ABSTRACT</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">28 February 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Accepted 01 March 2020</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">The development of rural destinations is currently one of the strategies to increase the level of welfare for the community. Indonesia, besides having natural resources, also has others potential resources such as culture, ethnicity, local languages, and many more. Those potentials</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Available online 31 March 2020</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">can be further developed as rural destinations. This research reaches the exploratory stage to find out what is potential, excellence and what must be done in order to become a rural destination. A qualitative approach is used in this study with Head Village in Sukadana along with community leaders and organizational groups such as Youth Organization, KOMPEPAR (The Driving Force for Tourism), BUMDes (Village-Owned Enterprises), etc. The result of this research finds out the potential resources that already exist in Sukadana like Natural Resources (Cikondang Waterfall, Gunung Padang Site and Tea Plantation) and Human made – not originally designed to attract Tourists and also suggest the activities that will improve the attractions. The conclusion finds that the village community still need more improvement in knowledges and skills about rural destinations, and also the local government is still not realized yet for Sukadana Village potential resources to be a rural destination.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font6">Keywords: Coffee, Tourism, Attractions, Rural Destination</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Tourism is one the considerations in improving the economy in many countries. With the increasing number of tourists, economic growth in tourism destinations can be increased. Indonesia has natural resources, culture, ethnicity, local languages, which is a potential in developing tourism and the economy. The data from the International Coffee</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Organization (ICO), shows that Indonesia is the fourth largest coffee producer in 2018. Brazil is still the largest coffee producer in the world, followed by Vietnam and Colombia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Coffee production has not only become the source of revenues, like export, but also can be developed into a unique and interesting tourism that can be developed into tourist destination through </span><span class="font5">e-ISSN: 2407-392X. p-ISSN: 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">the rural surrounding coffee producers. The other way to develop a rural into tourist destination is to make the potential into attractions that can bring tourists, which is certainly supported by adequate facilities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">This research is useful to improve the socio-economic community through the development of resources that are owned to provide added values for increasing the economy for communities. The interesting in this study is the history of coffee in Indonesia during the Dutch colonial era. Rooseboom (2014) stated that it began in 1616 where Indonesia was still in Dutch colonialism. At that time, coffee merchants wanted to monopolize coffee, where the seeds of fertile or living plants were not allowed to be exported out of the Arabian Peninsula. Pieter Van den Broecke, merchant and administrator of The Netherlands East India Company (VOC – </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie</span><span class="font6">), managed to bring coffee plants from Mocha, Yemen and brought them to the Netherlands. However, one of the difficulties is Netherlands is not suitable for large-scale cultivation because of the climate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Therefore in 1696, the VOC succeeded in sending live coffee plants to Batavia (now Jakarta) to be planted on Java. Where 10 years later, the VOC</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">brought coffee beans from Batavia to Amsterdam to be planted in the Hortus, one of the oldest botanical gardens in Europe. (Lasmiyati, 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Around the 1700s, the VOC required residents in the Batavia and mountainous regions of West Java (Parahyangan) and the local governments (regents) to be obliged to send coffee beans in accordance with the contracts imposed by the VOC. The regents should ensure that people plant coffee, maintains plantations and provide coffee in good quality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">According to Breman (2014), in 1726, the VOC became the largest coffee distributor, from which half to third quarter of the coffee trade in the world came. The majority was from Cianjur region. Aria Wiratanu III, at that time who served as Regent of Cianjur I, produced and contributed the most coffee in the regions, which greatly benefited the VOC (Suriadinigrat, 1982).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Based on the history above, it can be seen that coffee plantations in Indonesia experienced rapid progress in the Dutch colonial era, and the highest quality coffee producing regions were in the Cianjur area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Coffee as one of the attractions in rural destinations, can include history,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">processes, and traditions as well as the</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">ways to enjoy coffee from each of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">characteristics of the area. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">development of rural destinations in this study is the development of coffee farming-based tourism, conducted in Sukadana Village, Campaka District, Cianjur Regency, Indonesia.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1706</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">VOC brought the results of coffee beans to Amsterdam to be planted in the Hortus, Eurooe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1724</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Theyield of about 1 million pounds of coffee IssenttoAmsterdam</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1727</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yield increased to 4 million pounds of coffee</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">&gt;1736</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The enthusiasm of the population decreased because what was paid to the Regent and the farmers was very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1870</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Elimination Policy of CuItUjJr⅞-tfi</span><span class="font3">∣</span><span class="font0">¾</span><span class="font3">∣</span><span class="font0"><sup>for al1 </sup>crops, except coffee</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1696</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">VOC brought coffee plants to Batavia and planted them in lava</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">____, Around 1700</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">VOC required residents in the Batavia area and the Java area to send coffee beans according to the contract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><sub>1</sub> 1726</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">VOC become the largest coffee distributor in the world</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yield increased to 6 million pounds of coffee (the majority were produced from the 03PM</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">■</span><span class="font0"> areal</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1830</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Enforcement of Forced Planting Systems ttmΛU</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Around 1900</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Elimination Policy of Q4W5⅛Mfor coffee</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Picture 1. History of Coffee is grown in Indonesia during Dutch Colonial era</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>LITERATURE REVIEW</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Developed countries see tourism as the fastest-growing industry nowadays, according to Bishop (2014), these countries see the advantages by make Tourism as a priority of the development strategy. Tourism industry has the potential to be able to have a positive and negative impact on development and the environment. The positive impact that can occur in the region is to increase the</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">economy, while the negative impacts that occur due to the number of tourists are cultural shifts, waste/pollution/waste produced increased and also there will be many social problems that arise. The problems that arise need to be handled properly so that they cannot be addressed and overcome along with the development of tourism. United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), focuses on the tourism development to improve the economy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">There are several studies that have shown that tourist attraction is very necessary in understanding the elements that encourage people to travel (Formica, 2002). The attraction of tourist destination, if there is more factors can meet the needs of tourists, that can be considered attractive and more tourists will come to these destinations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Tourist Attractions are potential tourism that can be possessed by destinations, where the attractions can make tourists enjoy their vacation more. These attractions can cover all forms of natural and human-made resources, including culture, heritage, history, architecture, traditional arts, food, music, and craft that can attract tourists (Walsh-Heron, 1990; Crouch &amp;&nbsp;Ritchie, 1999; Goeldner &amp;&nbsp;Ritchie, 2003)</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Attractions that can also attract tourist are attractions that can involve tourists actively in these activities, for example when we talk about coffee attractions, tourist can do some activities such as picking coffee cherries, then processing the cherries to separate from cherries and seeds, then the roasting process of the coffee beans. The attraction that can be interactive is the process of making a coffee drinks which will be taught and shown in the process and how to enjoy coffee traditionally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">According to Swarbrooke (1995), states that there are four categories in the development of coffee attractions, including:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural attractions, such as the area of coffee plantations, landscapes, natural resources around such as waterfall and many more.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human made – not originally designed to attract tourists, such as building houses in a coffee plantation area that is used for various activities in processing coffee plants</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human made and purpose built to attract tourist, like a coffee museum (which can explain history), traditional methods of enjoy the coffee, and many more</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Festivals and special events, such as coffee festival, coffee competition, and harvesting traditional coffee</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">The concern and attraction in coffee is the area of coffee plantations because the coffee beans are still traditionally processed. The nature and layout of the coffee plantations as well as the surrounding area will be an attraction which bring distinctive character of the coffee produced there. Petit (2007) states that in Ethiopia, one of the important aspects to keep and promote the heritage and culture is the traditional coffee making ceremony.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>METHODOLOGY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">This study utilized a qualitative descriptive method to study and describe the potentials, existing problems, and the subjective potentials that exists in the community in the rural that can make the development succeed. This method is also used because it will include observations about &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;environmental &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;conditions,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">interactions that occur in the community, activities of coffee farmers, existing local wisdom and can determine the extent of community acceptance in the changes that occur in the process of developing the rural destination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The sampling technique was purposive sampling technique. Selected samples taken to have important roles in determining the development of rural destinations, as well as the stakeholders in the area, which consist of rural officials, community leaders, youth leaders, academics, tourists, community and local government.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The data collection technique was Focus Group Discussion (FGD), which aims at finding out the aspirations and needs of the community in developing rural tourism. The FGD is conduct with Village Head along with the community leaders and organizational groups such as Youth Organization, KOMPEPAR (The Driving Force for Tourism), BUMDes (Village-Owned Enterprises), etc.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESULTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">The location of the study took place in Sukadana Village, Campaka District, Cianjur Regency, Indonesia. This is an area of around 1,313 hectares, with population of 5,908 people, consisting of 2,977 men and 2,931 women, mostly farmers. Rainfall ranges from 1,500 – 2,000 mm/year. It is located 900 – 1,100 meters above sea level and the temperature ranges from 19 – 28 degree Celcius. The humidity averages 65%/year.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana village borders on other villages such as Giri Mukti village in the North, Campaka village in the South, Sukajadi village in the East and Wangunjaya village in the West. There are some natural resources that can be enjoyed around the Campaka sub-district such as Gunung Padang Site, Cikondang Waterfall and Gunung Campaka Tea Plantation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana village is an agricultural area where most of this area is filled with green plains, with the main livelihoods being farmers, farm laborers. For natural products, Sukadana village produces several agricultutal products, such as coffee, tea, banana, chili, tomato, tubers, avocado, edamame and many more.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana Village Head, Campaka sub-district, Cianjur Regency, Mr. Karmawan, said that the agricultural products are very diverse, it depends on the market demand. However, they are currently focusing on Coffee, which after being explored more deeply, the history shown that Cianjur was the Best and the Biggest producer of coffee in the Dutch colonial period.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana village has started running Arabica Coffee plantations since 2012. Already 6 years now, their production has almost reached 125 tons. In this 2019, 180,000 trees will be planted, in</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">which the 71,000 trees will be from the rural budget and the remaining will be paid by from West Java Province.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The interesting thing from the taste of coffee from Sukadana, that the Arabica Coffee that produced has an orange (citrus) aroma. This aroma makes the characteristic of Sukadana Coffee. The coffee tree planting system is planted through intercropping along with orange trees and banana trees. According to the Village Head and the residents, this makes the Sukadana Coffee has a distinctive aroma of orange (citrus).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">There are more than 600 farmers that manage more than 200 hectares of Arabica Coffee plantations in Sukadana. After the coffee harvested, will be accommodated by Gapoktan (Combined Farmers Group). This fact shows that the development of rural destination in Sukadana focus on Coffee Tourism. The economic conditions in Sukadana are very dependent on the products that sold to wholesaler, which causes very low selling price. For the example like greenbean of coffee are sold around 2 – 4 USD per kilogram, depending on the quality grade produced.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Being a rural destination, open the opportunities to improve the economy of the communities in Sukadana. This is</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">because it can open access for direct marketing the high quality of Arabica Coffee to consumers or tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Table 1. Overview of the Conditions of the Sukadana Village</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Valuation Items</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Sukadana Village</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Geographical</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Total area </span><span class="font2">± </span><span class="font4">1,313 hectares</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Located at an altitude 900 –</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">1,100 meters above sea level</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The temperature is 19-28 degrees Celsius</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Humidity level </span><span class="font2">± </span><span class="font4">65%/year</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Demographic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Total population 5,908 people, that divided into 2,977 men and 2,931 women</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are </span><span class="font2">±</span><span class="font4">215 families who own agricultural land from 628 farm families</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are ±344 families who own plantation land from 744 family plantations</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Economy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The majority of livelihoods are farmers and ranchers</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agricultural products are corn, beans, tubers, chilies, tomatoes, eggplants, oranges, avocados, bananas, papaya, etc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plantation products are coffee, tea, cloves, pepper and nutmeg</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Livestock products are cattle, buffalo, &nbsp;&nbsp;free-range &nbsp;chicken,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">goats, and sheep</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agricultural &nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;livestock</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">products &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sold &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">middlemen/wholesaler &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">entrepreneurs</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are also employees of private companies and civil servants</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gold mining</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sociocultural</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">a. Pencak Silat</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Infrastructure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are 6 Maternal and Child Health Services dan 1 Health Center</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Electricity available</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are 1 PAUD (early childhood education programs),</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">4 elementary school, 1 junior high school, and 3 Islamic boarding schools</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">d. There are already fine roads in the residential areas. But the road to go to tourist attractions such as Cikondang Waterfall and Tea Plantation is still rocky road</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Potensi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tempat Wisata</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gunung Padang Site</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cikondang Waterfall c. Campaka Tea Plantation</span></p></li></ul></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font6">Based on the table above shows sufficient conditions and potential to be developed as a rural destination. The plan to develop rural destinations is one strategy to increase community income. Being the rural destination, Sukadana will be known by others area that produce coffee which has a distinctive aroma of orange (citrus)</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Discussion and implications</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">The development of coffee-based rural destination can also believe to create a balance of the environment, socioculture and economy in the community. The balance of the environment will certainly avoid the occurrence of the conversion of agricultural land. The balance of socio-cultural factors, it can enhance the role and cooperation between communities due to having one common goal, developing a rural destination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Against economic factors, it will increase the economy from several sector such as agricultural products, tourist attraction packages, and homestay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Rural destinations as a form of integration between accommodation, attractions and supporting facilities presented in one unit. This requires the desire and commitment of all levels of society that exist in developing the rural destination. According to Abdillah (2016) development of tourism destinations significantly affected the level of community involvement. Its means that development of destination needs to gather all level of society to involve in development.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">According to Swarbrooke (1995), states that there are four categories in the development of attractions, such as Natural Attractions, Human made – not originally designed to attract tourists, Human made – Purpose built to attract tourists, and Festival / Special Events. If viewed from the condition of Sukadana, it is very possible to develop attractions, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural Attractions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana has several Natural Attractions such as Cikondang Waterfall and Gunung Padang Site.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cikondang Waterfall</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Cikondang waterfall is known as the Little Niagara and has height of 50 meters. Cikondang waterfall is not a form of original spring, but from the end of a river that falls from a large cliff. The shape Cikondang waterfall is similar to Niagara Falls, it’s just smaller. The condition of Cikondang Waterfall can be a tourist attraction. It’s just that there needs to be attention from the local government to be able to provide supporting facilities such as public bathrooms, or adequate trash bins.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gunung Padang Site</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">The Gunung Padang site is a hill located in Karyamukti Village, Campaka District, Cianjur Regency, West Java. Bukit Padang has 300 steps. It has an area of about 4,000 meters with an altitude of 885 meters above sea level. The Gunung Padang site has a lot of menhirs and dakon stones from andesite which contain high iron content. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">site has five terraces that make it even more attractive. This is usually used for worship and pilgrimage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">On the first terrace, it is thought to be a performing arts scene with serimpi dance. On this terrace there are also gong stones and gamelan stones that are pitched when hit. The first terrace is also called Pamuka Lawang (opening door), characterized by two stones that stand in a position like a door.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">On the second terrace, there is a granarys stone, a stone sitting and a stone of view to Mount Gede -Pangrango. On the third terrace, called the Crown of the World, On the fourth terrace, there is a stone with Kujang carvings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">On the fifth terrace is called a throne. There is a Throne stone which is a place where Prabu Siliwangi relaxes when meditating or calming down.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The name Gunung Padang, taken from the words Padang in Javanese and Sundanese means Light. When we stand from Mount Padang, we can see the</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">City of Sukabumi, Cianjur Cipanas, and Bandung. The orientation of the direction from Mount Padang is facing Gunung Gede. In 2014, Gunung Padang was made the President's National Cultural Reserve.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human made – not originally designed to attract Tourists</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gunung Campaka Tea Plantation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">This plantation is located in Campaka Village, Campaka District, Cianjur Regency with an altitude of 900 - 1,200 meters above sea level. With an average temperature of 24-27 degrees Celsius and has an area of around 765 hectares.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coffee Farm</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana Village has around 200 hectares of coffee plantation land which in the future will continue to be developed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coffee Processing Facilities</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana Village already has a location to process coffee fruit that has been picked from the plantation. Equipment owned by Sukadana such as Pulping Machine, Grader (coffee bean</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">sorting machine), Roasting Machine and Grinder</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human made – purpose built to attract tourists</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana does not yet have attractions that are specifically made to attract tourists. The attractions that can be made by Sukadana related to plantations are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The coffee processing process, this can be started from the process of picking coffee fruit directly from the coffee plantation, then proceed with the processing of coffee such as putting coffee fruit into Pulping Machine which functions in separating fruit from coffee beans, drying the coffee beans in a traditional way such as drying seeds outdoor coffee, then sorting coffee beans in terms of the size and quality of coffee beans, roasting the coffee beans to the desired level, and the process of making coffee drinks that can be enjoyed afterwards</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Coffee Museum, can make a kind of storyline, where according to history Cianjur is the largest and best coffee-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">producing region in Indonesia and even throughout the world during the Dutch colonial era VOC. This can be started from the collection of images and evidence that can be packaged in such a way that can attract tourists.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Homestay Program, where this program allows tourists to feel the living and living conditions the same as the natives in Sukadana. Where it will be very interesting because tourists must be able to follow the original work of the host of each Homestay, such as farmers, breeders, etc</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Festival and special events</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Sukadana does not yet have a Festival or Special Events to attract tourists. It has already begun to be planned for making events related to the potential possessed such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Manual &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Brewing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Competition, Sukadana can make the Manual Brewing competition locally and nationally,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coffee Festival, which invites the area around Sukadana to be able to introduce the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">characteristics of each region. This can increase awareness of coffee business people to be able to reintroduce history which states the best quality is in the Cianjur area.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coffee Harvesting Traditional, can be packaged for traditional coffee harvesting activities for tourists. Where the processing process is traditional without using a machine.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Looking at some of the above, it can be seen that Sukadana is very feasible in being a Rural Destinations, where there is wealth and beauty of nature, the potential of the community can be developed to tourism awareness and from the infrastructure side it already good and can be improved even more. This is one of the factors that causes satisfaction and loyalty of tourists. Based on study of Amelia and Palupi (2016) customers satisfaction significantly influenced domestic tourists’ loyalty.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">From the research process that has been carried out, there are several things that can be concluded, it is expected:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The people in Sukadana are very open to rural destinations development programs. This was indicated by the Village Head and the organization to be able to attend the training and guidance provided. It also needs to be strengthened by the desire and commitment in developing Sukadana into a rural destination.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The potential possessed by Sukadana is very huge in being a rural destination, including:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">a. &nbsp;Has abundant natural wealth</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">for agricultural products such as Coffee, Tea, Banana, Bulbs -Tubes, Chili, Tomatoes, Avocados, and many more,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">b. &nbsp;Has natural attractions, such as</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Cikondang waterfall, Tea Plantation and especially the Gunung Padang Site.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The natural superiority has not been organized and managed in tourism development. There must be an effort and awareness with the whole community if they want to make Sukadana a rural destination.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stakeholders &nbsp;in this &nbsp;case the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Government does not yet fully know and understand in supporting</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">the development plan of Sukadana to become a rural destination.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The village community is not ready to become a tourism organizer. This will be supported by holding several trainings related to the development of rural destinations, such as the introduction of the world of tourism, attraction building, homestay management, ways &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of behaving and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">communicating to tourists, etc. There needs to be a strong desire and joint commitment in developing into a rural destination.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Limitation of this study and suggestions for future study</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This research is only conducted from January to March 2019.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study only looks at the potential and problems that exist in Sukadana in the process of developing rural destinations.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Further research can begin to carry out training and progress in rural destinations &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;development</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">programs, and see the development of community competencies in Sukadana.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Further research can also analyze several factors such as Destination</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font6">Attractions, Destination Support</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Services, People-Related Factors and Destination Attractiveness</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Measures.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do further research on the origins of the taste and aroma of Sukadana coffee.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Abdillah, Fitri. (2016). Local Community Involvement and Quality of Life in Tourism Destination Development: Case of Coastal Tourism in West Java, Indonesia. E-Journal of Tourism Vol.3 No.2. pp. 130-139</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Amelia, Rizki and Santi Palupi. (2016). The Influence of Services Quality to Domestic Tourists’ Loyalty through Domestic Tourists’ Satisfaction at Mount Bromo Tourism in East Java Indonesia. E - Journal of Tourism Vol.3. No.2. 81- 87</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Breman, Jan (2014). Keuntungan Kolonial dari Kerja Paksa, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sistem</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Perdagangan dari Tanam Paksa Kopi di JAwa 1720-1870. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Jakarta: Pustaka Obor Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Bishop, M. L. (2014). Tourism and environment. In V. Desai &amp;&nbsp;R. B. Potter (Eds.), </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The companion to development studies</span><span class="font6"> (Third edit, pp. 374–378). New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Crouch, G., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Ritchie, B. (1999).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Tourism, competitive- ness, and societal prosperity. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Business Re- search, 44</span><span class="font6">, 137–152.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Formica, S. (2002). Measuring destination attractiveness: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;proposed</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">framework. Journal of American Academy of Business, 1(2), 350– 355.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Goeldner, C., Ritchie, B., &amp;&nbsp;McIntosh, R. (2000). </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Principles,</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">practice and philosophies</span><span class="font6">. New York: John Wiley and Sons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Hu, Y., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Ritchie, B. (1993, Fall).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Measuring destination attractiveness: A contextual approach. Journal of Travel Research, 25–34.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Kleidas, Minos &amp;&nbsp;Lee Jolliffe (2010). Coffee attraction experiences: A narrative &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;study. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Preliminary</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Communication Vol.58 No.1</span><span class="font6">, 61-73</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Lasmiyati (2015). Kopi di Priangan Abad XVIII-XIX. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Journal Patanjala, Vol.7 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Lyon, Sarah (2013). Coffee Tourism and Community Development in Guatemala. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Human Organization, Vol.72 No.3</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Petit, Nicolas (2007). Ethiopia’s Coffee Sector: A Bitter or Better Future?. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol.7 No.2</span><span class="font6">, 225-263</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Rooseboom, Hans (2014, Aug 22). </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The History of Coffee in Indonesia</span><span class="font6">. Retrieved &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://indonesiaexpat.biz/"><span class="font6" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://indonesiaexpat.biz/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font6">Suriadinigrat, Bayu (1982). Sajarah Cianjur Sareng Raden Aria Wiratanu Dalem Cikundul Cianjur. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Jakarta: Rukun Warga Cianjur.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Swarbrooke, J. (1995). </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">The development</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">and &nbsp;&nbsp;management &nbsp;&nbsp;of visitor</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">attractions</span><span class="font6">. Oxford: &nbsp;&nbsp;Butterworth</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Heinemann.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Vengesayi, &nbsp;Sebastian, et &nbsp;al. (2009).</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Tourism Destination Attractiveness: Attractions, Facilities, and People as Predictors. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Analysis, Vol.14, </span><span class="font6">6221-636. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;doi:</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">10.3727/108354209X125979</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Walsh-Heron, J. (1990). </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Management of visitor attractions and events</span><span class="font6">. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Yılmaz, B., Acar-Tek, N., &amp;&nbsp;Sözlü, S. (2017). Turkish cultural heritage: a cup of coffee. </span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Ethnic Foods, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4</span><span class="font6">(4), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;213-</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">220.doi:10.1016/j.jef.2017.11.003</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font5">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5">100</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">e-ISSN: 2407-392X. p-ISSN: 2541-0857</span></p>