---
layout: full_article
title: "ENGLISH IDIOM FOUND IN THE AGATHA CHRISTIE’S NOVEL THE LISTERDALE MYSTERY AND THEIR TRANSLATION INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "Kadek Ika Dewi Ani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH IDIOM FOUND IN THE AGATHA CHRISTIE’S NOVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE LISTERDALE MYSTERY</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> AND THEIR TRANSLATION INTO</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">INDONESIAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kadek Ika Dewi Ani</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Idiom adalah sesuatu yang yang sering kita ucapkan di setiap percakapan sehari-hari. Namun kadang-kadang sangat susah untuk dimengerti artinya. Khususnya pada saat kita membaca novel terjemahan. Arti dari idioms yang terdapat di novel terjemahan sangat asing bagi pembaca sehingga menyebabkan pembaca kebingunhgan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam menerjemahkan sebuah novel, kita sangat memerlukan terjemahan yang tepat untuk mendapatkan arti yang sama dari novel yang asli. Terjemahan adalah proses menyampaikan pesan dari novel yang asli. Oleh karena mennerjemahkan adalah proses menyampaikan pesan dalam ke dalam dua bahasa, maka akan bayak masalah yang akan ditemukan pada proses menerjemahkan seperti contohnya kesulitan pada saat menemukan padanannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah ini membahas tentang padanan terjemahan dari idiom dalam Novel Bahasa Inggris “ English idioms found in Agatha Christie’s novel The Listerdale Mystery pada novel Bahasa Indonesia Misteri Listerdale oleh Lanny Murtiharjana. Teori yang digunakan berhubungan dengan kesamaan terjemahan dari idioms dalam bahasa Inggris dan artinya. Idioms yang ditemukan diklasifikasikan ke dalam kata kerja, kata benda, kata sifat dan kata depan. Idioms diidentifiksi dan diklasifikasikan menggunakan klasifikasi berdasarkan klasifikasi dari Fathuddin. Dan dalam menganalisa terjemahan idiom akan digunakan teori dari Catford dan Larson yaitu non figurative dan figurative expressions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam penelitian ini digunakan non figurative expressions yaitu penerjemah menterjemahkan idioms dari novel bahasa inggris kedalam bentuk terjemahan non idioms di dalam novel terjemahan atau menggunakan figurative expression dimana penterjemah menggunakan terjemahannya sebagai pengganti dari idioms dalam bahasa Inggris. Dalam hal ini pengganti idioms bisa saja digunakan sebagai penganti idioms kalau memiliki arti yang sama dengan idioms dalam bahas Inggrisnya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Idiom, Terjemahan, Persamaan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Translation is an important process. The study of it has become one of the crucial studies in linguistics. Language is part of culture, and therefore, translation, which mean by an operation performed on languages: a process of substituting a text in a language for a text in another cannot be done adequately without the knowledge of the two cultures as well as the knowledge of the language structures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Many books, novels, poetry are written in English. We can get a lot of knowledge from them but some people who cannot understand English need translation of those books in their own language. At the time, novel is very interesting to be read, because we can get a lot of benefits for our daily lives. We can learn how to solve our problem from the story of the novel or it can be a mirror of our lives. We don’t realize that novel consists of a lot of words phrases whose meanings are not the combination of the meanings of individual words. Idioms are something common in our daily conversation, but sometimes it is difficult to understand the meaning, especially when we read a translated novel. It sounds so unfamiliar to the readers and it caused the readers to be confused. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(for example: a blue rose).</span><span class="font1"> We cannot say that the meaning of it is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a rose which has a blue color.</span><span class="font1"> But in idioms, it means that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">impossible.</span><span class="font1"> When we read an English novel and then we read its translation, sometimes we get different sense in both of those novels.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background and the empirical studies, two problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of idioms are found in the SL novel ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meaning equivalences of those English idioms in Indonesian?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3.Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the problems that rise above, the aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identity and describe the English idioms in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the equivalences of idioms used in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie in ( Their Translation in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Misteri Listerdale</span><span class="font1"> by Lanny Murtiharjana.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.Scope of Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problem above and to limit the scope of study, there are two aspects of idiom which are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the classes of the English idioms used in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the equivalences of idioms used in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie Into Their Translation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Misteri Listerdale</span><span class="font1"> by Lanny Murtiharjana.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the data was are from the English novel “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery”</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie and its translation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Misteri Listerdale”</span><span class="font1"> by Lanny Murtiharjana. The reason for choosing this novel as the data source of this writing is that the novel contains many idioms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method that was used to collect the data is library research. The data were collected by reading and identifying the English idioms that found in the SL and determine them into RL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed qualitatively and descriptively. The collected data were classified into verb, noun, adjective and adverb. The data were analyzed to find the equivalences by comparing the idioms found in the English novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“The Listerdale Mystery”</span><span class="font1"> by Agatha Christie with the translated novel in Indonesian </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Misteri Listerdale“</span><span class="font1"> by Lanny Murtiharjana.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6</span><span class="font1">.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusion. In the process of transferring the English idioms from the SL text into the RL text, the translator makes some adjustments because if translating idioms literally the result will usually be nonsense in the receptor language. The adjustment has made the translation natural in the RL as if it is originally written in their native language. Generally, there are two types of adjustments that are adopted, namely following:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) . By non figurative expression, that is, the translator translates the idioms of the SL into non idioms in the RL text.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) . By figurative expression, that is, the translator makes substitution of the SL idiom by the RL idioms.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">An idiom is an expression whose meaning cannot be inferred from the meaning of it is part. And In this novel, we just analyze twenty one idioms fifteen of them were translated nonfiguratively into RL, and two of them were translated figuratively into RL. There are eight verbs, three nouns, three adverbs and three adjectives was found in nonfigurative translation, one adverb, one verb and two</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">nouns were found in figurative translation. All of the idioms from the SL are translated into RL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translator were looking for the most natural and accurate way to express his meaning. Therefore, the form of the translation may be quite different from the form of the source text, even when the concepts are shared between the two languages. One must be remember that in the process of translating the idioms from SL text into RL text, should be viewed on the basis of their meaning, message, and function. And to make a good translation, a good adjustment is needed.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Catford. 1965. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font1">. New York-Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Christie, Agatha. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Listerdale Mystery.</span><span class="font1"> London: Harper Collins Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cruse, D.A. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lexical Semantics</span><span class="font1">. New York – The Bath Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Echols, John M. and Shadily, Hasan. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An English – Indonesian Dictionary.</span><span class="font1"> 1975. London: Cornell University Press. PT. Gramedia Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fathuddin, Drs. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Idioms Amerika</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta. Kesaint Blanc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font1">. Oxford : Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred.L. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation A’ Guide to cross- Language Equivalence’.</span><span class="font1"> Second Edition. New York – Oxford : University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muhamaddan, Ikbal. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Improve Your Vocabulary Through Idioms</span><span class="font1">. Lingkaran Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Murtiharjana, Lanny. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Misteri Listerdale</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, Eugene. A. and Taber, Charles, R. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Practice of Translation.</span><span class="font1"> Netherland : E J. Brill, Leiden Netherland.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pari Purnami, I Gusti Ayu. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Equivalence of English Idiom into Indonesian with reference to Arthur Golden Novel’s Memoir of Geisha. </span><span class="font1">Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Syah Maulana, Erwin. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Equivalence of English Idioms in Indonesian with reference to John Grisham’s “The Street Lawyer”.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tristanti, A.A. 2005</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. English Idiom in The Translation of Sydney Sheldon’s Novel “A Stranger In The Mirror” into Indonesian.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Venuti, Lawrence. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Readers.</span><span class="font1"> London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">6</span></p>