---
layout: full_article
title: "PIDGINIZED ENGLISH USED BY MASSAGE THERAPISTS IN KUTA BEACH BALI"
author: "Komang Ayu Swandriani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 15.2 Mei 2016: </span><span class="font0">113</span><span class="font1">-</span><span class="font0">118</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">PIDGINIZED ENGLISH USED BY MASSAGE THERAPISTS IN KUTA BEACH BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Komang Ayu Swandriani email: </span><a href="mailto:ayu_swandriani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ayu_swandriani@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;Pidginized English Used by Massage Therapists in Kuta Beach Bali&quot;. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis kalimat yang digunakan oleh tukang pijat di Pantai Kuta Bali saat berkomunikasi dengan para turis luar negeri dan menganalisis factor penyebab mereka menggunakan kalimat tersebut. Data yang dipergunakan untuk penelitian ini diambil dari kalimat yang dipergunakan oleh para tukang pijat di Pantai Kuta saat berkomunikasi dengan para turis luar negeri dan diubuh menjadi kalimat bahasa Inggris yang benar (Bahasa Inggris Standard). Metode dan cara pengumpulan data diambil dari populasi dan memilih beberapa tukang pijat di pantai Kuta sebagai data observasi. Metode penelitian ini menggunakan teknik tanya jawab antara tukang pijat dan penulis dengan memberikan kuisioner, dan mencatat hasil tanya jawab tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Bahasa Inggris non standard, Bahasa Inggris standard, Pantai Kuta.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Pidginized English used in the conversation between massage therapists and foreigners at Kuta Beach are intended to make negotiation to look for an agreement or satisfaction about prices, services and facilities. When they get in touch with the foreigners, they produce some quite trivial expressions, sentences, phrases, or linguistic units in a form of utterances. In this study, only English spoken by massage therapists in Kuta Beach area is taken into account which is compared to the standard English from their grammatical uses, as well as observing the mixing vocabulary with the local language, both Balinese and Indonesian languages. Based on the description above, this paper is discussing about the variety of English language, which is related to the language which has no native speakers, it is no one’s first language, but it is a contact language (Wardhaugh, l985:57). The variety of language is called Pidginized language</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">which means that its speaker who wish to be able to communicate with others try to find or improvise a simple code to enable them to do so. This topic is interesting to be chosen and analyzed because we all know that English has a great influence in the world. It is so important to know how pidgins exist in this globalization era. It is also interesting to know how the massage therapists at Kuta Beach express the sentence structure in their job. Pidginized English that is spoken by massage therapists in Kuta Beach Bali is chosen in this paper as the objects of observation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems discussed in this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the sentence forms of Pidginized English used by the massage therapists at Kuta Beach Bali compared to Standard English?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the factors influencing the massage therapists to use Pidginized English for their communication at Kuta Beach?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In writing this paper, there are two aims to be achieved.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the sentence forms of Pidginized English used by the massage therapists at Kuta Beach Bali compared to Standard English.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the factors which are influencing the Pidginized English used by the massage therapists at Kuta Beach Bali.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Research method of this study was divided into three: data source, method and technique of collecting data and also method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study was taken from the English expressions and utterances used by the massage therapists at Kuta Beach Bali in the conversation with the foreigners. Total numbers of the therapists who used Pidgin English in their</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">conversation at Kuta Beach Bali are over than l5 persons, but only 6 therapists were chosen as respondents for this research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method and technique used in collecting the data are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Population and Sample Techniques</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Only 6 therapists were taken as the respondents because, only the massage therapists who fulfilled the criteria were chosen as respondents. The criteria such as: they are able to speak English, they already did their job as massage therapists more than 5 years, there are at least ages of maximum 60 years old, the educational background is maximum Junior High School, they are from Kuta area (local people of Kuta)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Observation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Firstly came to Kuta Beach and observed the sentence utterance was taken from 6 therapists. Secondly, observed the activity of therapists by observing the therapists when they speak with foreign customers using English language, the data were collected by taking notes of the therapists utterance when they spoke English language with foreign customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interview and Note Taking</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The process of obtaining data for the purpose of the research is by asking some questions (face to face) between interviewers and respondents, and noted all the answered by the therapists.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this research were analyzed by using qualitative method. They are classified as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transcribe</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Noted the dialogue between the massage therapists with foreigners, the data from note taking and observation were transcribe and rewritten using a data sheet.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Categorization</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data is categorized based on each type of pidgin, then indentifying the pidgin language in those data compared to Standard English. The analysis is focus on the expressions and their grammatical uses.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Form of Pidginized English Language Spoken by Massage Therapists in Kuta Beach:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 . Positive Form</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This language phenomenon is stated by Todd (l984:5), in which he proposes that Pidginized English has mixed-Word order and it is more syntactically simple than any mother tongue variety of English the sentences are usually short.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pidginied English: (1) Nice massage </span><span class="font3">÷ </span><span class="font2">Standard English: (2) it is really nice massage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Example (1) has the absence of ‘to be’. In the example (1), the therapists seemed to simplify the sentence. This sentence (example (1)) was lack of to be “is” and lack of subject “it” before to be, which refers to “massage” that also omitted by the therapist. The complete sentence should be consisting of at least S+V/to be+ (adj). The example (1) should be “it is really nice massage” (sentence (2)).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 . Negative Form</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Betty Schramfer (1989), not expressed a negative idea and ‘not’ immediately follows an auxiliary verb or ‘be’, if there is more than one auxiliary, ‘not’ comes immediately after the first auxiliary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pidginied English: (3) This not expensive </span><span class="font3">÷ </span><span class="font2">Standard English: (4) This is not expensive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence (example (3)) was lack of to be “is” after subject “this” before to be, which refers to “massage” that also omitted by the therapist. The complete sentence should be consisting of at least S+V/to be. The example (3) should be “this is not expensive” (sentence (4)).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Todd (l984: 6), there are some criteria of Pidginized English after carrying out an observation on this language variety in Cameron. Based on the result of his research, he concludes that Yes/No is distinguished from statements by intonation alone. The case is absolutely similar to those found in Kuta beach Pidginized English, as well as modal at the beginning of sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pidginized English: (5) You want massage? </span><span class="font3">÷ </span><span class="font2">Standard English: (6) Do you want to have massage?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the examples above, the speakers only used the raising intonation to express the question sentences. These sentence as same intonation as Balinese language and Bahasa Indonesia. In Standard English language system, the interrogative sentence should be completed with auxiliary verb and the subject as how had been mentioned above. As in example (5), the therapists also simplified auxiliary “do” as the operator in the beginning of the interrogative sentence. If the data (5) compared to the grammatical aspect of Standard English, their form should be: (6) Do you want to have massage?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors Influencing of the Pidginized English in Kuta Beach:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The factors that influence the use of the Pidginized English in Kuta Beach are recognized, there are Economic Background. Educational Conditions, and Social Factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The forms of Pidginied English sentences found in Kuta Beach can be distinguished into three forms, the are positive forms, negative forms, and interrogative forms. The complete sentence should be consisting of at least S + V/to be. From the data, the positive sentence that were used by the massage therapists usually absence of “to be”, and negative sentence was lack of to be “is” after subject. The massage therapists also simplified auxiliary “do” as the operator in the beginning of the interrogative sentence. The sentences showed the simple epressioned by the massage therapists in most response by omitting the subject of the sentence, that is influence by three factors there are, economic background, educational conditions, and social factor. The massage therapists seemed to simplify the sentences into the simple one. However, the tourist still understood what the massage therapists mean.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Azar, Betty Schramfer. 1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding and Using English Grammar.</span><span class="font2"> New Jersey Prentice Hall, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Todd, Lotero. l984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Modern English: Pidgin and Creoles.</span><span class="font2"> England: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font2"> Great Britain: Page Bros.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">118</span></p>