---
layout: full_article
title: "TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH IDIOM INTO INDONESIAN WITH REFERENCE TO NOVEL NEW MOON"
author: "Julianta Pratama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH IDIOM INTO INDONESIAN WITH REFERENCE TO NOVEL </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">NEW MOON</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">BY:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I GST AGUNG PT JULIANTA PRATAMA ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam kehidupan sehari-hari idiom kerap dijumpai. Hampir setiap bahasa di dunia memiliki idiom. Khususnya untuk idiom bahasa inggris yang sangat beragam, keberagaman tersebut seringkali menghambat individu dalam berkomunikasi atau menginterpretasi suatu teks bahasa Inggris. Hal tersebut dikarenakan keterbatasan pengetahuan individu terhadap idiom bahasa inggris. Idiom seperti seni dalam berbahasa, karena butuh pengetahuan lebih dalam mencerna suatu idiom,ada beberapa konsep idiom yang tidak diketahui dibahasa target hal inilah yang membuatnya menarik dan menggoda untuk diteliti. Data idiom yang dianalsis dalam tulisan ini diambil dari novel New Moon karya dari Stephenie Meyer, novel ini dipilih karena banyak menggunakan idiom dalam penulisannya, yang merupakan pembahsan utama dalam penelitian ini. Data yang ditemukan dalam novel akan diklasifikasi dengan teori dari Larson. Dan teknik terjemahan akan diperiksa menggunakan teori dari Molina dan Albir. Hasilnya ditemukan dua tipe dari Larson yaitu: Generic Word With A Descriptive phrase dan cultural substitute, selain itu ditemukan bahwa 6 teknik terjemahan dari Molina dan Albir yaiut: Literal Translation, Transposition, Adaptation, Generalization, Particularization, Modulation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: idiom, terjemahan, konsep idiom tak dikenal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Translation is a study that is so important because that can help us understand different languages. The word “translation” is derived from the Latin translation (which itself comes from trans- and fero, together meaning “to carry across” or “to bring across”). Translation is a process of transferring message from the source language into the target language. And, the messages must be understood by the readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are many types of translation techniques, one of them is idiomatic translation. The idiomatic translations is a complicated process when a translator transfers the meaning from Source Language to Target Language, because all languages have idioms, idioms represent the culture of the language in unique style. Therefore, the translator has to learn and deeply understand the two of the languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this writing the type of idiom by Larson is used to classify the unknown concept of idiom. When the concept to be translated refers to something which is not known in the target language culture, there are three basic alternative ways a translator can find an equivalent expression in the target language. (Larson, 1984: 179-193). These are a generic word with a descriptive phrase, a loan word, and a cultural substitute.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two problems when analyze the novel:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of idiom are used to translate the unknown concept of idiom in the novel entitled “New Moon”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of techniques of translations are applied in the process of translation in the novel entitled “New Moon” into “New Moon”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To discover the types of idioms used in New Moon English version and New Moon Indonesian version.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the translation technique used to translate the English idioms into Indonesian in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Idioms taken from the English novel entitled New Moon and its Indonesian translation entitled New Moon (2006) by Stephenie Meyer and the translation in Indonesian novel done by Monica Dwi Chresnayani (2008). The consideration of choosing this novel is that this bestseller novel contains a lot of idioms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method applied in this study was library research method. Which means the data were collected through some techniques: reading, identifying, note</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">taking, and classifying the idioms used both in the English novel and its translation</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Qualitative method was used to analyze the data, because it is based predominantly on non-numerical data. For that reason, the analysis was done through qualitative analysis. Qualitative analysis is a research procedure, which produces descriptive data in the form of written or spoken words about the people and behaviors that can be observed (Bogdan and Taylor 1975). The Larson theory is used to answer the first problem and the translation techniques theory proposed by Molina and Albir is used to answer the second problem.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Idiom in The Novel New Moon</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classification of Idiom in The Novel New Moon</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After an intensive reading of the novel, it was found that approximately there were 127 Idioms founded in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon.</span><span class="font1"> According to Larson idioms could be divided by 3 there are: a generic word with a descriptive phrase, a loan word, and a cultural substitute. But in this writing only 2 were found.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1.1 . A Generic Word With A Descriptive phrase</span></h1>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I promised, surreptitiously </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">crossing my fingers </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">under the table (194).</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">… janjiku, diam-diam </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">menyilangkan jariku </span><span class="font1">di bawah meja. (p.210)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Literal</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (Hornby, 2005: 366)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the idiom </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">crossing my fingers</span><span class="font1"> means “hoping for good luck”, and from Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Idiom Dictionary </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">crossing my fingers</span><span class="font1"> means “hoping that something will be successful; wish somebody good luck” also in Dictionary of Idiom (Linda and Roger Flavell, 2006: 123) </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Crossing my finger</span><span class="font1"> means “to hope for a happy outcome” which is similar to the Oxford Dictionary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Crossing my fingers</span><span class="font1"> hoping for good luck/to hope for a happy outcome</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the meaning above the generic word is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wish</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hope,</span><span class="font1"> in the source language culture, crossing one’s finger is a quick and easy way of making sign of the cross to shield oneself from diabolic power. But, In Indonesian culture, when people want to make a wish or hoping they do in other way. Not by crossing their finger, but somehow by stick flat of the hand together and make a wish or even praying and many more way to wishing or praying to the God. The function is the same but in a very different form between the source language and the receptor language, due to the culture, and the habit of both languages. The translator should use modifies with a statement of function technique, But in this case the translator much prefer the form of the idiom than the function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural Substitute</span></h1></li></ul>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I feel fine.” He shrugged. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Fit as a fiddle.” </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(p.216)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">“aku merasa baik-baik saja.” Dia mengangkat bahu. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Sehat walafiat.” </span><span class="font1">(p.233)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Modulation</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The word “fit” means “healthy and strong, especially because you do</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">regular physical exercise” and the word “fiddle” means </span><span class="font0">“</span><span class="font1">to keep touching or moving something with your hands, especially because you are bored or nervous.” It would make that the result could not understand by the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (Hornby, 2005: 582),</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the idiom </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fit as a fiddle</span><span class="font1"> means “in very good physical condition”. And from</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dictionary of Idiom (Linda and Roger Flavell, 2006: 120) </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fit as a fiddle</span><span class="font1"> means “on top form, in excellent health”. Also from Oxford Idiom Dictionary (2001: 124) </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fit as a fiddle</span><span class="font1"> means “very healthy and active”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Fit</span><span class="font1"> as a fiddle. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in very good physical condition</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From those dictionaries, we know the meaning of this idiom. Comparing the result in the Indonesian version “New Moon” novel, the idiom translated by changing the form, but the function is the same like in the English version “New Moon” novel. From the result, the translator used cultural substitutes technique when translated this idiom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Techniques of Translation Applied In Novel New Moon</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are several technique by Molina and Albir’s theories applied in the Novel New Moon: Literal Translation, Transposition, Adaptation, Generalization, Particularization, Modulation. it will be described only one technique in this writing.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I promised, surreptitiously </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">crossing my fingers </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">under the table (194).</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">… janjiku, diam-diam </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">menyilangkan jariku </span><span class="font1">di bawah meja. (p.210)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Literal</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The example above does not change the pattern of the translation result in the target language. It can be equated with the literal translation or word-by-word translation. Translation of this type can be easily done, because usually the form is the same. But the literal translation techniques have drawbacks, the meaning of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the text was translated with literal techniques, sometimes cannot be understood or the messages from the source language cannot be transferred in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore, the translator must have some reasons when translating the idiom by using literal translation technique, in this case, the translator paying more attention to the form than the function of the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After an intensive reading and analysis, there are two types of idiom that used for translating the unknown concept of the idiom in the novel New Moon, there are: Modifying the generic word Cultural substitute.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina and Albir’s translation technique applied in translating the unknown concept of idiom, there are: Literal Translation, Transposition, Adaptation, Generalization, Particularization, and Modulation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition, idiom is state of the art part in the language. The meaning is really interesting and beautifying the style of a text of a language. The dictionary of idiom has a big contribution to this writing because without dictionary of idiom, we will never know the real meaning of an idiom. If the translator does not know the meaning of idiom from the source language, it is impossible to make a good translation result in the receptor language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bogdan R.</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Taylor</span><span class="font1"> S. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Qualitative Research Method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">New York: John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Catford, J. C. 1965. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation.</span><span class="font1"> Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cruse, D. A. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lexical Semantics.</span><span class="font1"> Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Flavel, Linda and Roger. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of Idiom and Their Origins.</span><span class="font1"> New Edition. York : Kyle Cathie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L.1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation.</span><span class="font1"> New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer, Stephenie. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon.</span><span class="font1"> New York : Little, Brown Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina L. and Albir H. 2002. &quot;Translation Techniques Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach“ journal des traducteurs / Meta: Translators' Journal, vol. 47, n° 4, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2002, p. 498-512.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://erudit.org/revue/meta/2002/v47/n4/008033ar.pdf"><span class="font1">http://erudit.org/revue/meta/2002/v47/n4/008033ar.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Monica Dwi Chresnayani. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon (Dua Cinta).</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta : PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, Eugene. A. and Taber, Charles R. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory and Practice of Translation.</span><span class="font1"> Netherlands : E. J. Brill, Leiden Netherland</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Palmer, F. R. 1976. Semantics : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A New Outline</span><span class="font1">. Melbourne : Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University Press.</span></p>