---
layout: full_article
title: "THE MEANING ANALYSIS OF SLANG USED IN NOTORIOUS B.I.G’S SONG “LOVE NO HO”"
author: "Silvia Laura Langga"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">THE MEANING ANALYSIS OF SLANG USED IN NOTORIOUS B.I.G’S SONG </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“LOVE NO HO”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Silvia Laura Langga</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik adalah cabang linguistik yang mempelajari hubungan antara bahasa dan masyarakat yang menuturkan. Salah satu contoh variasi bahasa dalam sosiolinguistik adalah slang. Slang adalah bahasa tidak formal yang diciptakan dan digunakan oleh suatu grup masyarakat tertentu dalam sebuah komunitas. Tulisan ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi tipe kata-kata slang yang ditemukan dalamm lirik lagu Notorious B.I.G berjudul “Love no ho.” Dan juga menganalisa makna dari kata-kata slang tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori yang di aplikasikan dalam tulisan ini didasarkan pada teori slang dari Chapman (1988) yang mengelompokkan slang dalam dua tipe yaitu primer slang dan sekunder slang. Tulisan ini juga mengacu pada teori Leech (1973) yang mengkaji makna kedalam tujuh jenis yaitu : makna konseptual atau denotasi, makna konotasi, makna stilistik, makna afektif, makna reflektif, makna kolokatif, dan makna tematik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dari analisis ditemukan bahwa primer slang mayoritas digunakan dalam lirik lagu Notorious B.I.G berjudul “Love no ho.” Setelah menganalisis makna berdasarkan tujuh jenis makna Leech (1974), Notorious B.I.G kebanyakan menggunakan makna konotasi daripada makna lainnya. Lagu ini menceritakan tentang kehidupan cinta atau tragedi romantikanya bersama seorang wanita pekerja seks komersial, jadi hamper semua istilah dalam makna afektif dan reflektif berhubungan dengan kemarahan.Makna kolokatif dan makna stilistik jarang digunakan dalam lagu ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Makna, Slang, Notorious B.I.G</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Sociolinguistics is the study of language in relation to society. Sociolinguistics is also the study of effects of various all aspects to society, including cultural, norms, and contexts on the language used (Hudson, 1980). People are belonging to the same trade profession, hobby, age, or social position tend to behave in the same way. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">behavior influences not only the clothes they wear, but also the language they use. Language as a means of communication plays an important role in human interaction. In using the language, human beings face many aspects concerned with language in use. Language can be used both in oral and written forms based on their contexts. While from its context, language can be used in formal and informal situations. People usually use formal or standard language in formal context, while in informal context people usually use informal one. There are some kinds of language varieties that used in informal context, one of them is slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nowadays teenagers develop a new English variety which is simple and ungrammatical in order to have an easier conversation or communications. The new language they made is known as slang. Webster (1989:58) states that slang is language of particular group, trade or pursuit or an informal, non-standard vocabulary changed word and extravagant, forced or facetious figures of speech. Slang language is mainly spoken form, which is use in social milieus and popular media, and to certain extent it is used in song lyrics and publication, such as teen magazine or pop culture magazine. Slang language in the lyrics of song is also used in communication. There are many kinds of music such as pop, R&amp;B, rock, jazz, classic, hip-hop, rap, etc. Analyzing the meaning of slang used in Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> is the concern of this study. Notorious B.I.G is one of the most famous rap singers. He is a composer and singer who sings his songs. In Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> he uses and forms words in a unique way that sometimes the meaning cannot be understood. The reasons why analyzing the meaning of slang is used in Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> has become the topic because slang language within the lyric is also used in communication and some people who used English as a second of foreign language may get confused in comprehending the meaning of song lyric.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of The Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to the background explained above, the problems of the analysis are</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of slang words are used in the lyric of Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of slang words used in the lyric of Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Concerning the problems of the analysis as mentioned above, the objectives of the analysis are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of slang words used in the lyric of Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the meaning of slang in the lyric of Notorious B.I.G song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Research Method is the way or procedures of understanding the objects that become the target of subject. The research method in this study was classified into three parts, they are: data source, method and collecting data and technique of collecting data, and also method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The primary source of the data for this study was taken from the lyric of Notorious B.I.G’s song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> found in the website </span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/notoriousbig/lovenoho.html"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/notoriousbig/lovenoho.html .</span></a><span class="font0"> The song lyric of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> is considered suitable to be the source of this study because provide plenty of samples of slang words and phrases.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The method used in collecting the data was documentation. Documentation is the way to collect data by recording or reporting of the fact of something, especially by using picture, recording, note taking, etc. To find out the slang words or phrases,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the data source was read thoroughly and then relevant points collected by using the note taking method. The data collected through some steps. In this study the procedures used in collecting data are: (1) reading and comprehending the lyrics; (2) marking the slang words found in the lyrics by checking in the dictionary of American slang and online slang dictionary whether it is slang word or not; (3) finding the type of the slang word; (4) finding the meaning of the slang word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study the collected data was analyzed using qualitative method. Based on the book entitled “The Analysis of Qualitative Data” by Miles (1992) qualitative method is a kind of analysis method which is use the data in form of words not number, qualitative method provide a wide descriptive of process that happened in the area which is analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data were analyzed as follows: Firstly, the slang words used in B.I.G Notorious song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> were identified and collected by reading the lyric and judge whether it is slang or not by matching the word with some dictionaries; oxford dictionary; dictionary of American slang, and online slang dictionary. Secondly, the data were analyzed based on the theory in Chapman (1988) which was divided into two types; Primary slang and secondary slang. Fourthly, giving the meaning of the slang word based on Leech (1974). Finally, drawing the conclusion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This chapter presents the result of my analysis. There are two analyses in this study, first is analyze the types of slang then the second is analyze the meaning of slang words and phrases used in Notorious B.I.G’s song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Love no ho”</span><span class="font0">. It has discussed and analyzed based on the previous theories in the chapter before. There were fifteen samples of slang language found in the song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The types of Slang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Chapman (1988) there are two types or forms of slang, the primary slang and secondary slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Primarily slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Primary slang is the pristine speech of subculture members, so very natural to its speakers that it seems they might be mute without it. Of course they would not be, since we know that slang is by definition always an alternative idiom, to be chosen rather than required. Much of teenage talk, and the speech of urban street gangs, would be examples of primary slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Primary slang can be detected by contrast, their oral language is often rich, complex, and powerful, and they live by using it effectively. Chapman (1988) calls the specialized social vocabulary of subcultures primary slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The primary slang of groups is often appropriated into general slang. It strikes members of the mainstream as novel, rich, and imaginative. It suggests a way of life with greater fun and excitement than the well-regulated lives of most. Adopting the vocabulary is a way of sharing vicariously in the daring while remaining apart from what is unsafe or objectionable about the way of life in the subculture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the sixteen samples of lyrics, fifteen lyrics that consist of eighteen slang words and phrases were identified as primary slang. They were </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Yo, fuckin bitch, ain't, 'sposed, hoes, back, 'bout, dis, stole, I-L-Y, fuck ya, Crib, cryin’ up a storm, hit, sleepin, tryna, and baby.</span><span class="font0"> The slang words and phrases </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">are</span><span class="font0"> identified as a primary slang because this kind of slang to express anger, used as a general expression used by English people on their daily communication, or it is an alternative pronunciation used by a rapper or hip hop singer to shorten, alter, or change the sound of a word. It is not related with someone attitude or something in secret.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Secondary slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Secondary slang is chosen not so much to fix one group as to express one’s attitudes and resourcefulness by pretending momentarily, in a little stick of guerilla theatre, to be the member of street gang or criminal or gambler or a drug user or a</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">professional football player, and hence to express someone’s contempt, superiority, cleverness by borrowing someone else verbal dress. It is also a matter of stylistic choice rather than true identification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In Notorious B.I.G’s song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No Ho</span><span class="font0"> only one sample is identified as secondary slang. It was the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bankroll</span><span class="font0">. The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bankroll</span><span class="font0"> in the data 10 is common used to name money. This slang word is used to express something in secret way where just restricted people who understand the meaning of that words. It is a reason the slang word ‘bankroll” classifies as a secondary slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Eventually, the user of slang is not limited only for underworld people but spreading out through certain groups of people in the society. Most of slang is metaphoric, in determining the meaning of slang given cannot be directly found through its literary meaning, for example </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“what the hell?”</span><span class="font0"> it is quite far from our imaginary of a place for punishment by god but here the aim of saying that expression is to show the surprising which mean </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“what is this?.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to the Leech (1974) meaning distinguishes in seven types namely: conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, stylistic meaning, affective meaning, reflected meaning, collocative meaning and thematic meaning. They can be summarized as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conceptual meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Conceptual meaning (sometimes called ‘denotative’ meaning or ‘cognitive’ meaning) is widely assumed to be the central factor in verbal communication and it can be shown to be integral to the essential functioning of language in a way that other types of meaning are not. There were some samples of conceptual meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho.</span><span class="font0"> One of them is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sleepin</span><span class="font0"> in the sentence “Who I'm sleepin with?” has denotative meaning sleeping. It is the ordinary dictionary everyday meaning of a word or expression. In denotative usage, words</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">refer to things and point to factual variable situation. This implies that denotative meaning can be regarded as universal that is, the constant and literal meaning of words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Connotative meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Connotative is the kind of values and attitudes invoked by a word apart from its core meaning. Based on the language characteristics, it always changes over time and is culturally dependence. Usually, connotative meaning used the writers who wish persuade the reader, etc. There were some samples of connotative meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho</span><span class="font0"> like the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font0"> here is indicated to have connotative meaning </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">darling</span><span class="font0"> and the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">hoes</span><span class="font0"> which is mean a prostitute or whore.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stylistic meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Stylistic meaning is a piece of language which conveys about the social circumstance of it uses. Sample of stylistic meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho</span><span class="font0"> like the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font0">, this is a stylistic way to say hello or greeting his friend. Based on Dictionary of American Slang </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">yo</span><span class="font0"> is used an interjection; it is a greeting or said to get someone’s attention. As indicated by Leech, stylistic meaning concerns what is communicated of the social circumstances of language use (1974:16-17). We know it from the dialects or the language usage of “status” as the category of its usage to differentiate between each dimension which shows something from the different style.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Affective meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Affective meaning has more directly a reflection of the speaker’s personal attitude or feelings toward the listener or the target of the utterance. Such feelings or attitudes are usually negative or insincere in nature. They are normally expressed through such forms of language use as insult, flattery, hyperbole or sarcasm. Sample of affective meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho</span><span class="font0"> like the word phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Fuck ya</span><span class="font0"> in the sentence above is included in affective meaning. Next, this sentence</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">belongs to the affective meaning because it comes from the feeling or emotion of the singer. The sentence </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Now I love no one! - FUCK YA!</span><span class="font0"> Uses vulgar slang used for emphasis or to express anger, annoyance, contempt, displeasing, despicable, or surprise. This sentence described that the singer’s condition is in anger.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reflected meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Reflected meaning is the meaning which arises in cases of multiple conceptual meaning when one sense of a word forms a part of our response to another sense. In short, reflected meaning is what is communicated through association with another sense of the same expression. Sample of reflected meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho</span><span class="font0"> is the word phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cryin' up a storm</span><span class="font0"> conveys reflected meaning because the meaning of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cryin' up a storm</span><span class="font0"> here is not indicated to “crying to a storm”. This word phrase refers to “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">crying loudly</span><span class="font0">”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The function of reflected meaning is to deliver the new sense of a word that relates to another phenomenon in the same expression. The new sense here is the new meaning comes to the expression of the same word. The new sense comes because of removes another sense in the same expression.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collocative meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Collocative meaning consist of the associations a word acquires on account of the meaning of words which tent to occur with it. Sample of Collocative meaning found in the lyrics of the song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No ho</span><span class="font0"> is the phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin’ bitch</span><span class="font0"> is called collocative meaning since the adjective word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin’</span><span class="font0"> conveys meanings when it is going together with others noun, such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin idiot, fuckin moron, etc</span><span class="font0">. based on the </span><a href="http://onlineslangdictionary.com/"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://onlineslangdictionary.com/</span></a><span class="font0"> the word fuckin’ itself is an adjective and vulgar slang used for emphasis or to express anger, annoyance, contempt, displeasing, despicable, or surprise. And based on Dictionary of American Slang the word bitch means woman one dislikes or disapproves. In this case, the adjective word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin’</span><span class="font0"> in the phrase </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fuckin’ bitch</span><span class="font0"> means “a very annoying person”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thematic meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Thematic meaning is what is communicated by the way in which a speaker or writer organizes the message, in terms of ordering, focus and emphasis. It is often felt that an active sentence has different meaning from its passive equivalent, although their conceptual content seems to be the same. There was no sample found in the lyrics </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No Ho</span><span class="font0"> identified as thematic meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">After presenting the analyzing of slang used in song “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love no ho”</span><span class="font0"> by Notorious B.I.G, we get the answers of two problems arose in the first chapter. As stated before, this study done to describe the type of slang and classified them into two parts, primary and secondary slang. It is followed by describing the meaning of slang in this song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There are two types of slang used by Notorious B.I.G in this song, primary slang and secondary slang. The type of slang used by Notorious B.I.G in his lyrics of song entitled “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love no ho</span><span class="font0">” is mostly in the form of primary slang. Primary slang is Primary slang is the pristine speech of subculture member; so very natural to its speakers that it seems they might be mute without it. From the analyzing of data in the third chapter, fifteen expressions that is used in this song is identified as primary slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Then, the secondary slang is chosen not so much to fix one in a group as to express one’s attitudes or something in secret. It also matter of stylistic choice rather than true identification. From the data taken from lyric of song </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">love no ho</span><span class="font0">, there is only one sample is found as secondary slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the analysis the meaning of slang used in Notorious B.I.G’s song “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Love No Ho”</span><span class="font0"> in the previous chapter, there are six types of meaning found in the lyrics. Those are denotative meaning, what is the ordinary dictionary everyday meaning of a word or expression; connotative meaning, what is communicated by virtue of language refers to; stylistic meaning, what is communicated of social circumstance of language use; affective meaning, what is communicated of feelings and attitudes of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the speaker or writer; reflected meaning, what is communicated through association with another sense of the same expressions; and collocative meaning, what is communicated through association with words which tend to occur in the environment of another word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From all of types, Notorious B.I.G more often uses connotative meaning than other meaning which is in the form of phrase. This song talked about his love or romantic tragedy with a prostitute, so almost all of the terms in affective and reflected meaning are related to anger. Collocative meaning and stylistic meaning are seldom to be used in this song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Chapman, Robert L. 1988. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Dictionary of American Slang.</span><span class="font0"> London: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hudson, R.S. 1980. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, Geoffrey. 1983. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font0">. Great Britain: The Chaucer Press Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Miles, M.B. &amp;&nbsp;Huberman, A.M. 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Qualitative Data.</span><span class="font0"> Thousand Oaks : Sage Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Webster. Chaeder. 1967. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font0">. New Jersey: Merill Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Internet</span></p>
<p><a href="http://onlineslangdictionary.com/"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://onlineslangdictionary.com/</span></a><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> .</span><span class="font0"> Accesed on Sunday June 2012</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/notoriousbig/lovenoho.html"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/notoriousbig/lovenoho.html</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></a><span class="font0"> Accessed on Sunday June 2012</span></p>