---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF WILIAM BLAKE’S POEM THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER"
author: "Ketut Ayu Ary Wardani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF WILIAM BLAKE’S POEM THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ketut Ayu Ary Wardani Jurusan Sastra Ingris Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Karya sastra dan sejarah merupakan hal yang tidak dapat dipisahkan, terutama saat kita membahas Era Romantis. Revolusi Perancis dan Revolusi Industri merupakan suatu peristiwa besar yang dampaknya terasa dalam setiap aspek kehidupan di Eropa, termasuk dalam karya sastra dari William Blake yang berjudul The Chimney Sweeper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam The Chimney Sweeper, William Blake melukiskan tentang mereka yang ingin mendapat uang dengan cara mudah dengan mengorbankan anak-anak sebagai penyapu cerobong. Dalam puisi ini Blake menegaskan bahwa para pemimpin bahkan orang tua dari anak itu sendiri, berpikir bahwa mereka tidak melakukan kesalahan dan tidak akan menyakiti anak mereka dengan pekerjaan tersebut, yang pada kenyataannya merupakan tindakan yang sangat berbahaya dan membawa penderitaan untuk anak-anak para penyapu cerobong tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini akan mengadopsi dua teori utama, yaitu teori dari Knickerbocker dan Reninger, serta teori dari Wellek dan Warren. Pembahasan akan difokuskan pada latar belakang sejarah puisi dan menganalisis puisi itu sendiri dengan melihat pesan dalam puisi serta pengalaman hidup sang penulis, William Blake.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Blake ingin menyampaikan pesan bahwa anak-anak dibawah umur yang dipekerjakan oleh orang tua mereka, sesungguhnya berada dalam sebuah ketakutan, penderitaan, bahkan bahaya besar yang mengancam jiwa mereka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: pekerja anak, penderitaan, bahaya</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature influence the culture and social reality because it contains ideas, feelings, desires, hopes, moralities and emotions. A work of literature must havemeaning, and it cannot avoid from having one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poetry is narrative, it tells a story. It conveys the meaning in ways that are different from those found in prose fiction. Poetry makes a statement, and the reader should be able to paraphrase that statement, realizing however that the paraphrase is not the poem itself. Most poetry has a formal structure that differentiates it from prose. The language of poetry is characterized by a greater intensity than a prose. It is likely to be more </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">metaphorical</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">connotative</span><span class="font1">. Discovering and describing meaning in a poem seems to be the goal in analyzing poetry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Talking about a poem, it must be realized that the work of the artist cannot be separated from the concern on society because the content of literary work is a reflection of the real world and its background. A work such as a poem is considered to be the reflection of the poet’s thought, his ways of thinking and perspectives, which he obviously absorbs through social, cultural historical bounds with his life within a society. Thus, biographical approach is needed especially by readers to catch the message from the poet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the poem entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> by William Blake was choosen to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background mentioned above, there are two problems which need to be discussed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the message in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> that Blake intended to say to the readers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do the children in the poem seem aware that they might be facing death any day?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This writing is intended to fulfill three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to poetry in order to get better understanding of Blake’s poem entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out the critical estimate of the poem and what message the poet wants to convey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last is academic aim, which is to give contribution to English Department, so this writing can be used as reference to help the student who takes the same topics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A method is a systematic procedure in analyzing an object of research in accordance with the approach which is used. The method which is used in this study includes the aspects as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data was taken from a poem entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> by William Blake which consists of six stanzas and is cited in:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.everypoet.com/archive/poetry/william_blake/william_blake_songs_of"><span class="font1">http://www.everypoet.com/archive/poetry/william_blake/william_blake_songs_of</span></a><span class="font1"> _innocence_the_chimney_sweeper.htm</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The techniqueused in this writing is documentation research. The poem, theories, and other related information are collectedusing documentation research. The steps of collecting data are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 .Preparing the writing tools</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2 .Reading the poem in detail</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">3.Identification process</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4 .Categorization process</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the poem is related to the theoretical basis in order to be able to find the types of figurative language used in the poem and to determine their meanings through an interpretation. The analysis of the data is presented descriptively</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the United Kingdom, sweepers were very important figures to the families, because they had to keep their houses warm throughout cleaning constantly the chimneys, and so they needed them</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> comprises six quatrains, each following the AABB rhyme scheme, with two rhyming couplets per quatrain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The poem is narrated by a chimney sweeper. He tells us a little bit about himself first before giving us the lowdown on another chimney sweeper, Tom Dacre. After introducing Tom, he relates a very strange dream that Tom had one night (it involved chimney sweepers in coffins, angels, flying, and a few other bizarre things). The poem concludes with Tom and the speaker waking up and going to work, sweepin' chimneys.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is clear that Blake is being ironic here, to show that these kids suffer double. Not only do they physically suffer, but they also suffer mentally and emotionally, too. It may indicate that Tom's belief is a coping mechanism; the only way to get through the day is to believe that they do not have to fear harm. But the sad part is, they totally do. The children get up in the dark and go to work. While &quot;dark&quot; refers to the time of day, it is also a metaphor for the &quot;dark&quot; and miserable lives the children lead.In a poem called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper,</span><span class="font1"> it is expected to meet a sweeper. In fact, the readers meet several (at least five) specific ones, thousands of other nameless ones, and also the readers get a pretty close look at their lives and the stuff of their work, brushes, bags, soot. All of these things represent burdens that children should not have to bear, and the poem makes no secret of this opinion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Interpretation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1">: The poem contains the following contrast: the chimney sweeper is working and covered in soot while mother and father have gone to church to pray. The chimney sweeper symbolizes the plight of England's children (chimney sweeper was a horrible job done by children because they were small enough to fit in the chimney and clean it). Fathers and mothers symbolize those responsible for taking care of children, be it the church, the king, or adults in general. It denounces the hypocrisy of the upper classes for praising &quot;God &amp;&nbsp;Priest &amp;&nbsp;King&quot; while ruining the lives of children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> was published in 1789. The poem examines the duties that children have to society as a whole. While there is an overriding sense of an allegiance to duty in the poem, the poem’s situational irony complicates the relationship between children and responsibility. The final line of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The ChimneySweeper</span><span class="font1"> best demonstrates this complicated relationship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Although it is fair to say that poem is proponents of both duty and childhood because of their youthful structure and irony. However, the poem is more heavily weighted towards one allegiance or another fulfillment of duty to family and country than the fulfillment of childhood. On the contrary, Blake’s choice to give his child character a first person voice empowers his protagonist and supports the idea that Blake was a bigger proponent of childhood than of duty. The poem reveals the complicated nature of this issue during the Romantic period, and it counters the other to give them both a more multidimensional perspective on the consequences and benefits of preserving childhood and duty.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this final chapter, Blake’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> can be concluded as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chimney sweeping was a nasty business, and the children who worked as chimney sweepers did not bathe very often, usually just once a week, which means they were probably often covered in soot and looked very dirty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The job was also dangerous. Children could get stuck and suffocate which often happened or get burned and bruised on a regular basis. In addition, chimney sweeps often developed what became known as soot wart, a form of cancer related to prolonged exposure to the cancer-causing substances from the nasty black stuff.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The dicey dangers and widespread injustice of the chimney-sweeping profession really stuck in his craw, so much so that he wrote not one, but two poems called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1">. Last but not least, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chimney Sweeper</span><span class="font1"> is about the ways in which childhood innocence is destroyed, taken away, or ruined by mean old adults.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2005.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font1">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jones, Edward.H. 1968. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Outlines of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: The Mac Millan Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Willard H. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">InterpretingLiterature</span><span class="font1">. USA: Holt Renehart and Wilson Inc..</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Made AdiSantika, I Made Adi. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Thematic Analysis of To the Cuckoo by Wordsworth</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: UniversitasUdayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner, Kathleen and Rausch, Ralph. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary.</span><span class="font1">USA : NTC Publishing group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan, Prof. Dr. M. Pd. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TeoriPengkajianSastra</span><span class="font1">. Yogya:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Smith, Cyril. 2002. Marx and the Fourfold Vision of William Blake.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/smith-cyril/works/articles/blake.htm"><span class="font1">http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/smith-cyril/works/articles/blake.htm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Smith, Sybille. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry.</span><span class="font1"> Pitman Publishing Ltd : London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith A. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature.</span><span class="font1"> New York : McGraw-Hill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sugiantari, Ida AyuPutuCahya. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Historical Approach of Wordsword’s Poem The French Revolution.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: UNiversitasUdayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sukada, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Made.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1987.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">BeberapaAspektentangSastra.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar.PenerbitKayumas&amp;Yayasa nIlmudanSeniLesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Susanti 2004.“Analysis of Figurative Language in the Poem </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">When I Was One and Twenty</span><span class="font1">”. Denpasar: UniversitasUdayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austen Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>