---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TYPES OF MAXIMS OF POLITENESS FOUND IN MOVIE THE GREAT GATSBY"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Mirah Handayani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TYPES OF MAXIMS OF POLITENESS FOUND IN MOVIE </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">GREAT GATSBY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I GUSTI AYU MIRAH HANDAYANI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tulisan ini berjudul “The Types of Maxims of Politeness Found In Movie The Great Gatsby” yang mana tulisan ini membahas penggunaan maxims of politeness oleh karakter-karakter di film. Tujuan dari tulisan ini adalah untuk menemukan tipe-tipe dari maxims of politeness yang digunakan oleh karakter-karakter di film “The Great Gatsby” dan faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan politeness di film.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data dari tulisan ini adalah library research yang mana sumber data di ambil dari sebuah transkrip di internet. Metoda dari mengoleksi data adalah metoda dokumentasi. Metoda kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisis tipe-tipe dari maxims of politeness yang ditemukan di film the great gatsby. Data dianalisis berdasarkan teori maxims of politeness oleh Leech (1983),dan teori faktor-faktor politeness dari Holmes (1992) dan Wardhaugh (1986).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari analisis menunjukkan bahwa ada banyak ekspresi-ekspresi dari maxims of politeness yang ditemukan di film “The Great Gatsby”, yaitu tact maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim, agrement maxim, modesty maxim, symphaty maxim. Ada beberapa faktor yang mempengaruhi maxims of politeness, yaitu kontek situasi, tingkat formalitas, umur, status sosial dan hubungan darah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kesopanan, maxims of politeness, faktor-faktor kesopanan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Politeness in communication is very important because it can maintain the social relationship between the speaker and the hearer. Thus, the speaker and the hearer must be aware of it. Choosing the right words when people communicate with others is one of the polite ways to talk with others, such as in requesting, apologizing, refusing, thanking as well as greeting and parting. Politeness is difficult to practice because it is not just to speak in polite way but also involves cultural values of the community. Holmes (1992: 296) defines that being polite is a complicated business in any language. Politeness is difficult to learn because it</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">is not just a matter of understanding the language, but also involves the social and cultural values of the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Politeness also give the influence of someone’s feeling, it can make someone feel comfortable. According to Holmes (1992: 296) generally, speaking in polite way involves taking account of the feelings of others. A polite person makes persons feel comfortable. It means that being polite means to keep comfortable feeling of the hearer. In discussing the issue of politeness, Leech (1983:81) introduces “the politeness principle which principally minimizes the expression of impolite beliefs and maximizes the expression of polite beliefs”. The politeness principle is a series of maxims, which Leech (1983: 131) has proposed as a way of explaining how to talk politely to others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study focuses on the types of maxims of politeness and the reason of why someone applied politeness.. The maxims of politeness can be found in the movie. The movie was chosen as the data source because maxims of politeness need many conversations to be analyzed. Besides, there are many conversations used by characters which are categorised as maxims of politeness. The movie which will be analyzed here is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2"> Movie</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> This movie is an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel, entitled ‘The Great Gatsby’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems of this study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of maxims of politeness are used by characters in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors made characters apply the maxims of politeness in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the problems above, there are two aims of study as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out and analyze the types of maxims of politeness used by characters in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the factors of maxims of politeness applied by the characters in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To carry out scientific research, we must follow the research method. Research method explains how to do the research. The research method of this study includes: data source, method and technique of collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data source in this study is primary data. The data were taken from a transcript of movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Great Gatsby</span><span class="font2"> in internet. The transcript of this movie was downloaded &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://subscene.com/subtitles/the-great-gatsby-"><span class="font2">http://subscene.com/subtitles/the-great-gatsby-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">2013/english/769949. The director of the movie is Baz Luhrmann. There are many places which are the setting of this film, such as Australia, Sydney, and New South Wales. This movie was released in Indonesia on 17 may 2013. The reason for selecting this movie as the data to be analyzed was because maxims of politeness need many conversations to be analyzed and there are many conversations used by characters which are categorised as maxims of politeness. In analyzing the data, it is focused on the utterances in the conversations of the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study is library research which the data source was taken from a transcript in internet. The method of collecting data is documentation method. There are some techniques of collecting the data in this study. First, watching the movie and listening carefully to the dialogue of every character. Second, reading and note taking the transcript of the movie to get the comparison between acts and the conversations between the characters in the movie and the transcript in order to find the type of maxims of politeness. Finally, the verbal utterances that contain maxims of politeness were taken.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed qualitatively. They were identified, classified, and analyzed. The data source identified to maxims of politeness. The data were classified into tact maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim, modesty maxim, agreement maxim and symphaty maxim. After that, the data were analyzed based on the theory maxims of politeness proposed by Leech (1983), and the factors of politeness proposed by Holmes (1992) and Wardhaugh (1986). In analyzing the data, it is focused on the utterances in the conversations of the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are some data in the movie “The Great Gatsby” that are categorized as tact maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim, modesty maxim, agreement maxim and sympathy maxim.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tact maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">TOM : Come on. We will get a great big room at the Plaza. A bucket of ice, a bottle of whiskey and it will be fun. Come on, it was your idea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DAISY: Fine, have it your own way, Tom. Come on, Jordan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">TOM : (To Gatsby) </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Will you join us, Mr. Gatsby?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the bolded statement, Tom offers Gatsby to join with him to go to Plaza. Tom’s expression is based on the rule of tact maxim. He maximizes the benefit to hearer (Gatsby). He gives a benefit in the form of invitation. Tom gives a benefit to Gatsby by offering him to go to a great big room at the plaza and at the plaza where Gatsby can enjoy a bottle of whisky.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tom’s utterance is influenced by context of situation (the relation between participants). Although the relation between Tom and Gatsby is not really close, Tom still talks politely to Gatsby. Tom as the host tries to treat Gatsby well and makes Gatsby feel comofortable as the guest.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generosity maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">HENRY: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Madame, the dinner is serving.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this situation, Henry as the servant of Daisy told Daisy that the dinner was served. Henry follows generosity maxim which minimize a benefit to self, but maximize a cost to self by talk politely to Daisy. There are some factors in this situation which influence the politeness. First factor is social status. The social status of Henry is different from Daisy. Henry is a servant while Daisy is wife of Tom. Tom was the heir to one of America's wealthiest families. Thus, Henry must talks in a polite way to Daisy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The other factor is age. Age has an important rule to the politeness expressions. It means that the younger person has to speak in a polite way to the older person. In this situation, Henry using </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Madame”</span><span class="font2"> to call Daisy. According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, “Madame”</span><span class="font2"> is a french title given to an older woman especially to one who is married or a widow. Thus, it can be concluded that Henry speaks to older woman politely by calling Daisy </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Madame”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Approbation maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">MCKEE : Hello..Oh, Chester, this must be the cousin. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Oh, you are adorable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK : Oh, thank you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mckee is Myrtle’s neighbor and Nick never meets her before. Mckee greets Nick politely, although she didn’t know Nick. She gives the praise to Nick by saying “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oh, you are adorable”.</span><span class="font2"> It can be concluded that Mckee maximizes praise to nick, and no dispraise in her statement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The factor that influences Mckee’s statement is the context of situation (relation between participants). Although their relation is not close and it was the first time they meet, Mckee still speaks politely to Nick. Besides the degree of formality also influences Mckee’s statement. Mckee uses formal language to Nick, because it’s the first time for Mckee to meet Nick. Mckee shows high formality in her expression and she keeps her utterance in a polite way.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modesty maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">TOM : So, Nick, Daisy tells me that you're over in West Egg. throwing your lot in with those social-climbing primitive new money types.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">My little shack's just a cardboard box</span><span class="font2"> at 80 per month.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the Nick’s expression, he is very modest. He says that his house is just a cardboard box. Besides he uses the word ‘shack’ to his house. It means that his house is just like the shack. Nick really maximizes dispraise to himself. He applies modesty maxim very well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason why Nick applies politeness maxim is social status. According to Holmes (1992: 149) family background may be source of status independently of wealth. In this situation, the family background of Tom is one of America’s wealthiest families. He was the heir to one of America's wealthiest families, because of that Nick is very modest and speaks politely to Tom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agreement maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">NICK : I'm going to call Daisy and invite her to tea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GATSBY &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: That's all right</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:What day would suit you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GATSBY : I don't want to put you to any trouble.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NICK : Day after tomorrow all right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GATSBY : Day after tomorrow?</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Well</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nick asked Gatsby about when he has free time for tea. Gatsby agrees with Nick’s suggestion if it is the day after tomorrow. Gatsby agrees by saying “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well”. </span><span class="font2">Gatsby follows a simple agreement maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The factor of Gatsby’s stataement is the context of situation (topic). They were talked about free time for tea and Gatsby answer Nick’s question in a polite way. Besides Nick is Gatsby’s friendship, Gatsby didn’t want to put Nick to any trouble. Gatsby tries to be nice.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sympathy maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Meyer: What a gentleman. From one of the finest families in the Midwest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sadly, all dead now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meyer’s expression shows the sympathy to Gatsby because Gatsby’s parents have passed away and now he live alone. Meyer feels pity for Gatsby because Gatsby doesn’t have family now. Meyer is following the sympathy maxim well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The factor of Meyer’s expression applied politeness is the context of situation (relation between participant). Meyer has the close relation with Gatsby. He wants to maximize his friendship by showing sympathy to Gatsby.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis and discussion of the previous chapter, the following points can be drawn as the conclusion of this study. There are six types of maxims of politeness that can be found in movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the great gatsby.</span><span class="font2"> Those are: Tact maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim, modesty maxim, agreement maxim and sympathy maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are some factors that influence politeness maxims used by the characters in movie “the great gatsby”. Those are: context of situation of participant, context of situation of setting, context of situation of function, context of situation of topic, social status, age, kinship terms and the degree of formality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim. 2013. The Transcript of the Great Gatsby (cited on 2013 November 2 <sup>nd</sup>)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: </span><a href="http://subscene.com/subtitles/the-great-"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://subscene.com/subtitles/the-great-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">gatsby2013/english/769949</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction to sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman Group UK Limited</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G.N. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">, London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Basil Blackwell Inc</span></p>