---
layout: full_article
title: "MARGINALIZATION OF DEPARTMENTS OF SOCIAL SCIENCES  AND LANGUAGES IN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL IN DENPASAR"
author: "I Wayan Winaja"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-5440 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-5440"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-5440"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">MARGINALIZATION OF DEPARTMENTS OF SOCIAL SCIENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">AND LANGUAGES IN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL IN DENPASAR</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">I Wayan Winaja</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The University of Hindu Indonesia Denpasar Jalan Sangalangit, Tembau, Penatih, Denpasar </span><a href="mailto:w.winaja@yahoo.com"><span class="font0">w.winaja@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Learning should be focused on the social and cultural development of intellectual ability, and encourage the learner’s comprehension and knowledge in order to produce intelligent and educated society. From the data collected from Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar, it was found that the departments of social sciences and languages were seriously marginalized, indicated by the time allocated for social sciences and languages. The time allocated for Natural Sciences such as chemistry, physics, and biology averaged three hours a week. The additional ‘extra’ time allocated for Natural Sciences made the overall time allocated for them double the overall time allocated for Social Sciences such as economics, history sociology, and geography. Furthermore, the time allocated for one of them was one hour a week. The knowledge presented by the books of Natural Sciences was highly “instrumentalist-positivistic”; unlike the books of social sciences which only provided academic normative information. The modernity contained in “instrumentative positivism” was the philosophy which gave more priority to practical things and hard work with financial success as the main criterion. It was concluded that the marginalization of the departments of social sciences and languages in Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar resulted from modernism, the culture of image, and the image that natural sciences were more advantageous than social sciences and languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: marginalization of social sciences and languages, senior high school,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">That the Indonesian educational institutions are weak has resulted from the fact that they do not have any cultural development as the basis. They are only developed based on economic libido model to produce workers which are already integrated in accordance with capitalistic economic values. The graduates of educational institutions become powerless job seekers (“they go to school to seek after jobs”). They do not become creative employment creators, meaning that they do not contribute to the welfare in the cycle of significances which should be the most essential in education and learning process (Purwasasmita, 2002; Piliang, 2004; Suwati, 2008; Winaja, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The capitalistic economic libido is a product of the “idolization” of the ratio of running after growth, as a consequence of the “great narration” of natural sciences. The educational institutions are also snared in the imperialistic great narration of natural sciences over social sciences and languages, as indicated by the departmental choice in senior high school (Katu, 2002).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study was intended to explore the factors causing the departments of social sciences and languages to be marginalized in Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar. In theory, it was expected that this study would be beneficial to the development of sciences in general and educational science in particular, which is particularly related to the factors contributing to the marginalization of the departments of social sciences and languages in Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study was conducted using qualitative method with the perspective of cultural studies (Bennet, 1998). The informants were purposively determined and were developed using snowball technique. The data were collected through in-depth interview, documentation, and library research. The data used were qualitative data as well as quantitative data. The primary data were obtained from the informants and through observation, and the secondary data were obtained from documents. The data were descriptively, qualitatively, and interpretatively analyzed and the stages included data reduction, data presentation, and final conclusion drawing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the data collected from Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar, it was found that the departments of social sciences and languages were seriously marginalized. That was indicated by the time allocated for each lesson. The time allocated for natural sciences such as chemistry, physics, and biology averaged three hours a week. The additional ‘extra’ time allocated for natural sciences made the overall time allocated for natural sciences total four hours a week, meaning that the overall time allocated for natural sciences doubled the time allocated for social sciences such as economics, history, sociology, and geography. The time allocated for social sciences averaged two hours a week; even the time allocated for one of them was one hour a week. The knowledge presented by the books of natural sciences was highly tendentious and encouraged “instrumentalist-positive” modernism. Unlike the books of social sciences which only gave academic normative information. The “Instrumentative Positivism” Modernity was the philosophy which gave more priority to practical things and hard work with financial success as the main criterion (Katu, 2002; Winaja, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In relation to that, the students and society made the natural sciences (the exact sciences) the standard of the highest truth. The followers of positivism assumed that the peak of the human knowledge was the positive sciences (the sciences which are based on facts which are verified and closely measured). The appearance of positivism could not be separated from the cultural climate which allowed a movement to develop to apply the way in which sciences worked in every human activity. Such a cultural climate resulted from the Industrial Revolution in England in the 18<sup>th</sup> century which led to the optimism that human beings would made progress based on the success obtained by the industrial revolution itself. Moreover, positivism avoided philosophy from its speculative work, that is, to search for ontological essences or metaphases which had been undertaken for thousands of years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to positivism, philosophy did not have anything to do except finding out the general principles which were similar to all sciences and using such principles for directing human behavior and as the basis for organizing people’s social behavior. In this context, positivism believed that people would make progress if they appreciated sciences and technology. In other words, positivism highly appreciated the position of sciences and was optimistic that it could play its social role in making human beings</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">welfare. It was stated that positivism was a dogmatic religion as it had institutionalized its global view as a doctrine for sciences (Adrian, 2006; Baudrillard, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It is in this stage of scientific-positive life that economic life became the center of attention and the society was led and organized by a group of elite scientists who were responsible for organizing the society rationally. Thus, in this context of the study, why the students of senior high school tended to prefer the departments of natural sciences to the departments of social sciences and languages. If referring to the Comte’s view concerning the three stages of the development of human thought, it seemed that the society was already in the third stage, that is, in the positive-scientific stage. This led to the fact that everything currently done by people was more influenced by the rational, objective pattern of thinking; even this was always supported by tangible data (Barker, 2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this context of the present study, the asymmetric justifying relation or the domination justifying relation which was intended was the domination of the natural sciences over the social sciences and languages. Most of the students and parents whom were interviewed stated that they preferred the departments of natural sciences for the reason that they were believed to give a better future. They also stated that the department of natural sciences was more prestigious and prospective than the departments of social sciences and languages. This indicated that the fact that natural sciences were much more glorious than social sciences and languages had widely controlled the people’s cognitive structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Such a condition led to what was stated by George Ritzer (2002: 2) concerning a wide scope of paradigm referred to as McDonallization, namely, as “…… a process in which various principles of fast-food restaurants were applied to dominate more sectors of life in America and the other parts of the world”. With reference to what was stated by Ritzer, it could be observed that the McDonalized life did not only affect restaurant business but also employment, health care, journey, politics, family, and education as well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">When education was contaminated by the paradigm of McDonalization, then in the transformational process the sciences learned by the Senior High School students could be affected by the McDonald principles, namely, everything should be instant, and the result should be instantly achieved without paying attention to the aspect of the quality of the result achieved. Such a paradigm could also affect the way of thinking of the students and people in defining sciences. What is meant is that the natural sciences</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">were regarded as being able to escort the students to the world of employment, and representing the symbols of modernism in which the students would be interested in. On the other hand, the social sciences and languages which were far less represented tended to be left behind by the students. It is this which was responsible for the fact that more students would be interested in the department of natural sciences and that less students would be interested in the departments of social sciences and languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CONCLUSIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Modernism, as the hidden ideology of the government, is consciously and unconsciously followed by the schools and stakeholders as far as the departmental choice in senior high school is concerned. This phenomenon could be seen from that fact that more time is allocated for natural sciences; as a result, the dichotomy between the department of natural sciences and the departments of social sciences and languages could not be avoided. Mastering natural sciences means having more opportunities and a better future. This is strengthened by the fact that natural sciences and mathematics contribute to technology. There is an image that those who master the materials provided in natural sciences are those who are clever, intelligent and rational, and have a bright future. Consequently, a school finally becomes a symbol of status. The followers of positivism assume that the peak of sciences is the positive or natural sciences. It is believed that people will make progress if they appreciate sciences and technology. This is expressed in the form of an admiration “consuming technology” (Adrian, 2006). The doctrine is that all sciences should be under the instrumentalist and positivistic paradigm. This has been established in all the cognitive structures of the society and government.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It is suggested to the educational regulator that the binary opposition in education in general and in the development of sciences in general should be temporarily stopped and postponed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Thank God (Ida Hyang Widhi Wasa) that it is His </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">asung waranugraha</span><span class="font0"> which enabled this dissertation to be completed in time. The writer recognizes that this study could have been completed without support, motivation, direction, and encouragement provided by the supervisor and two co-supervisors at the Doctorate Program of Cultural Studies of Udayana University such as Prof. Dr. Nengah Bawa Atmadja, M.A., Prof. Dr. I</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wayan Ardika, M.A., and Prof. I Made Suastika, S.U. and the senior high school students, teachers and headmasters of Public Senior High School 1 Denpasar and Dwijendra Senior High School Denpasar, the officials of the Department of Education, Youth and Sports of Denpasar City. The writer would like to thank and highly appreciate them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Adrian, Dony Gahral. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Percik Pemikiran Kontemporer Sebuah Pengantar Komprehensif</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chris. 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies Teori dan Praktik</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Baudrillard, Jean. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat Konsumsi</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bennet, T. 1988. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural: A Reformer’s Science</span><span class="font0">. St Leonard, NSW: Allen &amp;&nbsp;Unwin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Katu, Nggandi. 2002. “Pendidikan dalam Masyarakat Modern” dalam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Johanes Mardimin (Ed). 2002. Jangan Tangisi Tradisi, Transformasi Budaya menuju Masyarakat Indonesia Modern</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dunia yang Dilipat, Tamasya Melampaui Batas-Batas Kebudayaan</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Purwasasmita, M. 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Fenomenologi Nilai</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ritzer, George. 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sosial Postmodern</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suwati. 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sekolah Bukan untuk Mencari Pekerjaan</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Pustaka Grafia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Winaja, I Wayan. 2012. “Marginalisasi Jurusan Ilmu Pengetahuan Sosial dan Bahasa pada Sekolah Menengah Atas: Studi Kasus di SMA Negeri 1 dan SMA Dwijendra Denpasar”, disertation, Program Doktor, Program Studi Kajian Budaya, Program Pascasarjana, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>