---
layout: full_article
title: "Lexical Cohesion And Semantic Relation With Reference To Saint Exupery, The Little Prince"
author: "Ni Made Ari Supini, Putu Weddha Savitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 19.1 Mei 2017: 304-309</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Lexical Cohesion And Semantic Relation With Reference To Saint</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>Exupery, The Little Prince</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Made Ari Supini<sup>1*</sup>, A.A. Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi<sup>2</sup>, Putu Weddha Savitri<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:arisupini1313@gmail.com"><span class="font2">arisupini1313@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:jungshanti@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">jungshanti@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul Kohesi Leksikal dan Hubungan Semantic dengan Referensi Saint Exupery, The Little Prince. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui jenis kohesi leksikal yang digunakan dalam novel dan untuk mengetahui hubungan semantik yang digunakan dalam kohesi leksikal dalam novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data diambil dari The Little Prince novel karya Saint Exupery. Penelitian ini adalah penelitian kepustakaan yang dilakukan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi untuk mengumpulkan data. Data penelitian ini dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Penelitian ini menerapkan teori yang diusulkan oleh Halliday dan Hassan, Kohesi dalam bahasa Inggris (1976) menjelaskan jenis kohesi menjadi dua; Leksikal Kohesi dan Gramatikal Kohesi dan teori yang diusulkan oleh George Yule, The Study of Language (2006) untuk mengetahui jenis hubungan semantik menggunakan kohesi leksikal dalam novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa banyak kohesi leksikal ditemukan dalam data seperti pengulangan yang dapat diklasifikasikan ke dalam empat kelas pengulangan, sinonim, antonim, dan superordinate. Kemudian kolokasi dapat dibagi menjadi eksklusif dan inklusif. Analisis lain dalam penelitian ini adalah fungsi kohesif item leksikal yang menunjukkan hubungan referensial seperti anafora cataphora dan hubungan semantik antara unsur leksikal dalam teks yang membuat kohesif teks juga dapat ditemukan dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kohesi leksikal, hubungan Semantic, The Little Prince.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A text is best regarded as a semantic unit; a unit not of form but of meaning (Halliday and Hassan, 1995: 2). In analyzing text, there are still some problems found, for example, it is hard for us to understand the meaning of a text if we do not have the ability to understand various words and their uses in the text. Cohesive in the text can be achieved grammatically and lexically. Based on the book of Cohesion in English by Halliday and Hassan (1976), grammatical cohesion is a kind of cohesion that expresses relations on grammar and can be divided into four parts; Reference, Ellipsis,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Conjunction, and Substitution. In addition, the lexical cohesion is the cohesion that is expressed through relation on vocabulary which can be divided into two parts; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">reiteration and collocation</span><span class="font2">. Semantic relation is relation between meanings. The relation is between a word and an expression or phrase. Some important kinds of semantic relation discussed here are synonym, antonym, and hyponym. The discussion of this study was focused on the lexical cohesion as a means of relating sentences into a text to make the resulting text meaningful and easily interpreted. This study is interesting to be discussed because there are a lot of lexical cohesions occuring in this novel; they are the lexical cohesion created between lexical elements, such as words, groups, and phrases</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems formulated in this study based on the background:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of lexical cohesion are found in the “The Little Prince” novel?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the semantic relations of the lexical cohesions expressed in the text?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After formulating the problems of the study, the aims of the research are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of lexical cohesion used in the novel “The Little Prince” by Saint Exupery</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the semantic relation of the use of the lexical cohesions in the novel “The Little Prince” by Saint Exupery</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source in this study was taken immediately from a novel entitled “The Little Prince” by Saint Exupery which was republished in 2010. This novel consists of twenty seven chapters and from the entire of the chapters there are fifty nine data which showed the cohesiveness and coherence in lexical cohesion and semantic relations. In collecting the data, the library research method was applied to obtain detailed information regarding the theory of meaning and concept of lexical cohesion.The note taking technique was applied by taking notes of the whole words which contain the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">lexical cohesion. The collected data were analyzed using the descriptive qualitative method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Lexical Cohesion and Semantic Relation with Reference to Saint Exupery, The Little Prince</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This analysis presents two types of lexical cohesion found in this novel and the semantic relation of lexical cohesion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 1</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">True Stories from Nature</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, about the primeval forest. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">It</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing. (LC.Rep1.P3.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “it” in the second sentence (line 2) is most likely referring anaphorically to the animate “True Stories from Nature” in the preceding sentence. The word “it” is the head of grammatical function and the class is as pronoun. Meanwhile the words “True Stories from Nature” have a grammatical function as a noun. The word “it” in sentence two is ordinary repetition which refers anaphorically to the word “True Stories from Nature” in the first sentence. Both items create a cohesive effect because the word “it” in the following text exist with the words “True Stories from Nature” in the preceding text. Thus the type of lexical cohesion in the text above is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Repetition</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 2</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tiny</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> planet, my </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">little</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like . . . (LC.Syn2.P26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “tiny” is the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Synonym </span><span class="font2">of the word “little” in this paragraph (line 3). Both of them have no referential item and there is referential relation between. The word “little” anaphorically refers to the word “tiny”. From the text above the word “tiny” and “little” mean something small.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this paragraph the word “tiny” has the semantic relationship with the word “little” that expresses the same meaning. According to the Oxford Dictionary both of those words can mean small. The word “tiny, (2006: 1552)” means very small, meanwhile the word “little, (2006: 864)” means small in size, amount, or degree (often used to convey an appealing diminutiveness or express an affectionate or condescending attitude). Therefore, both of those words (tiny and little) refer to the semantic relation, that is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Synonymy </span><span class="font2">because it has a similar context situation that means something small.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 3</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">outside</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> and boas from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">inside</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. (LC.Ant1.P6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the sentence above, the word “outside” is opposite of the word “inside” because they have opposite meaning; the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">inside</span><span class="font2"> refers back to “outside” in the preceding text. The word “inside anaphorically refers to the word “outside” in the sentence. However, they have the same grammatical function as noun. Thus the type of lexical cohesion in the text above is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Antonym.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this paragraph there is one semantic relation that expresses the opposite meaning. The word “outside” and the word “inside” in the second sentence can be classified as antonymy. According to the Oxford Dictionary, both mean the contrary, in this context they mean location. The word “outside, (2006: 1037)” means the external side or surface of something, meanwhile the word “inside, (2006: 771)” means the inner side or surface of something. Therefore, both of those words (outside and inside) refer to semantic relation, that is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Antonymy </span><span class="font2">because it has a contradictory meaning, but is still within the context of a situation, that is, location.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 4</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">boa constrictor</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> in the act of swallowing an </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">animal</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Here is a copy of the drawing.(LC.S.Or1.P3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “animal” refers anaphorically to animal which is superordinate of “boa constrictor”. Both of those words can be classified as superordinate because the word</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“animal” has more generic meaning than “boa constrictor” and they have the same grammatical function noun. The word “animal” is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Superordinate </span><span class="font2">and its hyponym is “boa constrictor”. “Boa constrictor” is also semantically related to as the co-hyponym of the super ordinate animal. The word “animal” refers anaphorically to animal which is a super ordinate of ‘boa constrictor”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this paragraph there is one semantic relation that holds between general class and its sub classes. In the second sentence the item “boa constrictor” is hyponym / sub classes of the word “animal” as the super ordinate. According to the Oxford Dictionary the word “boa constrictor, (2006: 151)” means a large snake, while the word “animal, (2006: 50)” refers to a group of related species. Therefore, both of those words (boa constrictor and animal) refer to the semantic relation, that is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Hyponymy </span><span class="font2">because it has a general class and its sub classes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 5</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Little Prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down, but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king’s magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">he was tired</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">he yawned</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. (LC.Coll3.P41)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “he was tired” (line 3) and “he yawned” (line 4) can be classified as the collocation. It is a kind of the exclusive collocation because they are bond to each other. The worda “he was tired” are related to the condition of the Little Prince when he is around the planet which has the same grammatical function as adjective. Meanwhile “he yawned” is related to the act of the Little Prince when he was tired from the text above as verb. Both of those words create cohesiveness of the text and are supposed to be lexical sets which cannot be separated from each other. Thus the type of lexical cohesion in the text above is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Exclusive Collocation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis above, there are some conclusions that can be drawn; the type of lexical cohesion is classified into two forms: the first is reiteration which involves repetition, synonym, antonym, and super ordinate. The second is collocation which can be divided into two classes: inclusive, and exclusive. Almost all of lexical items are dominated by repetition since many words are repeated in the text although</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">another lexical items show the same meaning, opposite meaning or super ordinate. However, all the lexical items support the cohesiveness of the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The semantic relation of lexical items can be found with synonym, antonym, and hyponym / super ordinate. In the text, semantic relation is not only shown by synonym, antonym and hyponym but also by the relation between the lexical items that have the identity of reference. The use of grammatical item in this text, that is reference item shows the referential relation. The coherence of the novel helps form cohesiveness in the novel itself. The use of the lexical item likes repetition, synonym, antonym, and collocation build up the cohesiveness in the text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>7.Bibliography</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Exupery, Saint. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Little Prince.</span><span class="font2"> Bahasa Indonesia: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Geeraerts, Dirk. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theories of Lexical Semantics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M. A. K. and Ruqaiya Hassan. 1976. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hurford, R. James, Brendan Heasley and Michael B. Smith. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics a Coursebook.</span><span class="font2"> New York: United States of America by Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics; The Study of Meaning,</span><span class="font2"> 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition. Middlesex: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Riemer, Nick. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Semantics.</span><span class="font2"> United States of America: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, George. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language</span><span class="font2">. United States of America: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">309</span></p>