---
layout: full_article
title: "Language Styles With Reference To The Movie Ella Enchanted By Gail Carson Levine"
author: "Yunita Gloria Tololiu"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 19.1 Mei 2017: 297-303</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Language Styles With Reference To The Movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> By Gail Carson Levine</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Yunita Gloria Tololiu <sup>1</sup>*, I Nengah Sudipa <sup>2</sup> , Anak Agung Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi <sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:gloriayunita@gmail.com"><span class="font1">gloriayunita@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:jungshanti@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">jungshanti@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul Gaya Bahasa dengan Referensi Film Ella Enchanted oleh Gail Carson Levine. Studi ini sebagian besar bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi gaya bahasa yang digunakan oleh semua karakter dalam film termasuk jenis-jenis gaya bahasa dan faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi karakter untuk menggunakan gaya bahasa tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini dikumpulkan dari percakapan para karakter dalam film yang diusung oleh Gail Carson Levine. Data tersebut dikumpulkan dengan cara mengamati dan mencatat detail percakapan para karakter. Hal tersebut dianalisis berdasarkan teori yang diusulkan oleh Holmes (1992) yang membagi jenis gaya bahasa ke dalam bahasa standar dan vernakular. Sementara itu, faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi pembicara untuk menggunakan gaya bahasa tersebut dibagi menjadi partisipan, pengaturan, topik dan fungsi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan analisis data, hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa ada sebelas percakapan yang diklasifikasikan ke dalam bahasa standar dan enam belas percakapan dalam bahasa vernakular yang diucapkan oleh karakter dalam film. Dalam percakapan mereka, faktor partisipan, pengaturan, topik dan fungsi mempengaruhi penggunaan gaya bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: gaya bahasa, faktor, bahasa vernakular, bahasa standar</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is a means of communication used by people to communicate with each other. This is a way used by them to communicate and establish the relationship with other people. Bonvillain (1993:1) says language is an integral part of human behavior. It is the primary means of interaction between people. Speakers use language to convey their thoughts, feeling, intentions, and desires to others. Language has a close relationship with the society, in this case, people need a language in order to be able to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">communicate and interact with other people. The study of language in relation to the society is called sociolinguistics. The difference in language use of everyone ia explained in sociolinguistics as variations. There are many kinds of variationa such as dialect, code-switching, code mixing, vernacular language, standard language, lingua franca and so on whereas these differences are caused the appearance of stylistic variation. Stylistic variation is used by the people whereas they talk in various ways based on different social contexts. Style is one of language variations used by the people in the way they speak and it cannot be denied that every person has their own style to represent their personalities. Language style can be defined as the form of language used by the people based on their situation. A movie entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1"> is one movie in which some characters have language style in communicating with other people.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The problems analyzed in this study are formulated as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of language style are found in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the factors influencing the use of language style in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The purposes of this study can be divided into two points, as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of language style found in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the factors influencing the use of language style in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data for this study were taken from the movie entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1"> by Gail Carson Levine. In collecting the data, documentation method was applied by observing and note taking. The collected data were identified and classified based on Holmes’ theory (1992) using the the qualitative method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis the Types of Language Style found in the Movie Ella Enchanted and the Factors Influencing Their Use</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were classified using the theory proposed by Holmes (1992). He divides language style into two parts, they are standard and vernacular languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standard Language Style</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Standard language is generally one which is written and has undergone some degree of regulation or codification (in a grammar and a dictionary). There are examples of conversations happening among the characters;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. Dame Olga : My precious Hattie and my special Olive. Oh. And you must be Ella.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ella &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Pleased to meet you</span><span class="font1">. (00.08.23)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ella used standard language to welcome her new family. She said </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Pleased to meet you</span><span class="font1"> to Dame Olga, Hattie and Olive. This utterance is acceptable in standard language because it is grammatically used by someone to welcome someone else. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Pleased to meet you</span><span class="font1"> is a standard form of greetings and a polite way that is often used by people when they meet someone else for the first time. People tend to use welcoming words in standard language than informal style to make a good impression and create a warm situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factors influencing Ella to use standard language are related to the participant and function. From the participant side, Dame Olga, Hattie and Olive were a new family of Ella. Ella wanted to show her good character in front of them for the first time and also created a good relationship among them because they were going to live together. From the function side, the utterance meaning of what Ella said to them that she wanted to express her happy feeling because she had a new family after her</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">mother passed away.</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark18"><span class="font1">b. Dame Olga:</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark19"><span class="font1">Mandy:</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark20"><span class="font1">Trader:</span></a></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">: I want to look 25 at tonight's ball. What do you suggest?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: A time machine?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">May I recommend our newest procedure</span><span class="font1">? Bat faeces and oxen blood. Batox. Works wonders, although I do caution you, some people have a temporarily bad reaction. (00.55.41)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The trader intentionally used formal style when he spoke with his customer. He said </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">May I recommend our newest procedure</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">?</span><span class="font1"> when he was showing his new</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">procedure to Dame Olga. He used </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">May;</span><span class="font1"> it is used to ask for or to give permission (en.oxforddictionaries.com). Apart from the definition, the trader’s question has the meaning, that is a suggestion of Dame Olga. The trader’s utterance can be acceptable in standard language because his question is grammatically correct and it suits the standard form of question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factor influencing the trader to use standard language or formal style is the participant. The participant is Dame Olga who did a treatment with the trader. The trader talked with Dame Olga as formal as possible and treated as her desire with a good service so, she was going to feel much appreciated and in the end, she was going to buy and use the trader’s newest procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vernacular Language Style</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vernacular style or informal style generally refers to a language which has not been standardized or codified and which does not have official status (unmodified or standard variety). There are examples of conversations happening among the characters;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ella : I've never seen anything like this.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mandy : I know. No one has. And I don't want them to, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">cos </span><span class="font1">then they might take him away. (00.25.44)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mandy used informal style when she responded Ella’s statement in which she said </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">cos </span><span class="font1">in her words. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Cos</span><span class="font1"> is the abbreviation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">because</span><span class="font1">. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">cos</span><span class="font1"> is classified into informal language because it cannot be acceptable in standard language and it is not appropriate in standard form of language. That word is very popular in the society because it is always used by people when they are communicating with others, texting with friends or family, making status on the social media and replying comments. We could find many abbreviation words from </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">because</span><span class="font1"> such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">‘cause, coz, b’cos</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">cos</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factors influencing Mandy to use informal language are setting and participant. Here, the conversation between Ella and Mandy took place in Mandy’s room. In this case, Mandy tended to speak informally to Ella in her room to make a cozy situation so, Ella can speak with relaxed and sharing her story freely to Mandy. Ella and Mandy could speak informally to each other because of the close relationship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Owner of hotel : Can I help you?</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Ella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">: I'm looking for Lucinda Perriweather. It's kind of urgent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Owner of hotel</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: Sorry. She was kicked out last week.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Ella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: Do you know where I could find her?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Owner of hotel</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Nope</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Ella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: You don't understand. If I don't find her, something terrible's going to happen.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Owner of hotel</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">: Finding her would be something terrible. (01.06.03)</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ella and the owner of hotel shows that they used formal style for the first time and it intentionally changed into informal style because of the different situation. The owner of the hotel said </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nope</span><span class="font1"> to Ella. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nope</span><span class="font1"> is actually a slang word in which many teenagers use it when communicating with their friends. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Nope</span><span class="font1"> means informal variant of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font1">. It is often used by people in chatting and communicating with friends or the people who have close relationship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factors influencing the owner to use informal style are the topic and function. In the conversation, Ella was looking for her godmother (Lucinda) and asked the owner about her. When the owner heard Lucinda, she immediately changed her formal language into informal. The owner was reluctant to talk about Lucinda so, she tended to speak informally with Ella by saying the abbreviation word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nope</span><span class="font1">. Besides, there was something hidden in the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nope</span><span class="font1">; it was an expression of annoyance that she felt when they talked about Lucinda, the short answer of Ella’s question shows that she did not want to hear that name and stop talking about Lucinda.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis in the previous chapter, it can be concluded that the characters in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ella Enchanted</span><span class="font1"> movie used the two language styles when they were communicating with each other. The two language styles are standard language or can be said as formal style and vernacular language or can be said as informal style. As the result, vernacular language or informal style is the most common language style found and used by the characters in the movie (16 conversations).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the findings, there are four factors which caused the use of language styles found in the movie. They are participant, setting, topic and function. As the result, the most factors influencing the characters to speak in standard or vernacular language</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">are participant (12 conversations) followed by function (9 conversations), setting (5 conversations) and topic (2 conversations).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Adhalina, Nurul. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Different Language Style and Language Function Between Students and Teachers in Updating Their Status In Facebook Webpage</span><span class="font1">. Semarang: Diponegoro University. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://core.ac.uk/download/files/379/11730428.pdf"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://core.ac.uk/download/files/379/11730428.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bonvillain, Nancy. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Culture, and Communication</span><span class="font1">. United States of America: Prentince-Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dong, B. (2016). Formality of the style, maturity of the artist - stylistic analysis of a poem in joyce's A portrait of the artist as a young man. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Practice in Language &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Studies, 6</span><span class="font1">(1), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;97-101. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Retrieved &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://search.proquest.com/docview/1761494422/2FD5370369624D7FPQ/1?accountid=32506"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://search.proquest.com/docview/1761494422/2FD5370369624D7FPQ/1?acco</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://search.proquest.com/docview/1761494422/2FD5370369624D7FPQ/1?accountid=32506"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">untid=32506</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Learning about Language: An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. United Sates of America: Longman Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jawas, Nurul Muthiah. 2015. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style Used By Fangirls in Japanese Idol Online Community.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: English Department Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jendra, Indrawan. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics: The Study of Societies’ Languages</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rashid, S. K. M., &amp;&nbsp;Zainal, H. (2013). Kajian kontrastif terhadap gaya bahasa al-tawkid antara bahasa melayu dan bahasa Arab/A contrastive study of language style al-tawkid between malay and arabic languages. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Islamiyyat, 35</span><span class="font1">(2), 19-25. Retrieved from</span><a href="http://search.proquest.com/docview/1491800835?accountid=32506"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://search.proquest.com/docview/1491800835?accountid=32506</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wardaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. New York: Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zuliana, Novi. 2013. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Language Style Used in The Slogan of Advertisement That Found in The Internet</span><span class="font1">. Padang: Bung Hatta University. Retrieved from </span><a href="http://ejurnal.bunghatta.ac.id/index.php?journal=JFIB&amp;page=article&amp;op=view&amp;path%5b%5d=1565&amp;path%5b%5d=1415"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://ejurnal.bunghatta.ac.id/index.php?journal=JFIB&amp;page=article&amp;op=view&amp;p</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://ejurnal.bunghatta.ac.id/index.php?journal=JFIB&amp;page=article&amp;op=view&amp;path%5b%5d=1565&amp;path%5b%5d=1415"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ath%5B%5D=1565&amp;path%5B%5D=1415</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Ella Enchanted (Film)” En.wikipedia.com. 2016. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ella_Enchanted_(film)"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ella_Enchanted_(film)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Ella Echanted Script – Dialogue Transcript” Script-o-rama.com. 2016. Retrieved fro</span><a href="http://www.script-o-rama.com/movie_scripts/e/ella-enchanted-script-anne-hathaway.html"><span class="font1">m</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.script-o-rama.com/movie_scripts/e/ella-enchanted-script-anne-</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.script-o-rama.com/movie_scripts/e/ella-enchanted-script-anne-hathaway.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">hathaway.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">303</span></p>