---
layout: full_article
title: "The Meaning Of Visual And Verbal Communication Elements In The Burgerkill Video Clip Entitled “Under The Scars”"
author: "Ida Bagus Adi Sumanjaya, I Nengah Sudipa, Yana Qomariana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 151 – 158</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Meaning Of Visual And Verbal Communication Elements In The Burgerkill Video Clip Entitled “Under The Scars”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Bagus Adi Sumanjaya<sup>1*</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Yana Qomariana<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Departement, Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:gusdeebagus@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[gusdeebagus@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">[nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:yqomariana@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[yqomariana@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Penelitian ini menganalisis aspek komunikasi secara visual dan verbal pada video klip Burgerkill. Tujuan penelitian ini dibagi menjadi dua. Pertama adalah untuk menganalisis unsur-unsur komunikasi visual yang terkait dengan topik menggunakan teori komunikasi visual dan tujuan yang kedua adalah untuk menemukan makna lirik lagu dengan menggunakan teori visual dan verbal. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah studi pustaka dan teknik pencatatan ketika memilih data. Penelitian ini dianalisis secara kualitatif berdasarkan teori John Dyer (1993), teori makna oleh Geoffrey Leech (1974). Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa video klip di album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Venomous</span><span class="font2"> tersebut berisi 5 kategori komunikasi visual seperti penampilan, perilaku, aktivitas, properti dan tempat, serta visual. Video klip ini juga berisi 2 fitur semantik seperti personifikasi dan ironi. Makna konseptual dan makna konotatif terdapat dalam fitur semantik. Fitur-fitur semantik dan makna digunakan oleh penulis untuk menghibur pendengar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">video klip musik, visual, verbal, komunikasi, arti.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A music video or song video is a</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_film"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">short film</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">integrating a</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Song"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">song</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">and imagery, produce for</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promotion_(marketing)"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">promotional</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">or</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artistic"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">artistic</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">purposes. Modern music videos were primarily made and prior to the 1980s, these works were described by various terms including </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illustrated_song"><span class="font2">&quot;</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">illustrated song</span><span class="font2">&quot;</span></a><span class="font2">, &quot;filmed insert&quot;, &quot;promotional (promo) film&quot;, &quot;promotional clip&quot;, &quot;promotional video&quot;, &quot;song video&quot;, &quot;song clip&quot; or &quot;film clip&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Video is becoming a key element in the next generation of multimedia computing and communication. The rapid growth of video data raises a significant interest for developing efficient video search tools based on visual features, including color, texture, motion, body language, gesture, etc. There are two main families of image video indexing and retrieval systems: those based on the content of the images like color, texture, shape, objects, etc. And those based on the description of the images like keywords,sixe, etc.(Bruce, 2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">But sometimes it is depending from spectators. They are usually not understands about the message or the meaning of the music video clip that they have watched. The topic was interesting because in a music video clip we can analyze the message that the song writer want to deliver to us, especially in Burgerkill’s music video clip entitled “Under The Scars”. It is not just about the lyrics, the movement of an actor or an actress in a music video clip but also more reveals the expression of a song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study there are some problems to be analyzed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of visual sign communication elements are used in the video clip of Burgerkill entitled “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Under The Scars</span><span class="font2">” ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the lyrics from the song are represented into the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Under The Scars” </span><span class="font2">video clip based on the real meaning by the lyric itself?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study there are some aims of study, they are follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the use of visual communication elements in the Burgerkill video clip entitled “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Under The Scars”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the lyrics from the song represent into the Burgerkill video clip entitled “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Under The Scars”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are some methods in this research; there are three steps that were taken to analyze the music video clip. Those steps are: data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data. The data was taken a music video clips from a Indonesian Metal band namely Burgerkill. The video clips chosen are determined in the terms of the song contents. The title is “Under The Scars”. In collecting the data, library research method was applied. It is used to get the information related to visual communication elements and also to find out the meaning of Burgerkill’s music video clip. The techniques applied for this study were note taking the video music and listening thoroughly to the video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part presents the analysis of a music video clip of Burgerkill that has been collected as the data sources entitled “Under The Scars”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5 Components of The Principle of Visual Communication Elements In Visual Sign</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are five elements of appearance that are used in this music video clip; they are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gender, nationality, hair, body and looks</span><span class="font2">. The classification of the gender in this video can be classified male only. Genders are identified based on the overall appearance of each the band members and the actors such as their looks and the body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nationality in this music video clip only found Indonesian as the nationality of the all of actors. Spike, straight, wavy, blonde, bald, short and double pony tail are the hair’s category of the band members and the actor, which can be identified in this video. The bodies in this video present the characteristic of each character in the story, there were short, medium, tall, and for the curve, there were skinny, fat, strong. The looks of each character in this video are identified. Looks are indicates behavior of emotion at any one time and it is manifest in three main codes of non verbal communication.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Three elements of manner are expression, pose and clothes. The expression of the singer which has seen in this video is a negative expression</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">seems like have a bad problem and depressed. The pose which is seen in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">video is kind of passive pose, because the band just sited in the same place as same as the actors. But in the middle of this music video clip there are some guys destroying house and make such movement which involves the body’s part during the video.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The clothes used in this video are variable. Jeans, t shirt, are the example of non formal clothes but comfortable. Shirt, blouse are the example of formal clothes that seen in this video by the singer and the actors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Body gestures, movement and posture can be related to what the actor is doing. Body movements are the elements of the activity, which appeared in this video. There are four kinds of body movements that can be identified on this video. They are: sitting, standing, jumping, and walking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Props and Setting</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The music tools and sofa are the props that are used in this video. A room is also used as props in this video. The setting in this video consist of indoor setting, the indoor settings in this video are the house, and bathroom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual or Image</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The face of the actors/actress in every scene is observed from focus and depth vision. The face of the actor is presented in fuzzy description. The close up pictures can be seen on the pictures of the band member appearance when they have got hit by the punch and also sing. And then with the actors who sit and destroy something in the house.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Front and side are the angles that use to produce in the pictures in this video. The position of camera angle used in this music video clip can divided in two. First is the side angle. It is used to have a deeper mood of the actor when the zoom is used. The second is static and dynamic. The position of the camera is static and located straight. It is possible to record all the activities without changing the position of the camera.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of the Song Lyric</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">When everything has become unbalanced between the giving and receiving, there will be some friction that makes the anger and the desire to pulverize all the existing ones. The anger of disappointed people to the shame system in this nation, the promises before the election already refused by the chosen one. The meaning of the song represented as social meaning in the reality of this nation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study has discussed about the analysis of sign and meaning, especially the visual communication elements used to support visual sign on video clip. The theories applied to support this paper are the theory of visual communication elements by Dyer (1993), and the theory of principle or the meaning by Leech (1974).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first analysis, single “Under the Scars” by Burgerkill used 17 elements (age, gender, national and racial, hair, body and size, looks, expression, pose, clothes, touch, body movement, positional communication, focus and depth of vision, close up, lighting and color, cropping, and camera angle) from 6 categories (appearance, manner, activity,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">props, setting, and photographs or images) of visual communication elements. The objective is to further deepen what elements are used in the video clip.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second, analyzed the lyrics from the song represent into the “Under the Scars” video clip based on the real meaning by the lyric itself. The interpreter or the analyst the song message in “Under the Scars” music video clip without asked the writer of the song itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the analysis of this music video clip, it can be said that visual communication elements have important role in conveying the song message. It will be easier to understand what the clip wants to convey if the visual sign are supported with good concept. Finally, an effective visual communication is achieved by displaying information in a way that enables people to clearly see an accurate representation of message and understand what they see.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Agung Candrajaya, Anak Agung. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Visual Communication Elements Used in the Michael Jackson’s Video Clips”.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar: English Extension Program, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer. 1993. “ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Theory of Visual Communication Elements”.</span><span class="font2"> London: Metheun &amp;&nbsp;Co.Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Eco. 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“A Theory of Semiotics”.</span><span class="font2"> Bloomington: Indiana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic on Communication And Visual Sign</span><span class="font2">. UNS Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moriarty, Sandra E. 2002. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Journal of the Symbolic of Semiotics and Visual Communication</span><span class="font2">”. U.S.A, Colorado University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Story About Burgerkill</span><span class="font2">, resource: </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com/Burgerkill"><span class="font2">http://www.youtube.com/Burgerkill</span></a><span class="font2"> – Simple English Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.htm</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Visual sign on Communication, resource: http: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/visualsign/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">158</span></p>