---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Shift of Adverbs of Manner In Reference to: “City of Bones: Mortal Instruments” by Cassandra Clare"
author: "Jaynne Ilyanora Patricia, Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-73370 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-73370"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-73370"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 5 No. 1, Februari 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2021.v05.i01.p07"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2021.v05.i01.p07</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">| </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">47</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Shift of Adverbs of Manner In Reference to: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“City of Bones: Mortal Instruments”</span><span class="font4"> by Cassandra Clare</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Jaynne Ilyanora Patricia<sup>1</sup>, Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya<sup>2</sup>, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>123</sup>English Department – Faculty of Arts – Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:1jaynneilyanorapatricia@gmail.com"><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>jaynneilyanorapatricia@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><a href="mailto:2putrayadnya@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"><sup>2</sup>putrayadnya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><a href="mailto:3alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"><sup>3</sup>alit_ida@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1"> Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font3">This study is entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">“Translation Shift of Adverbs of Manner in Reference to ‘City of Bones: Mortal Instruments’ by Cassandra Clare”</span><span class="font3">. The aims are to identify the equivalences of adverbs of manner translated into Bahasa Indonesia and to analyze the shift of adverbs of manner in the novel. The data was collected by close-reading to identify the English adverbs of manner and its translation into Bahasa Indonesia found in the novel, highlighting the data found in both of the novels, comparing the data found to find the equivalences in both source and target language, then note-taking the data found to be analyzed afterward. The theories used in this research are the theory of translation proposed by Larson (1984) and the translation theory of shift proposed by Catford (2000). The results show that the English adverbs of manner found were equivalent to prepositions </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan, sambil, oleh, bagaikan, seperti, </span><span class="font3">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">secara</span><span class="font3"> that were followed with adjective, noun, verb, adjective phrase, noun phrase, verb phrase, or adverb after the preposition. The translation shift that occurred in the translation was category shift, in which the adverbs of manner shifted into an adjective, verbs, and numeral, and another type of translation shift that occurred was a level shift, in which adverbs of manner shifted adjective phrase, the noun phrase, and verb phrase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: adverbs of manner, shift, translation</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The translation is one of the ways for a human to understand each other, specifically those who speak different languages. The English word “translation” derives from the Latin word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">translatio,</span><span class="font3"> which comes from the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">trans</span><span class="font3"> (across) + </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ferre</span><span class="font3"> (to carry/to bring, which </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">latio</span><span class="font3"> is the past participle of ferre). In other words, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">translation</span><span class="font3"> means “carrying across”, which in this case a text from one language is ‘carried across’ into another language. According to Nida</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and Taber (1982; 12), they see translating is a process of reproducing in the receptor language the closest natural equivalent of the source language message. Newmark (1991; 27), said that translating is the act of transferring the meaning of a unit of language from one language to another, whether it is a whole or part of the text. Thus, translation can be considered as a process of rendering meaning, ideas, or messages of a text from one language to another language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating, it is important to understand the message that wants to be</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">conveyed to avoid mistakes in the translation product. There is one thing that a translator needs to be aware of when conducting a translation process besides having an in-depth understanding of the intended message from the source language, yet the equivalency of the translation as well. According to Larson (1984; 15), translation is classified into two main types; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">form-based</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">meaning</span><span class="font3">-based. The form-based translation is known as literal translation, which attempts to translate every single word in a text. While meaning-based translation ‘reproduce’ the source language text in the most natural forms of the target language that will minimalize the ‘awkwardness’ or ‘oddness’ in the translation product to be understood by the target language readers. This kind of translation is also known as idiomatic translation. Thus, a good translator will try to translate idiomatically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A paper entitled English Noun Phrase Translation Shift in the Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“The Davinci Code”</span><span class="font3"> (Sugianti, 2017) described that there were category shift and the structural shift occurred in the process of translation. In her research, she found that there were three types of translation shift, which are classified into (1) Unit Shift (from high to low level), (2) Structural Shift (linguistic factor), and (3) Intra-System Shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A journal of language and translation studies entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Structural Shift In “Gajah Selalu Ingat”</span><span class="font3"> (Iki, 2016) explained that there was structure shift in the subject, predicate, object, adverb, and compliment in the translation. It is also explained that in English sentences, there were modifiers that functioned as adjectives or adverbs, and head as the main word, and usually, in translating nouns into Bahasa Indonesia, the sentence structure changed, reversed from the English sentence structure. However, despite having the differences</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">in the sentence structures, it is explained that the intended meaning of the source language into the target language was the same.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A paper entitled Translation Shift in Translating English Noun Phrases into Indonesian Noun Phrases Found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Let It Snow”</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Dalam Derai Salju </span><span class="font3">(Santiari, 2017) found that there were level shifts and category shift; included structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intra-system shift). There were formbased translations and meaning-based translations found as well. Mostly, the translation shift that occurred was the structural shift and meaning-based translation (idiomatic translation) was dominated in the translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An undergraduate thesis entitled Translation Equivalence and Shift of Noun Phrases in the Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street</span><span class="font3"> and in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Serpih – Serpih Harapan</span><span class="font3"> (Fitriyani, 2017) found equivalency in the translation known as formal correspondence and textual-equivalency, and there were found 120 noun phrase in the analysis, 12 phrases of formal correspondences and 10 phrases of textual-equivalency. The shifts that occurred in the translation were structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intrasystem shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Arisuta (2018) in his paper entitled Strategi Penerjemahan dan Pergeseran Makna Onomatope pada Lirik Lagu JKT48, stated that there were seven strategies of translation found to translate the onomatopoeias and the shift of meaning of onomatopoeias that was affected from using the translation strategy by paraphrasing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Adnyana (2017) in his paper entitled Prepositional Phrases and Their Translation Shifts in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font3"> in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tersulut</span><span class="font3"> found that the equivalency applied in translation were formal correspondences and textual equivalency, and the translation shifts that occurred in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the translation were structure shift, class shift, unit shift, and intra-system shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A journal of language and translation studies entitled Shift of Noun Phrases in the Translation of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault In Our Stars </span><span class="font3">into Indonesian Version (Putro, 2016) found that the types of translation shifts that occurred in the translation, and the shifts (category shift) occurred because there were differences in the noun phrase structure between English and Bahasa Indonesia, differences in word class, the number of components in a sentence and the differences between plural and singular terms in both languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A paper entitled Pergeseran Penerjemahan Idiom Pada Novel Oda Nobunaga Karya Sohachi Yamaoka (Muliani, 2016) explained that the types of translation shift were form-based shift and meaning-based shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An undergraduate thesis entitled Pergeseran Bentuk dan Makna Terjemahan dalam Cerpen </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kappa</span><span class="font3"> Karya Akugatawa Ryunosuke (Krisna, 2018) found that class shift occurred in the translation and the translation process mostly using the literal translating technique.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suryawati (2015), in her paper entitled Strategi Penerjemahan dan Pergeseran Makna Kosakata Budaya Material Pada Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Densha Otoko </span><span class="font3">Karya Nakano Hitori Serta Terjemahannya Dalam Bahasa Indonesia found that the shift of meaning that occurred due to the translation strategy used, which was cultural substitution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kurniawati (2014), through his study entitled Types, Function and Position of Adverbs In the Yak Magazine, found that there were several classifications of adverbs found and the position of adverbs were put in the sentence, such as at the beginning of a sentence, in the middle or at the end of the sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dianti (2016), in her paper entitled Penerjemahan Majas Metafora dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kaze No Uta Wo Kike</span><span class="font3"> Karya Haruki Murakami found that the metaphors were translated by keeping the metaphorical image, translated into simile, translated into figurative meaning with or without keeping metaphorical imagery, translated into a metaphor of receptor language and translated by adding the meaning explained. There were also several types of translation shifts found that were caused by the translation process from the source language into the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Observing through the analysis and the results of these translation studies, most of these studies were using the translation theory of shifts proposed by Catford (2000), translation theory by Larson (1984), and some were using language structure and translation theory (Nida, 1975), theory of modulation proposed by Newmark (1988), translation strategies theory by Baker (1992), componential analysis theory proposed by Bell (1993), including the theory of grammar by Huddleston (1984), Quirk (1985) and Swan (1996). Shifts in translation were very commonly occurred as the results, whether it was a structure shift, level shift, or even a shift of meaning. Each component of words in a sentence has a big impact when the process of translation is conducted since every language has its terms, patterns, or rules. Thus, some words commonly will go missing from the source text when it is translated into the target language since it is important as a translator to maintain the original message to be transferred, rather than trying to keep the whole lexical items/components in a sentence remained when it is translated into the target language since it might make no sense, knowing that it might sound unnatural or odd in the target language’s terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the foregoing introduction, the focus of this study is limited to the following problems:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the equivalences of adverbs of manner in Bahasa Indonesia found in the novel?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of shifts occur in the translation of the adverbs of manner found in the novel?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MATERIAL AND METHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, the data were taken from a best-seller novel (based on the New York Times) entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">City of Bones: Mortal Instruments</span><span class="font3"> written in English by Cassandra Clare, while the translated version into Bahasa Indonesia by Melody Violin. This is a fantasy-adventure genre novel, consists of twenty-three (23) chapters and was published on March 27<sup>th</sup>, 2007 (in the U.S.) and July 2<sup>nd</sup>, 2007 (in the U.K.) by Margaret K. McElderry from Simon &amp;&nbsp;Schuster, Inc. while the translated version was published in February 2010 by Ufuk Press, Jakarta, Indonesia. This novel is very interesting to read since the author has a very unique way of describing and telling the story, by emphasizing the situation using the adverbs of manner, and it is very engaging for the readers as if they were there, having the adventure together with all those fictional characters. This novel was chosen because it provides a lot of English adverbs of manner and the translation process into the receptor language was quite interesting to be analyzed as cultural aspects were affecting the translation process. In collecting the data, the method and technique that were used were descriptive qualitative methods and by reading, notetaking, and highlighting the adverbs found in the novel and its translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, the novel was read carefully, and repeatedly to identify and to collect the English adverbs of manner and its translation into Bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Afterward, the collected data were classified into their translation equivalences using the theory proposed by Larson (1984; 16-18) which is The Types of Translation. Lastly, the data will be analyzed further by using the Translation Theory of Shift by Catford (2000). Some of the data analyses were taken as a representative of the whole data found, which were presented in tables in the appendices section. The discussion of the analysis was descriptively written. Taking the conclusion was the last procedure of analyzing the data of this research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FINDING AND DISCUSSIONS 3.1 The Translation Equivalences of Adverbs of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The adverbs of manner found in the novel were classified into several equivalences, which were translated into preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan, seperti, secara, yang, bagaikan, oleh,</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sambil</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Each of the occurrences of this preposition was followed by adjective, noun, verb, noun phrase, verb phrase, adjective phrase, and even adverb.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 47 adverbs of manner found that were translated using preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan</span><span class="font3"> in the receptor language, and some of the data were being followed by an adjective (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">furiously</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan kesal, properly</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan jelas</span><span class="font3">, etc.), being followed by a verb (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dangerously</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan berbahaya</span><span class="font3">), being followed by adverbs (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">carefully</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">warily</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan hati-hati</span><span class="font3">), being followed by adjective phrase (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">narrowly</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan lebih tajam</span><span class="font3">), being followed by a verb phrase (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">handsomely</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan cukup cakap</span><span class="font3">) and being followed by a noun phrase (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dizzily</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan kepala pening</span><span class="font3">, etc.).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were found some unique cases occurred that adverbs can shift meanings or functions such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">perfectly normal</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tidak ada yang berbeda</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">subtly strange </span><span class="font3">into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tidak kentara, most likely</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">yang paling mendekati, blindingly</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">yang menyilaukan</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 3 adverbs of manner found that were translated using preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti</span><span class="font3"> in the receptor language, and 2 data were being followed by a noun (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ghostly</span><span class="font3"> translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti hantu</span><span class="font3">, etc.), and 1 data were being followed by a noun phrase (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">stupidly </span><span class="font3">into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seperti orang bodoh</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">secara</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 3 adverbs of manner found that using preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">secara</span><span class="font3"> in receptor language (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">naturally </span><span class="font3">translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">secara alami</span><span class="font3">, etc.).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bagaikan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data found was the adverb of manner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seemingly</span><span class="font3"> and translated into preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bagaikan</span><span class="font3">. There was no word followed after the preposition, as this preposition was an equivalent form of the translation of the adverb of manner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seemingly</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">oleh</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There was only 1 adverb of manner found that were translated using preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">oleh</span><span class="font3"> in receptor language (i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">religiously</span><span class="font3"> translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">oleh agama</span><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Adverbs of Manner that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Equivalent with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sambil</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 5 adverbs of manner found that were translated using preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sambil</span><span class="font3"> in receptor language</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(i.e. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">meditatively</span><span class="font3"> translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sambil merenung</span><span class="font3">, etc.).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.2 Category Shift of Adverbs of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the data found in the novel, there were English adverbs of manner in which translation shifts occurred that is written as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Category Shift of Adverbs of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The category shift in the translation that was found were including adverbs of manner translated into an adjective, verb, noun, and into the numeral.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner translated into</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 43 data found that were classified into category shift from adverb into an adjective. One of the data was taken and analyzed like this:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">He smiled </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">smugly </span><span class="font3">and lowered his hand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Jace tersenyum </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">bangga </span><span class="font3">dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">menurunkan tangannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Smugly</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3"> and modifies the verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">smiled</span><span class="font3">. It is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bangga</span><span class="font3"> in TL as an adjective. Thus, the adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">smugly</span><span class="font3"> shifts from adverb into an adjective.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner translated into</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 15 data found that were classified into category shift from adverb into a verb. One of the data was taken and analyzed like this:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">Isabelle froze, her spoon poised </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dangerously</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL : &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Sendoknya terangkat </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">berbahaya</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dangerously</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3"> and modifies the adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">poised</span><span class="font3">. It is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">berbahaya</span><span class="font3"> in TL as a verb, which is formed from the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ber-</span><span class="font3"> + noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bahaya</span><span class="font3">. In Bahasa Indonesia, the prefix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ber-</span><span class="font3"> followed by</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">noun will change its word-class into a verb. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Berbahaya</span><span class="font3"> is considered as a verb because it shows an action of subject </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Isabelle</span><span class="font3"> who was surprised but maintained to compose herself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner translated into</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Numeral</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 7 data found that were classified into category shift from adverb into the numeral. One of the data was taken and analyzed like this:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">“That’s not </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">entirely </span><span class="font3">true,” Hodge said.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font3">“Itu tidak </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">sepenuhnya </span><span class="font3">benar,” kata Hodge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Entirely</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb of manner marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3"> and modifies adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">true</span><span class="font3">. It is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sepenuhnya</span><span class="font3"> in TL which belongs to numeral as it is having the same meaning as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">whole</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fully</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Level Shift of Adverb of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The level shift in the translation that was found are including adverbs of manner translated into an adjective phrase; into verb phrase; into noun phrase and adverb phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner shifted into Adjective Phrase</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There were 9 data found that were shifted from adverbs of manner into an adjective phrase. One of the data was taken as representative and analyzed like this:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">Hodge jerked upright, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">so abruptly </span><span class="font3">that Hugo, who had been resting comfortably on his shoulder, launched himself into the air with an irritable claw. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font3">Hodge tersentak ke atas, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">sangat keras </span><span class="font3">sehingga Hugo yang tadinya beristirahat dengan nyaman di pundaknya, melompat ke udara dengan kaokan kesal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Abruptly</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb of manner marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3">. It is translated</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat keras</span><span class="font3"> in TL, which is formed from the adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat</span><span class="font3"> + adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keras</span><span class="font3">. In this case, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat</span><span class="font3"> has the same meaning as adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keras</span><span class="font3"> has the same meaning as the adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">hard</span><span class="font3"> (very hard). The adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat</span><span class="font3"> modifies the adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keras,</span><span class="font3"> thus the adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">abruptly </span><span class="font3">shifts into an adjective phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner shifted into</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Noun Phrase</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 9 data found that were shifted from adverbs of manner into a noun phrase. One of the data was taken as representative and analyzed like this: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">She laughed, standing over him, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dizzily </span><span class="font3">he thought that he should have known.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: </span><span class="font3">Dengan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">kepala pening</span><span class="font3">, pemuda itu berpikir bahwa seharusnya dia sudah tau.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dizzily</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb of manner marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3">. Adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dizzily </span><span class="font3">modifies the subject </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">he</span><span class="font3">, and it is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan kepala pening</span><span class="font3"> in TL, which is formed from preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan</span><span class="font3"> + noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kepala</span><span class="font3"> + adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pening</span><span class="font3">. The adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pening</span><span class="font3"> modifies the noun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kepala,</span><span class="font3"> thus the adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dizzily </span><span class="font3">shifts into a noun phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbs of Manner shifted into Verb</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Phrase</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were 4 data found that were shifted from adverbs of manner into a noun phrase. One of the data was taken as representative and analyzed like this: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL: </span><span class="font3">The runes are </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">agonizingly painful</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL: &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Rune </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">sangat menyiksa dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">menyakitkan</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Agonizingly</span><span class="font3"> is an adverb marked by the suffix </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">–ly</span><span class="font3"> and modifies the adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">painful</span><span class="font3">. It is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat menyiksa dan menyakitkan</span><span class="font3">, which is formed from adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sangat</span><span class="font3"> + verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">menyiksa</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dan menyakitkan</span><span class="font3"> is a translation of adjective </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">painful</span><span class="font3"> as a complementary because without being translated, the sentence still makes sense</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and understandable. Thus, the adverb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">agonizingly</span><span class="font3"> shifts from adverb into verb phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">IV. CONCLUSIONS</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the foregoing discussions, there were several conclusions regarding the topic which has been analyzed. The conclusions are described as follows: The equivalent translation of English adverbs of manner that are found in the novel are using prepositions </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dengan, seperti, secara, bagaikan, oleh,</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sambil</span><span class="font3">. In each of these prepositions, there are some adjectives, verbs, nouns, noun phrases, adjective phrases, or even adverbs followed after the prepositions. There are also unique cases found, which are the occurrence of double negatives statements and adverbs of manner which shifted its function into adverb of degree and adjectives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two types of shifts that occurred in the translation of adverbs of manner found in the novel; category shift and level shift. In category shift, the translated adverbs of manner are shifted into adjectives, verbs, and numerals. In level shift, the translated adverbs of manner are shifted into adjective phrases, noun phrases, and verb phrases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Observing from the result and the analysis of this study, English of adverbs of manner that are translated are mostly into or being followed with adjectives, even from both types of translation shifts. In this case, it can be concluded that the translation of English adverbs of manner are mostly equivalent with the adjectives in Bahasa Indonesia, although it may be followed or translated into other word class (verb, noun, verb phrase, adjective phrase, noun phrase, verb phrase, etc.) but usually, in its translation will occur affixes to form the word in the sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">REFERENCES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arisuta, Citra. 2018. Strategi Penerjemahan dan Pergeseran Makna Onomatope pada Lirik Lagu JKT48. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities. </span><span class="font0">Vol. 22.2. May 2018: 335-341.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Carter, Ronald; McCarthy, Michael (2006), Cambridge Grammar of English: A Comprehensive Guide, Cambridge University Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Catford, J. C. 1965. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font0">. London: Oxford University Press.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clare, Cassandra. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">City of Bones: The Mortal Instruments.</span><span class="font0"> New York: Simon &amp;&nbsp;Schuster, Inc. Ebook version available from:</span><a href="https://epdf.pub/city-of-bones-the-mortal-instruments.html"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">https://epdf.pub/city-</span></a><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="https://epdf.pub/city-of-bones-the-mortal-instruments.html"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">of-bones-the-mortal-instruments.html</span><span class="font0">.</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Choliludin. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Technique of Making Idiomatic Translation</span><span class="font0">. Bekasi: Kesaint Blanc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dianti, Ni Gusti Putu Wahyu. 2016. Penerjemahan Majas Metafora dalam Novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kaze No Uta Wo Kike</span><span class="font0"> Karya Haruki Murakami. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 16.2. August 2016: 122129.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Faculty of Computer Science. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font0">. 2018. Jakarta: University of Indonesia. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://bahasa.cs.ui.ac.id/kbbi/kbbi.php?keyword=terkendali&amp;varbidang=all&amp;vardialek=all&amp;varragam=all&amp;varkelas=all&amp;submit=kamus"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://bahasa.cs.ui.ac.id/kbbi/kbbi.php?keyword=te</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://bahasa.cs.ui.ac.id/kbbi/kbbi.php?keyword=terkendali&amp;varbidang=all&amp;vardialek=all&amp;varragam=all&amp;varkelas=all&amp;submit=kamus"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">rkendali&amp;varbidang=all&amp;vardialek=all&amp;varragam</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://bahasa.cs.ui.ac.id/kbbi/kbbi.php?keyword=terkendali&amp;varbidang=all&amp;vardialek=all&amp;varragam=all&amp;varkelas=all&amp;submit=kamus"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">=all&amp;varkelas=all&amp;submit=kamus</span><span class="font0">.</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fitriyani, Ayu. 2017. Translation Equivalence and Shift of Noun Phrases in the Novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street</span><span class="font0"> and in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serpih – Serpih Harapan</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 18.1. February 2017: 1-9.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Iki, Yunia. 2016. The Structural Shift In “Gajah Selalu Ingat”. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 17.1. October 2016: 282-288.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Krisna P., Ni Putu Ayu. 2018. Pergeseran Bentuk dan Makna Terjemahan dalam Cerpen </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kappa </span><span class="font0">Karya Akugatawa Ryunosuke. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 22.4. November 2018: 1009-1017.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kurniawati, I Gusti Ayu Dewi. 2014. Types, Function, and Position of Adverbs In the Yak Magazine. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 8.2. August 2014: 2302-920.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language Development and Fostering Agency. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">KBBI</span><span class="font0"> Daring. 2016. Jakarta: Ministry of Education and Culture of Republic Indonesia [Internet]. Available from:</span><a href="https://kbbi.kemdikbud.go.id/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://kbbi.kemdikbud.go.id/</span><span class="font0">.</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Larson, M. L. 1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence</span><span class="font0">. Lanham Md: University Press of America.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mulyani, Putu Ayu. 2016. Pergeseran Penerjemahan Idiom Pada Novel Oda Nobunaga Karya Sohachi Yamaoka. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 14.1. January 2016: 104-111.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pullum, G., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Huddleston, R. (2002). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cambridge Grammar of the English Language</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Putro, Rico Yulianto. 2016. Shift of Noun Phrases in the Translation of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault In Our Stars</span><span class="font0"> into Indonesian Version. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 17.1. October 2016: 257-264.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Santari, Ni Wayan. 2017. Translation Shift in Translating English Noun Phrases into Indonesian Noun Phrases found in “Let It Snow” into “Dalam Derai Salju”. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 19.1. March 2017: 236-243.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sugianti, Desak. 2017. English Noun Phrase Translation Shift in the Novel “The Davinci Code”. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 3.5. March 2017: 2540-8720.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suryawati, Anak Agung Sagung. 2015. Strategi Penerjemahan dan Pergeseran Makna Kosakata Budaya Material Pada Novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Densha Otoko</span><span class="font0"> Karya Nakano Hitori Serta Terjemahannya Dalam Bahasa Indonesia. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 13.3. December 2015: 2302-920.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tri Adnyana, I Dewa Nyoman. 2017. Prepositional Phrases and Their Translation Shifts in Catching Fire and in Tersulut. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis Journal of Arts and Humanities.</span><span class="font0"> Vol. 18.1. February 2017: 127-134.</span></p></li></ul>