---
layout: full_article
title: "IMAGERY AND FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN WORDSWORTH’S POEM’S ‘’THE WORLD IS TOO MUCH WITH US’’ AND ‘’MY HEART LEAPS UP”"
author: "I Wayan Dedik Ardita"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">IMAGERY AND FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">IN WORDSWORTH’S POEM’S</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘’THE WORLD IS TOO MUCH WITH US’’</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">AND ‘’MY HEART LEAPS UP”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I WayanDedikArdita</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">0818351094</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Absrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paper iniadalahsebuahkaryasastrayang berjudul imagery and figutrative language in Wordsworth’s poems.Puisi yang dibahasdalam paper iniadalah the worlds is too much with us dan my hearth leaps up. Puisi the world is too much with us di terbitkan di londonpadatahun 1802, danpuisi yang keduaadalah my heart leaps up diterbitkantahun 1807 sebagaiprasasti.Metode kwalitatif sangat membantu dalam pengembangan paper ini.Sebagaian besar teori ini diambil dari sebuah karya sastra yang di publican olehHenry Holt and Company, United States of America pada maret 1957.Puisi Wordsworth’s sangat menarik ketika di dengar dan sangat bermakna ketika dibaca. Wordsworth mampu membuat pembaca tenggelam dalam suasana dan maksud yang ada dalam puisinya. Banyak pengguanaan imagery dan figurative lagauage dalam struktur puisinya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: worlds, materialism, and childhood.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature produces a true creative activity. According to Oxford dictionary, the definition of literature includes piece of writing that are valued as work of art, especially prose, drama, and poetry. One type of English literature which is quite well known to be among all is poetry.Poetry is one of three types of literary works, poetry itself is influenced by many factors which is assist the poetry in order to become more meaningful and interesting to be heard and read. Those factors are involved in poetry are figurative languages, symbols, imagery, senses, and rhyme.Poetry is an imaginative awareness of experience expressed through meaning, sound, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">rhythmic language choices as if evokes an emotional response. Poetry itself had it great development in romanticism period or Elizabethan period.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker and Renninger, (1963: 307) shay that”poetry is the hymns of praise, and the essays on the nature of poetry would check the shelves of any modest public library and overflow onto the floors as well good talk about poetry is nevertheless rare, and even the best of it will rest lightly on fallow ground until we ourselves have learned how to penetrate the inner life of a few poems. Poem is a medium not only to express the feeling of the poets but also make us enter into these feelings about the things, persons, situation or idea in the poem. Poetry is a give entertainment, satisfaction, pleasure and enjoyment to the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are a lot of things that can be discussed in a poem, but this the writing analysis concentrates only on the analysis of the figurative language used in the poem. Figurative language is defined as a certain literary device which is commonly applied by the author to gain strength and freshness of their literary works expression. Figurative language is also called metaphor language or simply metaphor because its Greek ancestor “metaphoric” means to carry meaning beyond its literary meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study was focused in analyzing the types of imagery and figurative language that occur in two poems “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The world is too much with us”</span><span class="font1"> and “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My hearts leaps up”</span><span class="font1"> written by William Wordsworth’s. It is considered as an important this to know whatare actually the meanings containing within the poems. It was useless if just read the poems without understanding what actually the poems wants to convey to the readers. That is why we need to analyze imagery and figurative language more deeply.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">2.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The relevant problem discussed in this study is formulated as follows:What</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">are the functions of figurative language used in Wordsworth’s poems </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the world is too much with us</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">my hearth leaps up</span><span class="font1">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to poetry in order to get better understanding to identify and describe the types of imagery and figurative language in Wordsworth’s poems </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the world is too much with us</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">my hearth leaps up</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">4.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A method is a systematic procedure in analyzing an object of research in accordance with the approach which is used.Methodology is very important part in developing scientific research. Research is an exploration of experience and fundamental procedure, sometimes formal and technical. Research method is the ways of procedures of understanding the objects that become the target of subjects. The method in this study was included as follows: Data Source, Method and Technique of Collecting Data, Method and Technique of Analyzing Data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to analysis, the data in this study was taken from a poem written by William Wordsworth’s, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The world is too much with us</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My hearts leaps up</span><span class="font1">. The poem wastaken from the book written </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">by Knickerbocker and Reninger</span><span class="font1"> entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1"> published by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Henry Holt</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Company</span><span class="font1">, United States of America in March 1957.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data that was analyzed in this study is considered as primary data. This study was focused on imagery and figurative language in the poems. The reason of choosing these poems because they are containing lots of imagery and figurative language that supports the theory that was used in the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ANALYSIS AND RESULT</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function of imagery and figurative language</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual imagery</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Imagery is the name given to the elements in a poem that spark off the senses. Despite &quot;image&quot; being a synonym for &quot;picture&quot;, images need not be only visual; any of the five senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell) can respond to what a poet writes. Poets combine the use of language and a specific structure to create imaginative and expressive work. The structures used in some poems types are also used when considering the visual effect of a finished poem. The structures of many types of poetry result in groups of lines on the page which increase the poem's composition.The visual imagery is given the reader an ability to form mental images of things or events imagery, the ability to form mental images of things or events in the poem.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Auditory imagery</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Imagery is a literary element most commonly employed in poetry and fiction. Poetry is piece of literature written by a poet in line or stanza expressing any emotions which are expressed by the use of using of techniques including auditory imagery. It is used to represent sound; auditory imagery is using a description to convey sounds to the reader.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinesthetic imagery</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The uses of kinesthetic imagery in Wordsworth’s poems are in several first line. Kinesthetic imagery is a broad term that is used to describe various emotions. It includes sense of touch, movement, feeling and temperature, internal emotions and physical interactions, refers to movement or tension external to the speaker in the poem. In other words, it describes outside movement or tension rather than internal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of paradox</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-a-paradox.htm"><span class="font0">Paradox </span></a><span class="font0">in poetry serves to create tension in the readers' minds by placing words or phrases together so that they first do not seem to follow the rules of logic or accepted truth. This use of contradiction in language often causes a reader to think on a deeper level about</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the implied meaning of such a contradictory statement. Authors who effectively use paradoxical wording reveal some element of truth within an apparently untrue statement. Paradox in poetry is sometimes structured differently than in</span><a href="http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-prose.htm"><span class="font0"> prose </span></a><span class="font0">literature, and it can often have multiple layers of meaning expressed in fewer words. This is found in the poem’s William Wordsworth’s, it to make reader more interested in the meaning of the line they have read, and the find out the deeper meaning which can give them an answer to carries a great sense, the surface meaning which to be illogical. On the order hand, this type of figurative language also since it contain things which very absurd, but also artistic at the same time, as found in this poem.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of personification</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of personification which is found in poetry William Wordsworth’s is mostly noticed to be used to give a more expressive, dramatic and emotional effect to the poem. The use this type of figurative language which is known to give human characteristics to non-human entities, give a special sense in terms that it makes everything seem to tend human like.Within a poem personification is alsoa type of metaphor in which distinct human qualities, such us, honesty, emotion, volition, are attributed to an animal, object or idea.in this poem Wordsworth’s want to indicate the reader an idea.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of simile</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The order type of figurative language found in this poem is simile, which has also appeared in the several lines in Wordsworth’s poem. The use of simile gives the reader a description of the author’s imagination, enables them to imagine how an event has happened in the story carried in the poem.Similealso toa figure of speech in which a comparison is expressed by the specific use of a word or phrase such as: “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">like”</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“as”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of hyperbole</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hyperbolea sentence bold, deliberate overstatement not intended to be taken literally, it is used as a means of emphasizing the truth of a statement. This is relatively rare in Frost. He has a penchant for fact and truth. The use of hyperbole in this poems is to give a greet effect caused by the exaggeration contained in this figure. In this poem the use of hyperbole is mainly to emphasize how meaning full the events which we told in the poem actually are. The poet wishes the reader to feel involved and to get the emotion of the poem by using these exaggerations as found in several lines in poem William Wordsworth’s.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of metaphor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Metaphor can also be found in the line in Wordsworth’s poems, metaphor is an implied comparison, or an expression that is use in a new sense, on the basis of similarity between it is literal sense and the new thing or situation to which it is applied, with “like” or “as” or for the A figure of speech in which a comparison is made between two things essentially unalike, and goes on to the profoundest thinking that we have. Poetry provides the one permissible way of saying one thing and meaning another. Here in this line the metaphor is used to imply the sigh which is same like melody when it heard in yearning and long.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the first poems entitled “The World Is Too Much with Us”, of which the theme is about materialism versus nature. &quot;The World Is Too Much with Us&quot; begins with Wordsworth accusing the modern age of having lost its connection to nature and everything meaningful to the harsh realities of materialism and industrialization. Wordsworth’s read the text well and everything symbolized by referent nature was adopted by was as a in life. Wordsworth tells the story of humanities progress at the cost of preserving nature throughout the sonnet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the second poems entitled “My Heart Leaps Up” in this poem poet describes about the nature that he is seeing from his childhood. The poet compares childhood to be the father of man.he says that child is the father of man which means</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">that sometimes child is wiser than man. This shows that childhood has a great influence on man's</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whole_life_insurance"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">whole life</span><span class="font1">.</span></a><span class="font1"> It is the base of manhood. He believes that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">foundations of manhood are laid in childhood. They are not wise always but when they are small they are deeply learned in nature and doesn’t speak lie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Aryawan. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Figurative Expression on Song Lyrics of MXPX Band Album. Unpublishes Undergraduate Thesis</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DiYanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature (Reading Fiction, Poetry, and Drama)</span><span class="font1">. Singapore: McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Encarta. 1993-1998</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Figure of speech</span><span class="font1">. 99 enclopedia Microsoft corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L &amp;&nbsp;Willard Reninger, H. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature.</span><span class="font1"> New York. Chicago. San Fransinco. Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation.</span><span class="font1"> New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suarningsih, Ni Putu. 2008</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. “Figurative Language in The Poem 'My Love is Like A Red, Red Rose'”. (Undergraduate Thesis).</span><span class="font1">Denpasar : Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sutarni. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Figurative Language in William Blake’s “The Tiger”. Unpublishes Undergraduate Thesis</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Sharrock, Roger. 1972. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Figure in a Landscape Wordsworth's Early Poetry</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Warton Lecture on English Poetry, British Academy.</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>