---
layout: full_article
title: "CONVERSATIONAL ANALYSIS IN ‘PERCY JACKSON THE LIGHTNING THIEF’ MOVIE BY RICK RIORDAN"
author: "Anak Agung Mirah Dian Sarastin"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CONVERSATIONAL ANALYSIS IN ‘PERCY JACKSON THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LIGHTNING THIEF’ MOVIE BY RICK RIORDAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ANAK AGUNG MIRAH DIAN SARASTIN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Konteks situasi oleh Halliday dan Hasan serta maxim percakapan oleh Grice merupakan unsur penting dalam suatu percakapan. Konteks situasi dapat menunjukan kejadian pada saat percakapan berlangsung dan maxim percakapan dapat menunjukkan bagaimana percakapan menyampaikan pesan pembicara. Pesan dalam suatu percakapan tidak selamanya diterima sesuai dengan yang diharapkan oleh pendengar. Sehingga konteks situasi dan maxim percakapan diperlukan untuk mengetahui apakah percakapan tersebut dapat menyampaikan pesan dengan baik atau tidak. Penelitian ini menggunakan data film Percy Jackson the Lightning Thief oleh Rick Riordan. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis jenis konteks situasi yang diaplikasikan dalam percakapan film ini menurut Halliday dan Hasan serta mendeskripsikan tipe maxim yang ditemukan dan diaplikasikan dalam percakapan di film ini berdasarkan teori Grice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Percakapan, Konteks Situasi dan Maxims</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Context of situation and conversational maxims which as proposed by Halliday and Hasan and Grice are the important insures in a conversation. Context of situation can show us what happens during the conversation and conversational maxims show us how the conversation conveys the message from the first speaker. The message in the conversation is not always delivered as clearly as what is expected. Therefore, context of situation and conversational maxims need to be analyzed in order to know whether the conversation can convey the message well or not. This research is focused on the context of situation and conversational maxims found and applied in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Percy Jackson the Lightning Thief Movie by Rick Riordan</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the background above, there are several problems formulated in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of context of situation based on Halliday and Hasan’s theory was applied in conveying the message of the conversation in Percy Jackson ‘The Lightning Thief’ movie by Rick Riordan?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of Gricean maxims are found and applied in the conversation in Percy Jackson ‘The Lightning Thief’ movie by Rick Riordan?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Related to problems above, the aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze kind of context of situation applied in conveying the message of the conversation in this movie based on Halliday and Hasan’s theory.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the type of Gricean maxim found and applied in the conversation in Percy Jackson ‘The Lightning Thief’ movie by Rick Riordan based on the Grice’s theories.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from Percy Jackson the Lightning Thief movie by Rick Riordan. This movie is a fiction movie which contained some conversations which showed context of situation and conversational maxims.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method of collecting the data used is the library research and the data were taken from the conversations in the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed using Halliday and Hasan’s theory about context of situation which consists of field, tenor, and mode. First, the data were analyzed based on Grice’s theory about conversational maxims which consisted of maxim of quality, maxim of quantity, maxim of relevance and also maxim of manner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Context of Situation and Gricean Maxim</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first conversation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poseidon : Zeus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : Poseidon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poseidon : It has been many years</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">What do you see?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poseidon : Thunder cloud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">But no lightning… stolen</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poseidon : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">What? </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">You think that I took it</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">? Omnipotence blind you brother. We are forbidden for stealing each other’s powers</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : But our children not</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poseidon : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">You are accusing my son</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">? I have not seen him since he was baby. He does not know me or even who he is because of you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : If your son is the thief, I will send him to the deep of Tartarus Poseidon : If you touch him, it will be fight of your life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus : </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">He must return it to me in 14 days, by midnight in a summer solstice or there will be war</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of context of situation and conversational maxims</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field. Here, in this conversation, there are Zeus and Poseidon who discuss something. They meet in the Empire state building to discuss the lightning. Zeus says that the lightning is stolen. There are two predicates which belong to material and mental processes which are the basic elements to analyze the field of the conversation. The first predicate is </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">think</span><span class="font1">. Poseidon is surprised that he is considered the lightning thief by saying “You </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">think</span><span class="font1"> that I took it?”. The second predicate is </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">accuse</span><span class="font1">. Poseidon knows that Zeus believes that Poseidon’s son is the thief. He knows that Zeus accuses his son. It is shown when Poseidon tries to reply Zeus words by saying “You are </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">accusing</span><span class="font1"> my son?”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor. They have permanent relationship as an elder brother and a younger brother because the conversation tends to be an informal one when</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Zeus speaks with his younger brother. It is shown when Poseidon asks his brother by saying ‘</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">You think that I took it?</span><span class="font1">’ which has the formal form ‘do you think that I took it?’. Then, the conversation that tends to be an informal one is also shown when Poseidon asks his brother by saying ‘</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">You are accusing my son?</span><span class="font1">’ which has the formal form ‘are you accusing my son?’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode. The way in which language is being used in this speech reaction is spoken conversation. This conversation belongs to expository mode because in this conversation, Zeus tries to explain that he losses his lightning and looking for the thief. He says that the thief must return the lightning in 14 days and there will be a consequence for the thief if he or she does not return the lightning in the expected days. It is shown when Zeus warns Poseidon about the punishment if his son does not return the bolt by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">if your son is the thief, I will send him to the deep of Tartarus</span><span class="font1">” and “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">he must return it to me in 14 days, by midnight in a summer solstice or there will be war</span><span class="font1">” and saying “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">what? You think that I took it? Omnipotence blind you brother. We are forbidden for stealing each other’s powers</span><span class="font1">” and “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">you are accusing my son? I have not seen him since he was baby. He does not know me or even who he is because of you</span><span class="font1">”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quality. Here in this conversation, maxim of quality is shown when Poseidon tries to make Zeus believe that Poseidon’s son does not steal the lightning. It is shown when Poseidon says </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“You are accusing my son? I have not seen him since he was baby. He does not know me or even who he is because of you”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quantity. Here, in this conversation, there is no any conversation which shows the maxim of quality because the conversation is only about what Zeus wants to tell to Poseidon and Poseidon does not need to tell what Zeus says to another.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of relevance. Here, in this conversation, maxim of relevance is shown when Zeus starts the conversation by asking </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“What do you see?” </span><span class="font1">to Poseidon and after Poseidon gives the answer, Zeus replies it by saying </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“But no lightning… stolen”</span><span class="font1">. Zeus says about the situation in the sky. Poseidon answers the question by saying </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“What? You think that I took it?</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Omnipotence blind you brother. We are forbidden for stealing each other’s powers”.</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of manner. Here, in this conversation, Zeus says about the thief of lightning to Poseidon clearly without ambiguity or even obscurity by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">if your son is the thief, I will send him to the deep of Tartarus</span><span class="font1">”. Then, Poseidon answers Zeus’ question in a brief, he says that he does not steal the lightning or even his son by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">We are forbidden for stealing each other’s powers” </span><span class="font1">and “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I have not seen him since he was baby. He does not know me or even who he is because of you”.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The second conversation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Brunner &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Percy. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">You left the camp and disobeyed my orders</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Percy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Yeah</span><span class="font1">. About that…</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Brunner &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Which is why you are my favorite student</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You can</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">receive all the training in the world but ultimately you have to follow your instincts</span><span class="font1">. Grace under pressure. Alright. I am trying to train. </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Go suit up. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">You might be a big shot on Olympus, but down here you are still just one of my students</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">. Move it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of context of situation and conversational maxims</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field. This conversation takes place in the half blood camp. It is a special place for God’s children. Those who have parents who are God and human will be called demigod and have to stay in half blood camp. This conversation is between Mr. Brunner and Percy. There are material and relational processes in that conversation which show the situation in that conversation. They are material process “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">left</span><span class="font1">” and relational process “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">are</span><span class="font1">”. The material process “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">left</span><span class="font1">” is shown when Mr. Brunner says “You </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">left</span><span class="font1"> the camp and disobeyed my orders”. This material process shows that Mr. Brunner tries to say his feeling to Percy that he is a little bit disappointed with Percy’s decision to leave the camp. Then, the relational process “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">are</span><span class="font1">” is shown when Mr. Brunner says “You might be a big shot on Olympus, but down here you </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">are</span><span class="font1"> still</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">just one of my students”. The relational process “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">are</span><span class="font1">” shows that although Percy already finished his mission, he is still one of Mr. Brunner’s students. Mr. Brunner tries to say that he is still proud of Percy and considers him one of his students.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor. They are two speakers in this conversation. They are Mr. Brunner and Percy. Mr. Brunner is Percy’ s teacher. He is not only as Percy’s teacher at school but also in the half blood camp. Therefore, they have temporary relationship which they only know each other and not too close as a family. They do the conversation only like between a teacher and a student and tends to be an informal one because there is an informal form of sentence when Percy says “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Yeah</span><span class="font1">”. Actually, it has a formal form “yes”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode. The way that language is being used in this conversation is spoken language. This conversation belongs to expository and persuasive rhetorical modes. It belongs to expository when Mr. Brunner explains what a little mistake that is done by Percy and why that little mistake makes him proud of Percy by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Percy. You left the camp and disobeyed my orders</span><span class="font1">”. He explains and tells Percy that although Percy leaves the camp and disobeys the rule, he is still the student of Mr. Brunner and even becomes the favorite one. Then, persuasive mode is shown when Mr. Brunner persuades Percy to obey his rule as a good student and has some training in half blood camp by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Go suit up. You might be a big shot on Olympus, but down here you are still just one of my students. Move it</span><span class="font1">”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quality. This conversation fulfills the characteristic of maxim of quality. It is shown when Mr. Bruner says the fact that Percy is really genius to use his instinct even it is allowed with a naughty thing by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You can receive all the training in the world but ultimately you have to follow your instincts</span><span class="font1">”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quantity. This conversation fulfills the characteristic of maxim of quantity. It is shown when Mr. Brunner has to tell Percy that although Percy can finish the mission and solve the Olympian’s problem, he still Mr. Brunner’s student and has to get some training in that camp. He says “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You might be a big shot on Olympus, but down here you are still just one of my students</span><span class="font1">”. Mr.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brunner tells Percy the information that Percy has to know. He does not make the information becomes too less or even too much. He delivers the information as informative as required.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of relevance. This conversation does not fulfill the characteristic of maxim of relevance because when Mr. Brunner greets Percy and says something to Percy, he does not give a full replay or response to Mr. Brunner. Percy only says something that tends to show to Mr. Brunner that he remembers the thing which is said by Mr. Brunner without giving any relevant response. Therefore, this conversation does not fulfill the characteristic of maxim of relevance.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of manner. This conversation fulfills the characteristic of maxim of manner. It is shown when Mr. Brunner says “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You left the camp and disobeyed my orders</span><span class="font1">” and “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Which is why you are my favorite student</span><span class="font1">”. It means that he is really proud to Percy because he can choose the right decision to solve the Olympian’ s problem although Percy breaks the rule which is given by Mr. Brunner. </span><span class="font0">Then, </span><span class="font1">he also says that Percy do the right thing to follow his instinct by saying “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You can receive all the training in the world but ultimately you have to follow your instincts</span><span class="font1">”. Mr. Brunner says it clearly, there is no ambiguity occurs.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Those conversations are as the representative of the most important situation in the movie. The first conversation is when the accusation is begun. Poseidon’s son is accused of being the thief of Zeus’s bolt. The second conversation is when Percy can solve the problem and proves that he is not the thief of the bolt. From the analysis above, the data show that first, the context of situation which consists of field, tenor and mode were found and applied successfully in those conversations. Field, tenor and mode always affect the conversation. The situation and the relationship between the participants are related to each other. The permanent and temporally relationship can produce both informal and formal conversations but in those data the relationship are permanent and temporary and the conversation tends to be an informal one</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">since it still depends on the situation around the conversation. The second one is not all of conversational maxims consisted of maxim of quality, maxim of quantity, maxim of relevance and maxim of manner found and applied in the conversation. There are only three maxims found and applied in the first conversation. They are maxim of quality, maxim of relevance and maxim of manner. Then, there are only three maxims found and applied in the second conversation. They are maxim of quality, maxim or quantity and maxim of manner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Grice, H.P. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Logic and Conversation</span><span class="font1">. Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font1">. Sydney: Sydney University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, Ruqaiya. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a social-semiotic perspective</span><span class="font1">. Deakin University: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Levinson, Stephen C. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Melbourne Sydney: Cambridge Universty Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. United states of America: Longman Inc., New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Riordan, Rick. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Percy Jackson ‘The Lightning Thief’</span><span class="font1">. Fox 2000 Pictures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Discourse</span><span class="font1">. Blackwell Oxford UK &amp;&nbsp;Cambridge USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Oxford University Press</span></p>