---
layout: full_article
title: "FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN SONG LYRICS OF PARAMORE"
author: "Ni Wayan Juniartini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN SONG LYRICS OF PARAMORE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Juniartini</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ekstensi Sastra Inggris</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Judul penelitian ini adalah &quot;Penggunaan Bahasa figuratif di Song Lyric of Paramore album Brand New Eyes&quot;. Hal ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui empat jenis bahasa kiasan dan menganalisis sebagai makna. Fungsi bahasa kiasan adalah cara khusus penulis lagu menyampaikan pengalamannya atau imajinasi untuk memberikan perasaan yang fantastis untuk seseorang yang mendengarkan atau membaca lirik lagu ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lirik lagu dari Paramore album Brand New Eyes adalah sumber data, telah dikumpulkan dengan men-download lirik sebelum diidentifikasi ke dalam bahasa kiasan. Setelah identifikasi data telah selesai maka dianalisis dengan menerapkan metode kualitatif yang menggambarkan kata-kata yang dianggap sebagai bahasa kiasan berdasarkan teori bahasa kiasan yang diusulkan oleh Knickerbocker dan Willard Reninger ( 1963 ). Dan ada tujuh jenis makna yang diusulkan oleh Leech menganalisis dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Setelah data telah dianalisis dan dibahas, maka dapat disimpulkan ada empat jenis bahasa kiasan yang digunakan dalam lirik dari lima lagu mereka : hiperbola, metafora, personifikasi, simile. Selain itu ada tujuh jenis makna yang dianalisis dalam penelitian ini yaitu: makna konseptual, makna konotatif makna gaya, makna afektif, makna collocative, makna tematik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword : Bahasa figuratif, lirik lagu, makna.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Figurative language is a word or phrase that departs from everyday literal language for the sake of comparison, emphasis, clarity, or freshness. </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Metaphor </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">simile</span><span class="font2"> are the two most commonly used figures of speech, but things like </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">hyperbole</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">synecdoche</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">puns</span><span class="font2">, and </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">personification</span><span class="font2"> are also figures of speech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">For a certain function, language plays an important role on song lyrics. Nowadays, song has being a part of our life. Song is a relatively short musical composition. It contains vocal parts that are performed by human voice and generally feature words, called lyrics. Lyrics are the words which are used to compose a song. The writer of lyrics is a lyrics or lyrist. A lot of lyrics reflect the reality, fact of social life, and experience of the writers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The focus of this study is to analyze figures of speech that are used in lyric of songs, because it is one of interesting things that attracts my attention. By </span><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">knowing the figures of speech in the lyric of song, we will clearly understand what actually the writer wants to show from the using of those figures of speech. When the song lyrics found from downloading from the internet was read, there is something words that are used in the lyrics which is shows figurative language and it often make us difficult understand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Some of their songs are very popular, because they used a lot of symbolism, deep meaning, and also beautiful words in it. Hopefully we will understand what the song writer actually wants to convey in that song before we learning more about figurative language in song lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems of the study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of figurative language are found in song lyrics of Paramore ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of figurative language in song lyrics of Paramore ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To be able to find out the kinds of figurative language are found in song lyrics of Paramore</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To be able to know the meaning of figurative language in song lyrics of Paramore</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three aspects of the research of the study; they are source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data taken from song lyrics of one of famous bands in USA, “Paramore”. There were five songs taken from Paramore, they are “Brick by Boring Brick”, “Ignorance”, “Decode”, “misery Business” and “Miracle”. which was released in 2009 in album “Brand New Eyes”. Most of Paramore song tells about love story, broken heart, and social life. Therefore, the reason of choosing “Brand New Eyes” album as the data because they contain many of figurative languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In collecting the data, is used the documentation method. The documentation method was chosen because in obtaining the data, the figurative languages were noted down on some papers. The technique of collecting data was done by several steps as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Since the research focused on the lyrics of the songs, certainly the first step will download the lyric from the internet</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;After that the lyrics were printed out and then read and sung for many times to understand single word in order to catch the sense of the song</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classifying the song lyrics and finding out which words sentences referred to figurative language</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study was analyzed by using descriptive method, descriptive itself is based on the theory of figurative languages proposed by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker and H. Willard Reninger (1963),</span><span class="font2"> and the theory about meaning (semantic) proposed by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Leech</span><span class="font2"> (1974).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Conceptual meaning is often called denotative meaning referring to first sense that comes to someone’s mind. It is the essential part of what language that one scarcely defines language without referring to it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">These lyrics below contain conceptual meaning or the sense that the listeners have their mind for the first time is also the song writer expects. The sentence in the song lyrics that obtain conceptual meaning are she lives in a fairy tale: it is about a beautiful place Forgotten the taste and smell: about someone who already forgetting his/ her past memory I don’t wanna hear your sad song: about someone who don’t want know about someone else life We wrote our names in blood: want to be with her/him forever When you’re clouding up my mind: it is like someone who broke her/ his mind The truth is hiding in your eyes: We can see the truth from his/her eyes And its hanging on your tongues: and the </span><span class="font0">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">truth is always out from her/ his mouth That’s what you get when you let your heart win: all you can get if you do it all with your heart This heart will start a riot in me: about the someone heart start beating.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Connotative meaning is the meaning which is not generally true that the meaning of satire and is experiencing additional denotation. Connotative meanings is indeterminate and opens in the same sense as our knowledge and believe about the universe that are opened-ended. There are some of sentences in seven of the song lyric that contain connotative meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The following is the example of connotative meaning She lives in a fairy tale: the sentence “fairy tale” is contained connotative meaning, the meaning of “fairy tale” here is somewhere that is very beautiful Her princes finally come to save her: whole of this sentence are contains connotative meaning, the sentence “princes” has the meaning a man that she loved, and he always become her helper When your head in the cloud: the sentence “your head in the cloud” is contained connotative meaning, the meaning of “your head in the cloud” is someone who getting stressed in his/her life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When you’re clouding up my mind: the sentence that containing the connotative meaning is “clouding up my mind”, the meaning of “clouding up my mind” is someone who broke or disturb her/his mind</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pain make your way to me: the sentence “pain” is contained connotative meaning, the meaning of “pain” is very bad feeling</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stylistic meaning is that the piece of language conveys about the social circumstance or its use. This type of meaning is also in accordance with the situation in which the utterance takes place. Two of the sentences using stylistic meaning: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Her prince finally come to save her</span><span class="font2">. This statement is said by a girl to her boyfriend, if it is in different situation, for example, someone talk to his/her friends, there might be no ‘prince’ and the second sentence is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Well nice to meet you sir .</span><span class="font2">This statement is said politely by someone who talk to the old one. In different situation, this sentence can change without using the sentence “sir”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Generally, a figure of speech is a word or group of words used to give special emphasis to the idea. Figurative languages that are simile, metaphor, personification, synecdoche, metonymy, hyperbole, irony, paradox, metaphor dead, and figuratively. In four paramore song there are six types of figurative language is used to express emotions Paramore them, Metaphor, Hyperbole, Personification, Allusion, Metaphor and Metonymy Dead. As the main objective of this research is to analyze the types of figurative language used in the lyrics of the song Paramore, has confirmed that among all types of figures are presented, the use of metaphor is present primarily or most often. Figurative language also build a theme song. Meaning or theme of the songs, as revealed through the analysis are as follows: the four Paramore song which the theme is about feeling sad to leave his loved ones love and devotion. Figurative language that is used in the lyrics of the song six gives special emphasis to the idea, he helped author the song to convey the meaning of the song in a special way. Therefore, one must learn to interpret figurative language figurative language used in the job accurately. This study also analyzes the meaning proposed by Leech (1974: 1023), there are seven types of meaning, such as conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, stylistic meaning, affective meaning, the meaning of reflective, meaning collocative, thematic meaning. There are three types of meaning can be found in the Paramore song, conceptual meaning, connotative meaning and the meaning of style. However, most of the meaning of figurative language found in the songs are classified into the connotative meaning because they cannot be taken literally, and all people will often interpret them differently depending on many factors such as knowledge, experience and sensitivity in understanding the song. Expressed metaphorically meaning the style because it can be taken literally, but not everyone will understand it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday. 1994. In Yuli Pramedio, Luh Kadek. 2009. Analysis of Poetic Devices of the Song Lyric in the Album Back to Bedlam by James Blunt (thesis). Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. et al.1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Avanced Learner’s Dictionary of current English</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbockers, K.L. &amp;&nbsp;H. Williard Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature. </span><span class="font2">Toronto: Holt, Richard and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, L.Mildred. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation</span><span class="font2">. New York: University Press of America</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey N. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font1">. Auckland: Penguin Books</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">6</span></p>