---
layout: full_article
title: "PERSONAL REFERENCE USING IN A PROSE ENTITLED “CALON ARANG”"
author: "I B Cahya Ambara Jaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>PERSONAL REFERENCE USING IN A PROSE</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ENTITLED “CALON ARANG”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Ida Bagus Cahya Ambara Jaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Non-Reguler Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Abstrak:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini menganalisa tentang personal reference yang muncul dalam prosa Calon Arang. Prosa Calon Arang dikarang oleh Toety Herati dan diterjemahkan oleh Iwan Mucipto Moelinono and Kadek Khrisna Adidharma. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori Cohession oleh Halliday dan Hasan dalam bukunya yang berjudul Cohession in English. Prosa Calon Arang sendiri kaya akan data yang dapat dianalisa baik dari segi cerita, gaya bahasa dan personal reference itu sendiri. Namun, Prosa tersebut haruslah dibaca secara intensif kemudian dibuatkan sebuah catatan pada data yang ditemukan kemudian dikualifikasikan sesuai dengan teori yang digunakan. Pemaparan makalah ini menggunakan metode kualitatif dan deskriptif. Berdasarkan analisa,terdapat bebagai macam contoh personal refrence yang ditemuka dalam prosa Calon Arang antara lain personal reference I, Her dan His, You, Their, We, dan One. Kepaduan penggunaan reference dalam prosa dapat merujuk pada penggunaan reference sebelumnya (anaforis) dan reference pengikutnya (eksoporis).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">reference, prose</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Reference is means of cohesion. It can be differentiated from other cohesive relation such as, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical cohesion, since it purely semantic relations while the other is grammatical class relation (substitution and ellipsis), indirect semantic relation (conjunction), and selected vocabulary relation (lexical cohesion). Sometimes the reader feel confuse in understand the word they read. It is caused by the arrangement of sentences in a prose using a lot of various words which replace one word that related to the others. This means that one word in a sentence sometimes has meaning that refers to one word in the previous sentences or refers to the word in the next word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reference is divided into three types, they are, personal reference, demonstrative reference, and comparative reference. Personal reference is reference by means of function in the speech situation, through category of person. Demonstrative reference is reference by means of location, on a scale of proximity. The last one is comparative reference in indirect reference by means of identity or similarity. (Halliday and Hasan. 1976:37)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The category of personal includes three classes of personal pronouns, possessive determiners (usually called 'possessive adjectives'), and possessive pronouns. There is no general name for this category in traditional grammar, because the members of it belong to different classes with diverse structural roles; but in fact they represent a single system. The significance of the person system is that it is the means of referring to relevant persons and objects, making use of a small set of options centering on the particular nature of their relevance to the speech situation. The principal distinction is that between the persons defined by their roles in the communication process, on the one hand, and all other entities on the other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Literature as the creation of the writer’s imagination can be divided into three major genres they are poetry, drama, and prose. Prose is one of those genres that the most interesting to be analyzed. Prose can be divided into fiction and non-fiction. In term of type and organization, there are three types of fictions, such as a short story, short novel and novel. The earliest is one of the fictions which have simple plot and character. The later in terms of number of pages is in the middle, between short story and novel, and the latest is a story of someone life and mostly describes characters and introduces more than one impression, effect or emotion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There is very interesting prose entitled “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1">” narrated by Toeti Heraty. A prose is translated into English by Iwan Mucipto Moeliono and Kadek Krishna Adidharma (2006). I choose a translated work not the original English version because in development our young generations forget about our culture that gave big influence in our life’s as we knew that many</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">tourism came to Indonesia especially to Bali because they very interested to our cultures. In this study I want to remind our young generation we have many cultures that we should take care of due to make them everlasting generation to generation; not to forget them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1"> prose there are a lot of reference can found and it is very interesting to be analyzed how the writer insert cohesion to convey the meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1"> story to the readers. Based on the explanation above it is interesting to interpreting the cohesiveness and the message of the written text. For the further study, is to do study in interpreting the cohesiveness and the message of the text by looking at its cohesive devices especially, reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This research tries to reveal the message behind prose, cohesive device especially reference and its function which consist in it. From the background above, this study concern on the following problems:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of personal references are found in Heraty’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang </span><span class="font1">prose?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aim of study is to find out the types of personal reference in Heraty’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1"> prose by applying the theories which have been learned.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the data was taken from the story entitled “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1">”, by Toety Heraty (2000) and translated into English by Iwan Mucipto Moeliono and Kadek Krishna Adidharma (2006). “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1">” is a Balinese</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">folktale, which is the original language was Indonesian. In its development, the story of “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang</span><span class="font1">” is translated into English and it is reasonable to analyze it as the object of this study. The word selection in those prose is has idiomatic meaning. It is not just a good prose, but it also can give the readers a positive moral teaching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The prose as the data source was read through a close reading, that is by reading it repeatedly and intensively in order to find out the compiled and classified based on each reference that constructing the prose. After reading the prose, the following process was taking notes and finally listing or grouping the data source related to the points which were discussed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data was analyzed qualitatively and descriptively based on Halliday’s concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cohesiveness</span><span class="font1"> of the text. The analysis was start by finding out the types of reference used in a prose, and then followed by analyzing how they are presented in the prose. Those sub classification were analyzed and explained descriptively based on the concept of cohesion specially reference items which proposed by M.A.K Halliday and Riquaiya Hasan, (1976), in their book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1">, and also supported by other discourse theories.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference Using in A Prose Entitled “Calon Arang”</span><br><br><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark14"></a>a.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Ah, now </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">I</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> understand how she became a victim of patriarchy, anger and fury consuming her. No need for a holy priest, she burned with such vengeance, her brittle body engulfed by fire.”</span><span class="font1"> (Heraty;2006:4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘I’</span><span class="font1"> in the sentences is referring to something by specifying its function or role in the situation. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976) this system of reference is known as person. In the sentence above </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘I’</span><span class="font1"> is referring to the writer, since it refers outwards this personal reference can be categorized as exophoric reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark16"></a>b.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Her</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">His</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example 2:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang – so people called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">her</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> Bali symbol of evilopposing Barong, his victory never assured the witch’s matted hair hanging loose tongue protruding, fangs and claws grasping pendulous breast a-sway. She is just an old woman a crone with anger overflowing (Heraty; 2006:1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Generally, personal reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">she</span><span class="font1"> is used to refer to singular female person. Personal reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">she</span><span class="font1"> is categorized as other roles in subject participant. If it is non-subject, it is changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">her</span><span class="font1">. Meanwhile, as possessor, it is changed into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">her</span><span class="font1"> which function as modifier or head. This type of reference can be categorized as an anaphoric reference because </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">her </span><span class="font1">in the sentence is refers back to Calon Arang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark18"></a>c.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 4:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Oh Calon Arang, what an unhappy fate an entire country punished for love’s sake but your own child betrayed </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">you</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> for love – you became a fury for love – </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">you</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> were destroyed by a priest.” (Heraty;2006:4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Here we can see that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">you</span><span class="font1"> is referring to the person which is Calon Arang. The changing happens due to the change of speaker roles. The reference itself can be categorized as cataphoric reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark20"></a>d. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Their</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 5:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Their</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> dancing gladdens Calon Arang’s heart the dancing over, she sends them on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">their</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> tasks in five directions: Si Lendi – south, Si Larung – north, Si Guyang –east, Si Gandi – west. Calon Arang, Si Weksira and Mahisawardana in the centre. Then Calon Arang goes to the cemetery – (Heraty;2006:17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The determiner </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font1"> serves function referring to different person which are Si Lendi, Si Larung, Si Guyang and Si Gandi. The changing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">happens due to the change of speaker roles. The reference itself can be categorized as cataphoric reference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark22"></a>e. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">We</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 6:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Again </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">we</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> glimpse the kingdoms history eight centuries ago Singosari, Majapahit and Kediri embodying the enchantment of bygone days. Priest Baradah giving counsel to Erlangga to divide his kingdominto Kediri and Jenggala.” (Heraty;2006:13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the example above, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font1"> is categorized as exophoric reference since it refers outwards. The source of identification not lies in the text. The meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font1"> in the text is referring to the writer and the reader of the book.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark24"></a>f. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Personal Reference </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">One</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 7:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“ A widow is a woman left by her loved </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">one</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Somewhere between maiden in love and mourning widow, gapes a chasm – the widow lies on her bed, emptiness beating in her vagina, embraces the bolster – so, perchance did the grieving Calon Arang. ”</span><span class="font1"> (Heraty;2006:7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">One</span><span class="font1"> is a generalized personal form for human reference, it make specific reference to persons or things. In the example above we can see that one is referring to man which in the sentences is outside the text. This mean it can be categorized as exophoric.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis and discussion in the previous chapter, the following points can be drawn as conclusion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Reference in the data is of three types; those are the personal reference, demonstrative reference and comparative reference. The kinds of personal reference that occur in this prose are: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I, her, his, it, you, we, one and their.</span><span class="font1"> This is related to prose which is about that reference. Reference shows its cohesiveness in the prose by referring back to the preceding reference (or</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">called anaphoric) and the following reference (or called cataphoric). Exophoric is not simply a synonym for retrieval meaning. It is one which does not name anything; it signals that reference must be made to the context of situation. Exophoric is a relation which refers ‘outward’, the relation that refers to some person or object in the environment not to the text itself. Meanwhile, endhoporic is a reference when the source of identification lies in the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">DiYani, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature; Reading Fiction, Poetry, and Drama. </span><span class="font1">Singapore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fakuade, Gbenga &amp;&nbsp;Emmanuel C. Sharndama. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Comparative Analysis of Variations in Cohesive Devices in Professional and Popularized Legal Texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Giri. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Cohesive Devices in &quot;Slipknot Lyrics Vermilion Part II.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday and Hasan</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> 1976</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Cohesion in English.</span><span class="font1"> London: Longman Group Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font1">. London: Edward Arnold Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Heraty. Toeti. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Calon Arang : The Story of a Woman Sacrified to Patriarchy</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Persada Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moreno, Ana I. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Role of Cohesion Devices as Textual Constrain on Revelance: A Discourse- as- process View.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nunan, David. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. London: Penguin Books Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prajanata</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> 2007</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. The Analysis of Personal Reference in The Children Story Bjha and the Forty Thieves.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prasisthayani</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Cohesion and Coherence of Political News in Jakarta Post.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quirk, et.al. 1972. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Contemporary English</span><span class="font1">. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Waren. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> Great Britain: Penguins Books.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Xi, Yan. 2010</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Cohesion study in the past 30 years: Development, Application and Cahos.</span></p></li></ul>