---
layout: full_article
title: "DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS USED BY MAIN CHARACTERS IN ALICE IN WONDERLAND MOVIE SCRIPT"
author: "Ni Kadek Ayu Tedja Sari Dira"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS USED BY MAIN CHARACTERS IN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ALICE IN WONDERLAND</span><span class="font1"> MOVIE SCRIPT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NI KADEK AYU TEDJA SARI DIRA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT, FACULTY OF LETTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ini berjudul”Directive Illocutionary Acts used by main Characters in Alice in Wonderland movie script”. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisa jenis-jenis, fungsi dan conteks situasi yang terjadi pada sebuah direktif tindak ilokusi dalam percakapan yang mengandung suatu unsur permintaan, pertanyaan, larangan, saran dan peringatan. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori pragmatik yang dikemukakan oleh Bach dan Harnish (1979). Teori pendukung lainnya dikemukakan oleh Searle (1981). Untuk menganalisa fungsi dari direktif tindak ilokusi menggunakan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Vanderveken (1990). Dan untuk conteks situasi jurnal ini menggunakan teori oleh Hymes (1972). Dalam menganalisa jurnal, metode yang digunakan adalah metode kualitatif. Pembahasan diawali dengan menyaksikan film yang berjudul Alice in Wonderland, membaca naskah film dan mencatat kalimat-kalimat yang mengandung unsur tindak ilokusi. Hasil dari pembahasan ini menunjukkan bahwa terdapat banyak kalimat yang mengandung tindak ilokusi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata Kunci: Pragmatik, direktif, tindak ilokusi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Studies about movie script have shown that it constitutes a particular variety of naturally occurring language characterized by the dialogues within it. Despite the features of formal and informal utterance, recent studies have shown that the implicit communicative intention is successfully recovered and interpreted by dialogues in the movie. In making those utterances, the speaker at least performs three kinds of act which are called: locutionary act, illocutionary act, and perlocutionary act. The dialogues performed in a movie contains several utterances which sometimes are bound to the context of situation, thus the kind of speech act which often appears is illocutionary acts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">By understanding the way that is used by speakers in performing utterance, we may do a quick action to encounter them whether the words said is containing one meaning or more.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, the problems of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types and the functions of directive illocutionary acts that mostly used in dialogues taken from movie script </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In what kinds of contexts of situation do those directive illocutionary acts occur in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font1"> movie script?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background of the study and the problems as mentioned above, this paper aims at:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Describing what types and functions of directive illocutionary acts are found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font1"> movie script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analyzing the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">contexts of situation when directive illocutionary acts occur in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font1"> movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resource Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Methodology is the set of methods that are used as the steps in doing the scientific neared, particularly in obtaining and processing the data. The methodology of this paper includes some parts: namely data sources, method and technique of collecting data and the method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study was taken from a movie script entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font1"> which is a 2010 American computer-animated and live action fantasy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">film directed by Tim Burton, written by Linda Woolverton, and released by Walt Disney Pictures. There are many dialogues within this movie which are taken for data of this study. The dialogues which come from the four main characters above occur in many occasions and situations in the movie. The dialogues between rabbit and Alice also become the source of this study since the rabbit has a significant role in the story. Therefore, the data of this movie is bound to those main characters’ dialogues.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research methodology to get appropriate data to support of this paper is by using documentary research, which is conducted when the source is in such forms as notes, transcriptions, books, novel, newspaper, magazines, or short story. The techniques of collecting data include the steps as follows: First, watching the movie to recognize the story and identify the main characters of the movie. After that, Selected and identified the utterances that have been heard in the movie to the script that have been previously read. And the last, Taking notes of the texts that are considerably to be part of directive illocutionary acts showing the types, functions, as well as the contexts of situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method that is used to analyze the data in this research is qualitative descriptive method with several steps of analyzing data as follows: The first step is to make a list and identify whether the sample dialogues contain the directive illocutionary acts within the types. The next step is to identify the functions applied in the text whether the directive illocutionary acts would function as: ordering, requesting, suggesting, advising, recommending, warning, asking and so forth. And the last step is to analyze the text based on the contexts of situation based on the theory proposed by Hymes (1974:9). After all those steps above are well done, finally the analysis could be started.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of Directive Illocutionary Acts used by main Characters in Alice in Wonderland Movie Script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 The classification of illocutionary acts</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Bach and Harnish (1979:47) “Directives express the speaker’s attitude toward some prospective action by the hearer. However, it also expresses the speaker’s attention (desire and wish) that is utterance or the attitude in expresses be taken as (a) reason for the hearer to act”. There are six kinds of acts that belong to this category:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Requestives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S requests H to A. it means in uttering expression, speaker request hearer to do action. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The desire that H do A, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that H do A because (at least partly) S’s desire.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Requestive performative verb include: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ask, beg, beseech, implore, insist, invite, petition, plead, pray, request, solicit, tell and urge</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Questions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S questions H as whether or not </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">P</span><span class="font1">. it means in uttering expression, speaker question hearer as whether or not proposition. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The desire that H tell S whether or not </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">P</span><span class="font1">, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that H tell S whether or not </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">P</span><span class="font1"> because of S’s desire.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Questioning performative verb include: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ask, inquire, interrogate, question and quiz.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Requirements</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S requires H to A. it means in uttering expression, speaker requires hearer to do action. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The belief that his utterances, in virtue of his authority over H, constituents sufficient reason for H to A, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that H do A because of S’s utterances.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Requirement performative verb include: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bid, command, demand, enjoin, order, prescribe, and require.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prohibitive</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S prohibits H from A-ing. It means in uttering expression, speaker prohibits hearer from doing action. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The belief that is utterance, in virtue of his authority over H, constituents sufficient reason for H not to A, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that because of S’s utterance H not do A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Prohibitive performative verb include: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">enjoin, forbid, prohibit, proscribe, and restrict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Permissives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S permits H to A. it means in uttering expression, speaker permits hearer to do action. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The belief that his utterance, in virtue of his authority over H, entitles H to A, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ii.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that H believe that S’s utterance entitles him to A. permissive performative verb include: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">agree to, allow, authorize, bless, excuse, exempt, forgive, grant, license, pardon, release, sanction.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Advisories</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">e</span><span class="font1">, S advises H to A. it means in uttering expression, speaker advises hearer to do action. If S expresses:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The belief that there is (sufficient) reason for H to A, and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The intention that H take S’s belief as (sufficient) reason for him to A. Advisories: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">admonish, advice, caution, counsel, propose, recommend, suggest, urge and warm.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The classification of context situations.</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting and Scene</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Setting refers to the time and place. It means that concrete physical circumstances under which the speech act takes place. Besides, scene includes the characteristics such as range of formality and scene of play or seriousness. In a particular setting, participants could change the scene as they change a level of formality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Participants refer to the persons that who speak to whom. These are about the speaker and hearer, sender and receiver, or addresser and addressee. The element of participants also includes the relationship and social dimension (solidarity or social distance and social status or power) among them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ends</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ends refer to goals, purposes, and outcomes of the speech acts. It also refers to the conventionally recognized and expected effects or outcomes of an exchange as well as the personal goals that the participants expected to accomplish in speech acts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Act sequences</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Act sequences refer to the message form and content. That means how the speaker used the words and the relationship of what is said to the actual topic at the moment in which the conversation takes place. Thus, this aspect can give the description of what speaker means by utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keys</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Keys refer to tone and manner in using the language. It means the way used by the participant of the exchange in performing speech acts whether it is mocking, sarcastic, serious, and precise, etc. the key of speech acts can also be marked non-verbally by certain kinds of behavior gesture, posture, or even deportment.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Instrumentalities</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Instrumentalities refer to the means of communication used in performing the speech act. It includes the channels employed during the speech act and the forms of speech language dialect, etc. the channels of speech acts can be differentiated from verbal, non verbal and physical channel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Norms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Norms refer to specific properties attached to speaking interpretation of norms within cultural belief system. Norms of interaction and interpretation are varied according to the participant social status.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Genre refers to the textual categories in the utterances or the topic of conversations. For example prayer, lectures, teachers, poems, family, etc. They are all marked in specific ways in contrast to casual speech. Genre is the kind of speech act or speech even.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In fact, in uttering something, the clause pattern is not always constructed grammatically as normal basic structure in English, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">S+V+O. </span><span class="font1">However, through Directive Illocutionary acts analysis, the sentence can be analogically analyzed and it will perform a clear meaning to be understood.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Austin, John Langshaw. 1970. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How To Do Thing With Words</span><span class="font1">. New York: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bazin, André. (1967:71). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">What is cinema? Vol. 1 &amp;&nbsp;2</span><span class="font1"> (Hugh Gray, Trans., Ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISBN 0-520-020340</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bird, Alexander. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Illocutionary Silencing</span><span class="font1">. Pacific Philosophical</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quarterly vol. 83</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Green, Mitchell S. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Illocutionary Force and Semantic Content</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">23: </span><span class="font1">435–473, 2000. Netherlands: Virginia University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Horecky, Jan. 2007. “The content and Form of Illocutionary Acts”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SKASE. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Theoretical Linguistic. Vol 4. No.1.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.skase.sk/Volumes/JLT08/pdf_doc/11.pdf"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.skase.sk/Volumes/JLT08/pdf doc/11.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, Dell. 1964. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Toward Ethnographies of Communication: The Analysis of Communication Event.</span><span class="font1"> Berkeley: California University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keith, Allan. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Meaning (Vol.2)</span><span class="font1">. London: Routledge and Keagan Paul Inc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kent, Bach and Robert M Harnish. 1979. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Communication and Speech Acts</span><span class="font1">. London: The MIT press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pusparini, Ni Putu Indah. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Illocutionary Acts found in Pond Scum by Alan Silberberg.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rachmayuni, Ayu Sri. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The analysis of Illocutionary Acts of Promises in The Drama “Beyond of The Horizon</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle, J.R. 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts and Illocutionary Logic.</span><span class="font1"> Berkeley: California University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Trisnaputri, Ary Devi 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Directives Illocutionary Acts in the Radio Telehone of Air Traffic Service Control</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>