---
layout: full_article
title: "POSITIVE POLITENESS AND POSITIVE IMPOLITENESS STRATEGIES IN THE NOVEL “MY NAME IS MEMORY”"
author: "Putu Siska Andiyani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">POSITIVE POLITENESS AND POSITIVE IMPOLITENESS STRATEGIES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN THE NOVEL “MY NAME IS MEMORY”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PUTU SISKA ANDIYANI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness adalah cara kita berbicara dalam menunjukkan rasa hormat terhadap orang lain. Politeness khususnya positive politeness biasanya digunakan untuk menjaga hubungan sosial antar sesama. Kebalikan dari positive politeness yaitu positive impoliteness yang biasanya digunakan untuk menimbulkan ketidakharmonisan sosial. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menemukan tipe dari positive politeness dan positive politeness yang digunakan dalam novel “My Name is Memory” dan untuk menganalisa reaksi dari pendengar terhadap ungkapan positive politeness dan positive impoliteness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dokumentasi dan teknik mencatat digunakan dalam mengumpulkan data dan metode deskriptif kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisis data. Teori positive politeness oleh Brown dan Levinson dan teori positive impoliteness oleh Culpeper digunakan dalam menganalisa tipe poitive politeness dan positive impoliteness.Sedangkan teori reaksi oleh Holmes dan teori reaksi positive impoliteness oleh Culpeper digunakan untuk menganalisa reaksi pendengar terhadap ungkapan dari positive politeness dan positive impoliteness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari penelitian bisa diklasifikasikan menjadi dua yaitu pertama terdapat 14 tipe positive politeness dan 7 tipe positive impoliteness yang digunakan dalam novel. Dan yang kedua terdapat 3 tipe reaksi terhadap ungkapan positive politeness dan 4 tipe reaksi terhadap positive impoliteness.Berdasarkan hasil penelitian, dapat disimpulkan bahwa tipe positive politeness digunakan di dalam novel dengan tujuan untuk menjaga hubungan antar karakter di novel. Tapi dalam beberapa kondisi, karakter dalam novel cenderung menggunakan positive impoliteness untuk menunjukkan ketidaksetujuan dengan cara yang tidak sopan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Positive Politeness, Positive Impoliteness, Reaksi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">People as social creatures need to socialize or communicate with others through</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">conversations in order to maintain the social relationship among them. Politenessis the way we talk in order to show our regard to other people.positive politeness is used by people to show close relationship among them using common ground and solidarity expressions to show politeness.However, there are some occasions when people attack rather than support others and sometimes those attacks are considered by others to be impolite in social communication. As the opposite of positive politeness, positive impoliteness tends to attack other’s positive face especially to attack someone’s face who has close relationship with them to show disagreement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whattypes ofpositive politeness strategies and types of positive impoliteness were used in novel “My Name is Memory”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How did the hearers respond towards positive politeness and positive impoliteness expressions which are applied in novel “My Name is Memory”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1 . To find out the types of positive politeness and positive impoliteness in the novel“My Name is Memory”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2 .To analyzethe response of the hearers towards positive politeness and positive impoliteness expressions applied in the novel “My Name is Memory”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the data were taken from the conversations among the characters in the novel “My Name is Memory”.The conversations which were used as the data source were the expressions which applied positive politeness strategies and positive impoliteness strategies and also showed the response of the hearers toward the positive politeness strategies and the positive impoliteness strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This novel is written by Ann brashares in 2010 which contains 369 pages. The novel is centredaround a young couple who discover that their souls have been reincanated over hundreds of years. A mysterious young boy named Danielwho has memory of his past life, and Sophia is the girl he has spent lifetime searching for, as he races against time to spur her lost memories of him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Documentation method and note taking technique were used to collect the data, since the data in this study were taken from the conversation among characters in the novel. The process of collecting data was done by reading the novel and using note taking in some parts of conversations which show positive politeness and positive impoliteness and also the response of the hearers toward positive politeness and positive impoliteness applied by the characters in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Qualitative descriptive method was used to analyze and describe the types of positive politeness and positive impolitenessand the response of the hearers to positive politeness and positive impoliteness expressions used in the novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Firstly, the collected data were classified into two groups, positive politeness based on politeness theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987) and positive impoliteness based on impoliteness theory proposed by Culpeper (1996). Then, after classifying them, the collected data were analyzed using the theory of response proposed by Holmes (1995) and Culpeper (1996) to show the hearer’s response to positive politeness and positive impoliteness applied in novel “My Name is Memory”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Positive Politeness and Positive Impoliteness Strategies in the Novel “My Name is Memory”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Positive politeness and positive impoliteness are usually used in social communication whether to maintain social relationship among people or to cause social disharmony. Positive politeness has 15 strategies and positive impoliteness has 10 strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Positive Politeness and Positive Impoliteness strategies</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are 14 types of positive politeness strategies found in the novel, one of them is explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1 : Notice, attend to H (his/herneeds)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Alexander : “You stayed the same”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“ Your hair grew more”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He had wonderfully curly, sandy-colored hair. She and Marnie used to style it when he was little and they could get him to sit still.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 2</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daniel : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Your eyes are blue now”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Constance : “They were always blue”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daniel : “No, they were once black”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Constance : “Oh?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daniel : “Yes, and equally beautiful” (Page 161)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In these examples, the first example shows that Lucywants to show respect by paying attention to Alexander’snoticeable changes especially his hair which has been growing more than before. The second example shows that the speaker (Daniel)notices the noticeable change of hearer (Constance) especially</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the change of Constance’s eyes colour because in previous life, Constance has black eyes not blue eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are 7 types of positive impoliteness strategies found in the novel, one of them is explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ignore, snub the other</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy : “Who’d Stephen come with”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Marnie : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Shut up’ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Page 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From this example, Marnie wants to show that what Lucy says is not really important and Marnie is actually not interested in it so Marnie tries to show it by saying something rude like “shut up” to make Lucy stops saying something about it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.2Response of the Hearers to Positive Politeness and Positive Impoliteness Expressions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are three main types of responses of compliment which also belongs to positive politeness, one of them is explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accept</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daniel : “Then yes. He’ll be fine”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“That’s good”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Page 18)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 2</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy: “I’m sorry to hear it”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mom : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Well” </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Page 72)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the examples above, we can see how the hearer responds toward positive politeness expressions. In the first example, the hearer (Lucy) tends to accept what the speaker (Daniel) says or what the speaker thinks by saying “That’s good” which shows that the hearer cooperate with the speaker. In the second example, the speaker shows sympathy by saying </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“I’m sorry to hear that”</span><span class="font0"> and the hearer responds it by saying </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“well”</span><span class="font0"> which means that the hearer accepts the speaker’s sympathy utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are four types of response of the hearers to positive politeness expressions, one of them is explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not responding</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy : “Maybe he’ll care. You don’t know that”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Marnie : “He won’t. He’s had a lot of chances to care and he hasn’t”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">After Lucy hung up the phone for the last time she stood in front of the mirror. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Page 12)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 2</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lucy : “Who’d Stephen come with”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Marnie: “Shut up’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Lucy did shut up for a while, watching the smoke climb and dissipate. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Page 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the two examples above, we can say that the hearer in this case Lucy shows “not responding” response, we can see that although the speaker (Marnie) uses impolite phrases in her utterances like “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“He won’t. He’s had a lot of chances to care and he hasn’t”</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Shut up’</span><span class="font1"> , the hearer doesn’t respond it by saying impolite phrase too but tends to keep silent because she may think that it is impolite and there is no reason to respond such an impolite attitude.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the result of the whole analysis, there were only 14 strategies used in the novel, strategy 2 exaggerate was not found in the novel. And there were only 7 types of impoliteness strategy used in the novel, strategy 2 (exclude the other from an activity), strategy 3 (disassociate from the other) and strategy 6 (use obscure or secretive language) were not found in the novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the data analysis, it can also be concluded that the hearer’s response to positive politeness like accept, evade, and reject were used in the novel and the hearer’s response to positive impoliteness like not responding, accepting impoliteness, countering defensively, and countering offensively are also applied in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brashares, Ann. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My Name Is Memory</span><span class="font1">. New York : Riverhead Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, P and Levinson, S. 1987.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Some Universals in Language Usage</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Culpeper, J. 1996. Towards an anatomy of impoliteness.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Pragmatics, 25</span><span class="font1">, 349-367.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, J. 1988. Compliments and compliment responses in New Zealand</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Anthropological Linguistics,</span><span class="font1"> 28(4), &nbsp;&nbsp;485-508. Available in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><a href="http://books.google.com/books?isbn=9027226253"><span class="font1">http://books.google.com/books?isbn=9027226253</span></a><span class="font1">) downloaded on 4rd 2013.</span></p>