---
layout: full_article
title: "THE STUDY OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN MINETTE WALTER’SNOVEL THE SCOLD’S BRIDLE"
author: "Ni Putu Listiani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.3 Juni 2016: 158-162</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE STUDY OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN MINETTE WALTER’S NOVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE SCOLD’S BRIDLE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Listiani</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">email: </span><a href="mailto:niputulistianidewi@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">niputulistianidewi@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department, Faculty Of Letters And Culture Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Karya sastra sangat menarik untuk dipelajari. Di dalam penulisan karya sastra, penulis selalu menggambarkan beberapa aspek dari kehidupan. Ada beberapa macam jenis karya sastra, misalnya puisi, seni drama dan cerita rekaan. Pada penulisan karya sastra ini yang akan dianalisis adalah cerita rekaan (fiksi). Tulisan ini berjudul “The Study Of The Main Character In Minette Walters Novel The Scolds Bridle”, yang bertujuan untuk mengetahui karakter utama dalam novel tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Adapun metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian untuk pengumpulan data penelitian kepustakaan. Disebut penelitian kepustakaan karena sumber data dari penelitian ini diambil dari novel. Cara pengambilan data melalui tahap membaca isi dari novel dan lalu memilah data yang penting untuk dianalisis. Analisis ini berfokus pada penentuan karaker, khususnya karakter utama. Data yang telah dikumpulkan dianalisis menggunakan teori dari Di Yanni dan Lajos Egri. Di Yanni menyatakan ada dua tipe dari karakter, yaitu dynamic character dan static character. Lajos Egri menyatakan bahwa karakter memiliki tiga ukuran sebagai struktur dasar yaitu physiology, sociology dan psychology</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Novel, karakter utama dan struktur dasar</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature is a creative activity, an artwork that must always have a structure and an aesthetic purpose, a total coherence and effect. Literary work can be divided into two elements, such as non-fiction literary work and fiction literary works (Wellek and Waren, 1955: 219)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who is the main character in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the writer describe the main character psychologically, sociologically and physiologically in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and identify the main character in the novel “The Scold’s Bridle”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out more deeply about psychology, sociology and physiology in the novel.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Methodology is system of methods and principles of doing something. The research, which consists of obtaining a group of data, will determine the research method. The method is divided into three points, they are data source, data collection and data analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Data source is an important thing to support the analysis of this writing. The data weretaken from the novel under the title of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span><span class="font1"> by Minette Walters. The novel is as the object of study and as well as the source of the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected based on library research. Firstly, the novel was read repeatedly and carefully in order to understand and comprehend the content of the text. The next step was taking notes of the part of the novel providing information about the main character and supporting characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were qualitatively analyzed. This is based on the theory of literature and theory of psychology in order to get the conclusion. The other relevant information from other sources was used to support the analysis of the data. To determine the data belonging to certain point of analysis, the data was copied from the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">novel first and categorized into sociological dimension, psychological dimension and sociological dimension. It was analyzed based on the characterization available. The literature found in the source language was compared to theirstructure and classified in terms of their structure and their meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Dimensional Analysis of Main Character in The Scold’s Bridle Novel by Minette Walters</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The description of physiological aspect can be traced out through several things such as age, sex, and physical appearances which include shape of body, color of skin, hair, eye, feature and so forth which belong to human body. Below is the analysis of physiological aspect of the main character.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological Dimension in the story can be seen from all things, which are related to environments, the family and the relationship of the character to the other character.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The psychological aspect can be analyzed through the nature of human being such as attitude, behavior, feeling, emotion and motivation.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">6</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synopsis of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Once upon a time there lived an old woman in Long Upton Village, her name is Mathilda Gillespie. She lived alone without her relatives. She is going outside seldom. So she does not know her neighbor so much and very private person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">One day Mathilda is found dead in her bathtub, her body is found nearly two days after she had taken an overdose and slashed her wrists with a stanley knife. But how shocked Dr Sarah Blakeney when she saw the scold's bridle obscuring the dead woman’s face. A metal contraption grotesquely adorned with a garland of nettles and Michaelmas daisies. The police assume that the coroner will return a verdict of suicide. Only Dr Blakeney, it seems, doubts the verdict. Until it is discovered that Mathilda’s diaries have disappeared. The dead woman’s only friend, Dr. Sarah Blakeney, becomes prime suspect in her murder after police discover that she is been left a great deal of money in the will.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Main Character in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The main character in the story is Mathilda Gillespie. We can say that because she is always being the focus of the story and occurs in every event of the story. She is described as a person who fell silent, very snobbish, very intolerant and not overly friendly, but she had a brilliant mind. Every act of her is always to be the focus of the story. So, we can assume that she is the main character in the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the study shows that the main character in the story </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span><span class="font1"> is Mathilda Gillespie. She is categorized as round or complex character and the author is in this case describingMathilda from all sides of life thatdoes not embody to single attitude. She is described as a flexible character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mathilda, physiologically, was a geriatric of sixty-five-years-old, and still looks beautiful. She is an old widow. Psychologically, she is a woman who has sense of humor and can make the people laugh together with her. She also feels silent and though if the freedom is just an illusion. For her, the freedom is just for a man and she does not feel the freedom in her life. As an old woman, she is very nice and has softy hearts. Sociologically, Mathilda is a private person who lives in Long Upton. She is also a Christian and is a closed woman and does not care with her neighbor in Fontwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From this analysis, we can assume that in describing a character, a writer cannot only take from one aspect only whether it is physiological, psychological or sociological aspect, but all of them must also be combined together to create comprehensiveness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">American Corporation. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Encyclopaedia Americana</span><span class="font1">. USA: Grolier, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Aminuddin, Drs, Mpd. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">PengantarApresiasiKaryaSastra,</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: PT. Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">AyuMirahYuliari, I Dewa. 2010. “The Main Character in “The Cather in The RYE” by J.D Salinger” Unpublished Under Graduated Thesis. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters UdayanaUniversity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Di Yanni, Robert. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: Reading Fiction, Poetry, Drama and Essay. Third Edition.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Mc Graw – Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Harina, Virgil. 2001. “An Intrinsic Case Study found in the novel Monster Blood by R. L. Stine” Unpublished Under Graduated Thesis. Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A S. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font1">. Fifth Edition. London: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Joni Jatmika, I Made. 2006. “The Analysis of Main Character in “Beowulf” Interrelated to The Socio-Historical Background of Anglo-Saxon People” Unpublished Under Graduated Thesis. Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966 </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">. New York, Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leng, Andrew. Dr. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mastering the Unseen Prose &amp;&nbsp;Poetry: Upper Secondary Literature &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in English</span><span class="font1">. Singapore: Person Education Asia Pte Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sukada, I Made. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">BeberapaaspekTentangSastra</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Kayumas&amp;YayasanIlmu dan SeniLesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sumarjo, J and Saini, K.M. 1979, 1988. ApresiasiKesusastraan, Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tarigan, Henry Guntur. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-PrinsipDasarSastra</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Walters, Minette. 1955. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Scold’s Bridle</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Second Edition</span><span class="font1">. Australia Print Group, Maryborough, Victoria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1955. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Jonathan Cape.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">162</span></p>