---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS ON THE MAIN AND SECONDARY CHARACTERS IN THE NOVEL THE HOUSE ON HOPE STREET  BY DANIELLE STEEL"
author: "Antonio Constantino Soares"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS ON THE MAIN AND SECONDARY CHARACTERS IN THE NOVEL </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE HOUSE ON HOPE STREET </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">BY DANIELLE STEEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ANTONIO CONSTANTINO SOARES ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Karya sastra pada dasarnya dikembangkan oleh dua unsur pokok, yaitu unsur intrinsik dan ekstrinsik. Karakter merupakan salah satu unsur intrinsik diantara unsur-unsur yang lain seperti, tema, alur, sudut pandang, latar, gaya, bahasa dan perpaduan yang membangun karya sastra itu sendiri. The House on Hope Street merupakan salah satu karya terbaik Danielle Steel yang ditulis pada tahun (2000) dan pernah menjadi salah satu novel terlaris di dunia. Novel ini bercerita tentang Liz dan suaminya Jack Sutherland yang bekerja sebagai pengacara khususnya untuk menangani masalah perceraian. Mereka telah menikah selama delapan belas tahun dan membangun sebuah keluarga yang bahagia bersama ke lima anak-anaknya dan tinggal di dekat San Francisco, tetapi pada Natal pagi, di tengah-tengah suka cita dan tawa anak-anak, sebuah tragedy menimpa Jack Sutherland dimana dia ditembak oleh salah satu suami klien mereka. Kematian Jack Sutherland tiba-tiba mengubah semuanya menjadi duka yang sangat memilukan. Cerita ini berisikan sejumlah konflik, terutama konflik yang disebabkan oleh suami salah satu klien mereka yang bernama Phillip Parker yang akhirnya membunuh suami Liz. Konflik Liz sebagai tokoh utama dengan salah satu putrinya Megan. Konflik Liz dengan Dr. Bill Webster. Dengan Kematian Jack dapat membuat Liz memulai hidup baru baik menjadi seorang ibu sekaligus menjadi ayah bagi kelima anak-anaknya. Analisis konflik pada tokoh utama dan kedua ini dipilih karena konflik dapat mempengaruhi pembaca untuk terus membaca cerpen, novellete dan novel sebagai karya sastra. Tanpa adanya konflik pada sebuah karya sastra, karya sastra tersebut tidak akan menarik para pembaca untuk membacanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Konflik, Eksternal, Internal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Literary work is fundamentally developed by two elements, such as intrinsic and extrinsic element. Character is one of the intrinsic elements among other elements such as; theme, plot, setting, point of view, style, language and unity that build a literary work. The house on the hope street was one of the best works of Danielle steel written in (2000) and it became one of the best-selling in the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The story was about Liz and her husband Jack Sutherland. In their eighteen years of marriage they had built a family, a successful law practice, and a warm happy home near San Francisco. In a house on Hope Street, but on Christmas morning, in the midst of joy and children’s laughter, tragedy Liz was left alone, facing painful questions in the face of unbelievable loss. In writing this paper the conflicts analysis on the character were chosen because the conflict can influence the readers to continue reading the literary works especially a short story, novelette and novel. Without conflicts, readers will not be interested in reading the literary works.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">To focus on the conflicts on the main and secondary characters, problems of the present study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What were the roles of the main and secondary characters related to the conflicts?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What were the sources of the conflict faced by the main and secondary characters and how they managed their conflicts?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Related to the problems stated above, this study covered two majors of study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what were the roles of the main and secondary characters related to the conflicts.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what were the sources of the conflicts faced by the main and secondary characters and how they managed their conflicts.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data sources of this study were divided in to two parts: The primary data were taken from the novel The House on Hope Street (2000) written by Danielle Steel. The secondary data were taken from the biography of the writer itself some, books, and various kinds of the documents related to the topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Documentation method used in collecting the data included reading the novel The House on Hope Street (2000) intensively, repeatedly and noted down all the information relevant to the topic discussion. Secondly, the information related to the conflicts on characters in the novel was obtained.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected then analyzed by using the qualitative and descriptive method based on the literature theory proposed by (Wellek and Warren in Sukada’s book ‘Pembinaan Kritik Sastra Indonesia Masalah Sistematika Analisis Struktur Fiksi)’ (1986), and Kenney (1966, How to Analyze Fiction). Those theories were used to analyze the characters and characterization; however, the theory proposed by Deetz and Stevenson (1986, Managing interpersonal communication) and the theory proposed by Robbins, Stephen. P. (2005, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Organizational behavior)</span><span class="font0"> were used to analyze the conflicts on the main and secondary characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Conflict on the Main and Secondary Characters in the novel the House on Hope Street by Danielle Steel.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis on The Main, and Secondary Characters</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Kenney (1966:24) states that a character is relevant if there are a lot of people like him in the real world or there is something of the character in each of us.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Liz Sutherland</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The main character in the story of The House on Hope Street was Liz Sutherland. She dominantly played an important role and determined the plot of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the story. She appeared continually and dominated almost the whole of the story from the beginning to the end.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Secondary Characters</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Secondary characters are the characters that also have important roles in the story because the secondary characters can give their influences to the role of the main character to determine the plot of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jack Sutherland</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Jack Sutherland was Liz’s husband who was killed by Philip Parker Amanda’s husband.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philip Parker</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Philip Parker was Amanda’s husband. In the story he acted as the antagonist character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amanda Parker</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Amanda was Phillip Parker’s wife, the one who became Liz and Jack Sutherland’s client.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dr. Bill Webster</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dr. Bill Webster was the man who gave many influences to the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Megan</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Megan is one of Liz’s daughters. She was fourteen years old. She was the one who opposed Liz to have another relationship with another man</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.1.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peter</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Peter is Liz elder’s son. He was 17 years old. He was the one who also gave a lot of influences to the main character in the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Liz Sutherland and her husband lived happily and peacefully with their five children in the house on the hope street in San Francisco. The conflicts of Liz Sutherland were analyzed into both internal and external conflicts. The Analysis of external conflict would cover the types of conflict, and the sources of conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Kenney (1966:19) states that a story may deal with a conflict within a single man, conflict between man, conflict between man and society, between man and nature, and so on. Related to the discussion of the conflict in main character, he states that the conflict with which fiction concern itself are of many kinds. While the conflict with the single man, or conflict between an idea and another is called internal conflict.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Sources of External Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">'What do you think Daddy would say about your going out, Mom?' she asked her mother directly.’ I think he'd say it's about time,' Peter said simply. 'It's been nearly nine months, and she has a right Hell, when Andy Martin's mom died last year, his father got remarried in five months. Mom hasn't even looked at another man since Dad died,' Peter said fairly, but Megan looked even more worried.’ Are you going to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">marry</span><span class="font0"> the doctor? ‘No, Megan,' Liz said quietly, 'I'm not going to marry anyone </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(The House on Hope Street 2000: 247-249)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Peter said to Megan that their father had gone for nine months; however, Megan still continued opposing peter and their mother to postpone loving anyone else. Liz tried to explain to Megan about Dr. Bill Webster to her that they did not have any special relationship, but friends and besides Dr. Bill Webster was Peter’s doctor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I think we love each other.' But it was a heavy dose for her daughter to swallow.’ What about Daddy?' There were tears in her eyes when she said it. 'Daddy's gone, Meg. I loved him with all my heart and always will. This isn't the same; it's different, for me, and for all of this. But I'm not going to be alone for the rest of my life. I have a right to someone in my life.' She spoke to her daughter as gently as she could, but it needed to be said.’ That’s </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sick!’</span><span class="font0"> Megan chastised her, furious with her mother. 'It hasn't even been a year since Daddy died. I never knew you were a slut before, Mom.' </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(The House on Hope Street 2000: 294-295)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dr. Bill Webster and Liz drove slowly back to Tiburon that afternoon, and the children were all home when they arrived. Liz could see Megan raise an eyebrow when she got out of Bill's car, but nothing was said until later that evening, then the younger children were in bed and Peter was busy doing his</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">homework in his room. Then Megan started asking her mother why she was in Bill's car.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Don't speak to me that way! Now go to your room until you can be civil. If you want to talk about it with me, you can, but you can't be disrespectful.' 'I have no reason to respect you!' Megan said grandly from the safety of the doorway, and then slammed the door, and ran into Peter's room and told him what had happened. '</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">(The House on Hope Street 2000: 296)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There was a great psychological fight among Megan, Peter and her mother. This time Peter defended his mother to quarrel with Megan. Peter defended his mother by saying to Megan that their mother had been alone and working all her life like a dog.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Internal conflict is usually called psychological conflict. Brady (2010:1) states that internal conflicts could happen between one idea to the other ideas or the conflicts of someone with his own mind. Internal conflict exits when a character is wrestling with an idea or characteristic which exists with her or him. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.4 The Sources of Internal Conflicts</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The source of internal conflict of Liz was incompatible role, between two roles, the role of her daughter Megan and the role of her mother. Liz was influenced by two equally roles. Liz hardly ever believed that her beloved husband who loved her so much could leave her forever. She did not what she was going to do after his death.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'How could this happen?' she whispered as she knelt next to him. 'What am I going to do without you?' The tears streamed down her cheeks as she knelt on the worn carpet and rested a hand on the smooth wood. It was all so inconceivable, so unbearable, so much more than she had ever thought she could (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street: 93)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Liz had conflict with herself because she would like to pack all of her late husband Jack’s stuffs away, because every time she saw her husband’s clothes they hurt her too much; however, she could not be strong enough to do it. When she was in her sadness again her elder son, Peter, was always ready to support her by giving her his brilliant support and idea. Liz loved her son Peter very much as he had grown up as a great boy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution for External Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">When Megan did not bless the relationship between her mother to have another relation with another man, Liz was always patient and she always tried to persuade her daughter in order to bless her to have another relationship with another man as she felt very lonely some sometimes. Though Megan ever said that Liz was a slut woman, she never laid her hand on her because she loves her daughter very much.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'Who's down there?' 'I am,' Liz answered. ‘Bill the doctor?' She sounded surprised and Liz could hear other voices, Peter Jamie, Rachel and Annie. They had woken the whole house up.’ Bill, the Brute and Moron,' he corrected, and Megan came down the stairs slowly with a sheepish smile. ‘I’m sorry.' She looked straight at Bill as she said It.' me too.' He smiled at her.' Let's have breakfast,’ Jamie said again.' I'll make waffles,' Liz said and stopped to look up at Bill, as they exchanged a smile, and he kissed her again. 'You run a busy house,' he commented, as he followed her into the kitchen.' Only sometimes. Come by for lunch anytime she said, taking out her waffle pan. 'I was thinking of staying,' Bill whispered to her. (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street: 367-368)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hearing that the doctor had come back and visited them again Megan finally went down and ran to Dr. Bill Webster to apologize him for what she had done to him previous days. Then Dr. Bill Webster also apologized to Megan. Then finally they forgave each other and forgot what had had happened between them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution for Internal Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Liz did not really wish to pack away all her husband’s stuff away however she had to do it. If she still kept all of her husband’s clothes in her house they would only hurt her too much though what she was going to do was opposed by her daughter Megan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'Why are you doing that now? It's because of him</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font0"> isn't it?' They both knew she meant Bill, and Liz shook her head, as they both stood in the walk-in closet crying. 'It's time, Meg ... I had to ... It hurts me too much to see them,' Liz said, as she cried and reached out to her daughter, but Megan pulled away, ran to her room, and slammed the door, and a few minutes later, Liz followed. (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street: 277)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A few months had passed by and Liz lived with her beloved children without her late husband Jack Sutherland. Day by day Liz always felt that everything was so painful. Everything hurt her so much. Therefore one day Liz had made a big decision to pack all of her late husband’s stuff away as she thought if Jack’s stuffs were still kept there, they would only hurt her too much.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There were some external conflicts faced by Liz Sutherland with the other characters. She faced the conflict between her and her mother, conflict between her and her daughter Megan, Conflict between her and Dr. Bill Webster and conflict with her husband. The sources of external conflict of Liz Sutherland and the other characters were because of different opinion. This conflict was called as the incompatible conflict role.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The source of Liz Sutherland’s internal conflicts was interpersonal conflict. The internal conflicts of Liz Sutherland were included in personal conflicts. The result of the conflicts on the characters ended with happy ending because the conflicts could be solved well by the both main and secondary characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>7</span><span class="font0">.</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Deetz Stanley A. And Sherly L. Stevenson. 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication</span><span class="font0">. New York: Harpercollins College Div.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Diyanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading, Fiction, Poetry, and Drama</span><span class="font0">. McGRAW-Hill International Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font0">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Robbins, Stephen. P. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Organizational Behavior,</span><span class="font0"> Eleventh Edition, (Electronic Edition) Published by Prentice-Hall. Copyright © 2005 by Pearson Education, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Steel, Danielle. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The House on Hope Street. Printing History</span><span class="font0">. Mantam press edition published 2000 corgi edition published 2001.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sukada Made. 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra</span><span class="font0">, Kayumas dan Yayasan Ilmu dan Seni Lesiba, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sukada. I Made. 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pembinaan Kritik Sastra Indonesia: Masalah Sistimatika Analysis Struktur Fiksi</span><span class="font0">. Bandung. Angkasa. Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>