---
layout: full_article
title: "FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE FOUND IN ADELE’S SONG LYRIC"
author: "Purnama Wathi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE FOUND IN ADELE’S SONG LYRIC</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NI MADE PURNAMA WATHI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Karya tulis ini berjudul “Figurative Language Found in Adele’s song lyric” yang memiliki tujuan untuk menjawab dua pertanyaan. Pertama untuk mengetahui tipe-tipe majas yang ditemukan pada lirik lagu-lagu Adele. Kedua untuk menganalisa dan menjabarkan tipe makna yang terkandung dalam majas yang ditemukan dalam lirik lagu-lagu Adele. Teori pertama menggunakan teori majas oleh Knickerbocker dan Reninger (1963). Dan Teori kedua menggunakan Teori Leech (1974) untuk menganalisa type arti dalam majas yang ditemukan. Data primer yang digunakan pada analisis ini diantaranya adalah lirik-lirik dari Adele yang berjudul “Setting fire to the rain, Rolling in the deep and Turning Table” diambil dari album Adele yang berjudul “21”. Data sekunder diambil dari biografi singkat penyanyi Adele yang bersumber dari internet. Karya tulis ini menggunakan kajian pustaka dan observasi dalam analisis ini berlangsung. Majas yang ditemukan termasuk personifikasi, metaphor, sinekdot, hiperbola, alusi, paradox, symbol dan metaphor. Berdasarkan pengertian konstekstual dari keseluruhan lagu milik Adele menceritakan tentang pengkhianatan dan pertentangan dalam percintaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci:lirik lagu,bahasa figuratif,biografi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A song is one of the best forms of entertainments to enjoy. The languages or words in the song are used in a specific way, so it becomes different from the ordinary language. It is interesting because it is usually written using beautiful and nice words. Most of the song lyrics use figurative language to convey the ideas as well as to make effect of beauty and to make the language or the words in the song more interesting to attract our attention. According to Holman (1968), a language style that contains deviations either from the normal constructions of sentence or from the meaning of the words in order to create particular effects can be called as figurative language. This study is focused on figurative language which used mainly in the song lyrics in the songs of Adele’s. Adele is very popular among teenagers and music lovers because her beautiful compositions and themes. In order to understand the meaning, it is important to learn how to interpret figurative language. Therefore, it is very interesting to analyze the figurative language found within the song lyrics more deeply.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the study above, the research problem can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">What types of figurative language are used in the song lyrics of Adele’s song? And What are the meanings of figurative language found in the song lyrics of Adele’s song?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A according to the problem of the study, the aims of this study are identifying the types of figurative language used in the lyrics of Adele’s song and analyzing the meanings of figurative language conveyed in the song lyrics of Adele’s song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part of study consists of three elements. They are data source, method and techniques of collecting data, and method and techniques of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study is Adele’s song lyric. The data were taken and downloaded through internet. There are three songs that have been analyzed; they are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Set fire to the rain, Rolling in the deep</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span><span class="font2">. The reasons for choosing three lyrics are because those songs were sung by the musicians presenting broken heart theme. And those song lyrics contain many types of figurative language which one concerned with the topic of this study, and her music is very interesting to listen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method applied in collecting the data was documentation method. The steps in collecting the data were as follows. First, browsing three songs chosen from the internet then listened to them attentively several times. And then the lyrics of the song were downloaded from the search engine internet and printed out in order to understand their meaning. Finally the presentation of data was carried out. Note taking of the song lyrics which was considered as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">containing figurative language was done followed by classifying the words in those songs to get the classified figurative language to know how many types of figurative languages are used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed using descriptive qualitative method. The next step is presenting the qualitative method of the data based on the theory of classification of Figurative Language as stated by Knickerbocker and Williard Reninger (1963) and on the theory of meaning by Leech (1981).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Figurative Language in the song lyrics of Adele “21” Album</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Set fire to the rain”</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">It was dark and I was over</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence uses hyperbole, because the word “dark” is not present about the night or a room without no light, but the true meaning is only a sense of sadness. Logically, someone cannot die through a thing like broken heart. The word “over” there is not to represent the true meaning of death, it means she was at the end of herself, done. It tries to convey the message of what broken heart. “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Over</span><span class="font2"> is chosen in order to give a simple yet strong impression to the reader or listener.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Let it burn while I cry</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this sentence again we can see the use of hyperbole. Hyperbole is obviously open to many interpretations because hyperbole exaggerates the sentence. How can we burn one’s face just by touching it? </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Let it burn while I cry”</span><span class="font2"> means that she had to end relationship because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“it burned”</span><span class="font2"> as it is painful as the man treated her wrongly. When we leave a person we love so much, It hurts and accepts that is over.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence “Let it burn while I cry” is an exaggeration and has connotative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">meaning because it is very impossible to let it (the rain) burn, Due to the fact we cannot burn water.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Rolling in the deep”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Throw your soul through every open door</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence in line 33 shows the use of hyperbole because there was an exaggeration used to create a special effect. Just like the previous sentence, we cannot throw our soul. How could one throw one’s soul? Perhaps the author wanted to say that she was getting rid of all her memories and anything that reminded her of him. She wanted to forget all about him (throw your soul) in every way and effort that she could (through every open door).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hyperbole is the use of exaggeration or overstatement to make a point. It is not used to mislead the reader, but to emphasize the point. Because the sentence is considered hyperbole, we can conclude that the sentence has connotative meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Rolling in the deep</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If we read line 14 above, we also find a metaphor in expression. “Rolling in the deep” may be, a more concrete way she will be crying and the tears are rolling in the deep, like rolling down the cheeks, expressing deep despair to have lost the beloved one. Another option, she mentions Rolling in the deep as a spin of the slang phrase “Roll Deep” which means to have someone, always have someone that has your back, and you are never on your own. If you are ever in trouble you have always got someone who is going to come and help you fight it. Instead, he hurts her worse than stranger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Count your blessings to find what you look for</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of hyperbole again appears in the sentence above. The use of the hyperbole in this sentence is to give a special effect to the listener or the reader of the song lyric itself. It represents something unbelievable and unthinkable. Because, how could we count our blessings? And how could we remember it? That is why this sentence is called hyperbole because it exaggerates to emphasize the message it carries. The writer of the song wants to express her imagination and convey the true meaning in a dramatic way.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence means that she told him to pick up whatever bits of his life he had left (count your blessings) and find whatever he thought he wanted when he was with her, that he apparently did not think she had given him. From the description of hyperbole we can also easily conclude that the sentence above is considered hyperbole having connotative meaning because the sentence cannot be understood literally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification in “Turning tables”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">When the thunder calls for me</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Here, “the thunder” which is an inanimate object, is given human qualities or an ability, that is, the ability to call for someone. Therefore, this is called a personification. In relation to the contexts of situation, the line “the thunder calls for me” would be best interpreted as representing the writer’s courage and readiness to end her relationship with her boyfriend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence also has a connotative meaning since it cannot be understood literally and can be interpreted differently by different characteristic of a person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Under haunted skies I see you</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the sentence above there is human characteristics such a feeling is given and signifies the use of personification, The meaning of the sentence which the authors see is in the dark mood he was in, she finally saw who really was and every night she was still thinking of him. She thought about their relationship that she was trapped in the dark world with him; she could not find any happiness anymore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Because of this sentence cannot be understood literally and can be interpreted differently because of many factors that are considered having connotative meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">VI. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusion. There are seven types of figurative language found in the song lyrics of “Rolling in the deep”, “Set fire to the rain” and “Turning tables” used by the songwriter. This study found seven types of figurative language proposed by Knickerbocker and Reninger they are: metaphor, personification, metonymy, irony, hyperbole, simile and dead metaphor. There are two types of meanings found in Adele songs namely, conceptual meaning and connotative meaning. Most of the meanings of the figurative languages found in the songs were classified into connotative meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>VII. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbockers, K.L. &amp;&nbsp;H. Williard Reninger. 1963</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font2">. Toronto;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holt, Rinehart and Winston inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey N. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics.</span><span class="font2"> Auckland: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. et al. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of current English</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: University Press.</span></p>