---
layout: full_article
title: "FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN SONG LYRICS  BY SAOSIN BAND, NELLY FURTADO AND BRUNO MARS"
author: "I Gede Kurma Dinata"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN SONG LYRICS</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BY SAOSIN BAND, NELLY FURTADO AND BRUNO MARS</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I Gede Kurma Dinata</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis dan menganalisa makna yang tersirat dalam figuratif yang ditemukan dalam empat lagu antara lain dua lagu oleh Saosin Band, satu lagu Nelly Furtado, dan satu lagu oleh Bruno Mars. Keempat lagu yang digunakan sebagai sumber data memiliki cerita dan genre yang berbeda. Oleh karena itu variasi figuratif yang digunakan sangat menarik untuk diteliti. Penelitian ini bersifat kualitatif dan menerapkan metode dokumentasi dalam pengumpulan data. Teori terkait jenis figuratif oleh Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963) diterapkan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis dan teori makna oleh Leech (1974) untuk menganalisa makna figuratif yang ditemukan. Data menunjukkan bahwa jenis figuratif yang ditemukan adalah metafor, simile, personifikasi, alusi, sinekdok, simbol dan hiperbola. Metafor adalah jenis yang muncul paling banyak. Makna figuratif tersebut secara umum bersifat konotatif tetapi ada juga yang bersifat afektif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Figuratif, Jenis dan Makna</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A song is a short piece of music with words that are sung. The words in a song are called lyrics that may consist of an intro, verses, choruses, bridges and a coda. Lyric derives from the Greek word for a song sung by the lyre, “lyrikos” and came to be used for the “words of a song” (Douglas, 2012). Analyzing figurative language in song lyrics is important for some reasons. First, singing a song and knowing the meaning of the lyrics is better than singing without an adequate understanding concerning the lyrics. We can also gain some lesson learning and fruitful information when we understand the non-literal meaning contained in song lyrics. Second, analyzing figurative language provides us more practices to better understand non-literal expressions. Based on the above reasons, it is interesting to analyze the use of figurative language in song lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Saosin, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars are recognized worldwide as favourite singers. Their songs are interesting and compelling. Figurative</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expressions are also present in their songs. It is interesting to analyze the figurative language in these song lyrics as they are different from each other. Some figurative expressions contained in those songs require a deep analysis. Each song conveys different message. One is about a spiritual struggle and the rests are about love in different situations. Therefore, their songs were chosen as data source in this study. The figurative expressions in their songs were analyzed by implementing the theory of figurative language proposed by K.L Knickerbocker and H. Williard Reninger (1963) and the theory of meaning by Leech (1974) supported by other theories related to this topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Dealing with the use of figurative language in song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars, followings are two problems which can be formulated based on the background of this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of figurative language used in the song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning conveyed in the figurative language used in the song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims and the Significance of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The aims of this study are closely related to the problems formulated above. The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of figurative language used in the song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning conveyed in the figurative language used in the song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Hopefully this study is beneficial to those interested in the analysis of figurative language or those who are interested in the songs of the mentioned singers above.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is a qualitative research. There are four songs used as data sources in this study. They are two songs by Saosin Band entitled “Is this Real” from the album “In Search of Solid Ground&quot; (2009) and “Love Maker” taken from the album “The Grey EP” (2008), one song written and sung by Nelly Furtado entitled &quot;I'm Like a Bird&quot; as the first single from her first album </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Whoa, Nelly!</span><span class="font3">, and one song by Bruno Mars entitled &quot;It Will Rain&quot; released on September 27, 2011 and appeared on the soundtrack to the film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A documentation method was applied in collecting the data in this study. There are three steps in collecting the data. First, the four chosen songs along with the song lyrics were downloaded from the internet. Second, in order to support the analysis of the lyrics, some information related to those songs was searched and gathered as additional data to support the analysis for example the biography of the singers and the background information related to the making of the songs. Finally, while listening to the songs, the figurative language contained in the songs were underlined and noted using a note taking technique.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were several steps taken in analyzing the data. First, the song lyrics were thoroughly read and comprehended in order to identify the figurative expressions contained in each song. Next, after classifying the figurative expressions in the song lyrics based on the types, the meaning was analyzed. The biography of the singers and the background information related to the making of the songs serve as a helpful source to provide the paraphrase of the song lyrics and to support the analysis of the figurative expressions contained in each song. Finally, the explanations concerning the meaning contained are provided in descriptive sentences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Findings and Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Types of Figurative Found in the Song Lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The types of figurative found in the four songs are summarised in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">following table.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data Source</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Figuratives Found</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3"> by Saosin Band</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">metaphors, allusion and synecdoche</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Love Maker</span><span class="font3"> by Saosin Band</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Symbols and allusion</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I’m Like</span><span class="font3"> a Bird by Nelly Furtado</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Simile</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It Will Rain</span><span class="font3"> by Bruno Mars</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">metaphors, hyperboles, and simile</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of the Meaning Implied in the Figurative Found in the Song Lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this article, only two analyses of the meaning found in the figuratives present in the song lyrics by Saosin Band, Nelly Furtado and Bruno Mars are presented.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Allusion in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Saosin Band</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Below are the full lyrics of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3"> performed by Saosin, as copied from </span><a href="http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics</span></a><span class="font3">. The allusion found is underlined.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Is This Real</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Time's runnin' out and I have been betrayed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gotta cast my stone into the lake </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">That's all it takes my son then you are safe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">When the end comes, everything's okay</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Take my skin, we're diving in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It doesn't make a difference if I sink or swim</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There’s a line drawn thin or so they tell me</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">I'll never know the difference if we..sink or swim!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chorus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Is it real, the choices that we make The smiles that we fake</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I know it hurts but is it real</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The choices that we make</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The smiles that we fake for my own sake</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I know it hurts but is it...</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I can't help feelin' like I've been betrayed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shoulda cast that stone into the lake</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Chased in the wrong direction, led astray</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And I know you don't believe a single word you say</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Take my skin, we're diving in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It doesn't make a difference if I sink or swim</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There’s a line drawn thin or so they tell me</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'll never know the difference if we..sink or swim!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Repeat Chorus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Is it real, the choices that we make</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The smiles that we fake</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I know it hurts but is it real</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The choices that we make</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The smiles that we fake for my own sake</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Coda</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I don't want to buy into the lie Stare up at the sky but is it real? Show me something real.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I don't want to buy into your lies Stare up at the sky and say “I surrender myself for this”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'll take the blame</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I surrender myself for this, I'll take the blame</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For peace or war, for rich or poor For loss, for gain, for everything that I loved</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I see, I feel, I've become one with words not real to me</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">So I'll stare in silence</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Forward, backwards</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Just to realize we all fall down</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3"> is a song about a spiritual struggle of the writer in which he questions his belief and life in general. We can sense a tone of loss of hope and disappointment in each line of the lyrics. It seems that the writer is no longer able to distinguish what is true and what is false, what is real and what is unreal. These results from an event in his life where the principles he thought were absolute proved to be mere lies. This causes in him a great spiritual battle where his beliefs are conflicting with reality. Therefore, the relationship here is reflective; the people involved in the lyrics are the writer and his self. This song is about a spiritual battle where the writer questions his own beliefs. Here, the writer expresses his doubt and disappointment through the combination of literal and figurative language. The figuratives used give pictures of the spiritual state of the writer and convey deeper meaning than that of the literal one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An allusion appears in the first verse of the lyrics, which makes a reference to a basic doctrine in the Bible. The personnel of Saosin band grew up in a Mormon family and therefore were raised with Mormon principles. Mormon is one of the religious sects in Christianity. Therefore, they often make a reference to the teaching and verses in the Bible. The allusion is presented and analysed below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">That's all it takes my son then you are safe</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">When the end comes, everything's okay</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">As stated previously, the lyrics in its entirety is about someone who has come to question his own belief (religiously). The last two lines of Verse 1 seem to suggest the belief that the writer is questioning. Here, the writer seems to be recalling what someone said to him years ago (probably his spiritual guru). They refer to a Christian belief that is commonly known, that only by believing in God can humankind be saved. This is extracted from the Bible, from the book of John 3:16, which says, “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After knowing some information about the figurative language used in Verse 1, we can now analyze the meaning. These figurative lines in the lyrics also contain connotative meaning. They have values above their purely conceptual content. For example, to understand what is meant by ‘safe’ and ‘the end’, we need to have certain knowledge and experience, especially about religions and beliefs. Those words, conceptually, don’t excite in our hearts any sentiment, but in the lyrics, the writer is using the word ‘safe’ to suggest a condition of being saved from eternal punishment, and the word ‘the end’ to suggest the end of time, the end of the world, the end of everything.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methapor in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">It Will Rain</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Bruno Mars</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The following are the full lyrics of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It Will Rain</span><span class="font3"> written and sung by Bruno Mars, as copied from </span><a href="http://www.elyrics.net/read/b/bruno-mars-lyrics/it-will-rain-lyrics.html"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://www.elyrics.net/read/b/bruno-mars-lyrics/it-will-rain-lyrics.html</span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">It Will Rain</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Cause it would take a whole lot of medication</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To realize what we used to have, We don't have it anymore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If you ever leave me, baby, Leave some morphine at my door</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There's no religion that could save me</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">No matter how long my knees are on the floor, oh</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">So keep in mind all the sacrifices</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'm making</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To keep you by my side</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And keep you from walking out the door.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Yeah for you I'll try, I'll try, I'll try, I'll try</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'll pick up these broken pieces 'til</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'm bleeding</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If that'll make it right</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Repeat Chorus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause there'll be no sunlight</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">if I lose you, baby</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There'll be no clear skies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">if I lose you, baby</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chorus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause there'll be no sunlight if I lose you, baby</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There'll be no clear skies if I lose you, baby Just like the clouds, my eyes will do the same if you walk away</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Everyday, it will rain, rain, rain</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Just like the clouds, my eyes will do the same if you walk away</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Every day, it will rain, rain, rain</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ooooh Don't just say goodbye, don't just say, goodbye I'll pick up these broken pieces 'til I'm bleeding</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'll never be your mother's favorite</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Your daddy can't even look me in the eye</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oooh if I were in their shoes, I'd be doing the same thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Saying there goes my little girl walking with that troublesome guy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">If that'll make it right</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Repeat Chorus</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause there'll be no sunlight if I lose you, baby</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There'll be no clear skies if I lose you, baby</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Just like the clouds,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But they're just afraid of something they can't understand</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oooh well little darling watch me change their minds</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">my eyes will do the same if you walk away</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Every day, it will rain, rain, rain, rain...</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Some metaphors were found throughout the lyrics to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It Will Rain</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Below are the data followed by an analysis for each figurative:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">If you ever leave me, baby,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Leave some morphine at my door</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cause it would take a whole lot of medication</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">To realize what we used to have,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">We don't have it anymore.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Analysis:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Verse 1 of the lyrics shows how afraid the man (Edward, if related to the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Breaking Dawn</span><span class="font3">) is of losing his lover (Bella). The first two lines are related to the last three lines. The lines ‘If you ever leave me, baby’ and ‘Leave some morphine at my door’ describe how painful his feeling is if his lover ever leaves him. Morphine is a powerful and addictive drug used for stopping pain and making people calmer. However, the morphine in this line should not be interpreted literally; instead there is a connotative meaning within this line. This line implies that if the man loses his girl, he will feel great sadness. The writer of this song (Bruno Mars) makes a comparison of a thing to another that has something in common. This style is called a metaphor. The next three lines make the meaning of the metaphor in the first two lines clearer. The lines ‘Cause it would take a whole lot of medication’, ‘To realize what we used to have’, and ‘We don’t have it anymore’ tell the listeners that the man (Edward) would need a lot of efforts and time to heal the pain if the woman (Bella) leaves him. The morphine represents the idea that the great sadness will take much effort to relieve it. The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a whole lot of medication</span><span class="font3"> in the third line of the Verse 1 may refer to much time and efforts (not literally means medicine).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to the theory of meaning proposed by Leech (1974), these lyrics contain connotative meaning. Connotation is the real-world value a speaker associates with an expression. We can take the word ‘morphine’ from the song lyrics as an example. When we analyze word meanings, we should distinguish two separate concepts called denotative and connotative meaning. The word “morphine” denotes a drug used for stopping pain but it also connotes a sense of delusion, which is a false belief about ourselves or the situation we are in. In the lyrics, it connotes much time and effort. It is implied that the singer needs much time and effort to forget his lover if she leaves him because every memory they have will always reminds him of her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the formulated problems in this study and the result of the analysis, there are two conclusions drawn. First, the figurative types found in the four songs are various with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">metaphor</span><span class="font3"> as the most frequent type found. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3"> by Saosin Band is a song about a spiritual struggle of the writer in which he questions his belief and life in general. There are several types of figuratives found in this song; they are several metaphors, one allusion and one synecdoche. Meanwhile, another song by Saosin Band entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Love Maker</span><span class="font3"> is a song about a failed relationship because one party in the relationship fails to give the other a meaningful relationship. There are some symbols found and one allusion, which makes a reference to the principles in the Bible. Nelly Furtado in her song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">I’m Like a Bird</span><span class="font3"> describes the complexity of her love relationship, in which there is the impossibility of her making a commitment in the relationship due to her nature, like a bird, free from any bound of relationship. She mainly uses literal expression and there is one simile that is effectively employed in the chorus part of the song lyrics. This is a good technique in giving emphasis on the meaning of the lyrics. Meanwhile, Bruno Mars employs several metaphors, hyperboles, and one simile in his song entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It Will Rain</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, the meaning of the figuratives found is mainly connotative meaning, for example one metaphor in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is This Real</span><span class="font3"> by Saosin Band, ‘cast my stone in the lake’ that cannot be interpreted literally. It does not mean that the writer casts a stone into the lake in a literal sense. According to the theory of meaning proposed by Leech (1974), the figurative line in the lyrics contains connotative meaning, as it has values above its purely conceptual content. The meaning is metaphorical; what he means is that he has got to take an action concerning his doubt in his own belief. As is known, casting a stone into the lake will cause a ripple effect and the ripples will get back to the person who has cast the stone. Before he experienced the doubt, he had a still life; everything was peaceful and quiet. Then, some events led him to question his belief and he feels that it is now the time to seek the truth and ‘break the silence’. This is what is referred to by the line ‘gotta cast a stone into the lake’</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Fernatubun, Robert. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Figurative Language in Sonnet 116 by William Shakespeare</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Harper, Douglas. 2012. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lyrics (n)</span><span class="font3">. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 21 July 2012</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holman, C Hugh &amp;&nbsp;William Harman. 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Handbook to Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York: publishing. Co</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S. ET. Al.1995. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of current English</span><span class="font3">: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Is &nbsp;&nbsp;This &nbsp;Real</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;(Song &nbsp;Lyrics) &nbsp;by &nbsp;&nbsp;Saosin &nbsp;Band. &nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">It &nbsp;&nbsp;Will &nbsp;Rain</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;(Song &nbsp;&nbsp;Lyrics) &nbsp;by &nbsp;Bruno &nbsp;&nbsp;Mars. &nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.elyrics.net/read/b/bruno-mars-lyrics/it-will-rain-lyrics.html"><span class="font3">http://www.elyrics.net/read/b/bruno-mars-lyrics/it-will-rain-lyrics.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Reninger, H. 1963. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature.</span><span class="font3"> Toranto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G.N. 1974. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font3">. Auxland: Penguin Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Love Maker</span><span class="font3"> (Song Lyrics) by Saosin Band. Available from </span><a href="http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">http://www.sing365.com/music/lyrics</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lukitasari, Rimalinda. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Song Lyrics of the Movie “Slumdog Millionaire”</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Reaske, Christopher Russell. 1996. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Poetry.</span><span class="font3"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p>