---
layout: full_article
title: "SERIAL VERB CONSTRUCTION IN BALINESE (SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC ANALYSIS)"
author: "Ni Luh Mas Indrawati, Ketut Artawa, Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, I Nyoman Sedeng"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-4630 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-4630"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-4630"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">E-journal</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>SERIAL VERB CONSTRUCTION IN BALINESE (SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC ANALYSIS)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">English Department Faculty of Letters, Udayana University email: </span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@fs.unud.ac.id"><span class="font0">mas.indrawati@fs.unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font0"> / </span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font0">Postgraduate Program, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ketut Artawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nyoman Sedeng</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Serial verb construction (SVC) is a construction where more than one verbs occur in a clause without any overt markers of subordinator or coordinator. SVC is a common fenomenon in isolative languages which lack morphological markers for sintactic processes. However, in the use of Balinese, which is rich in morphological markers, SVC are common fenomena. This research attempts to analyse the typological characteristics of SVC in Balinese, to describe the types of SVC in Balinese viewed from the structure of events which forms the SVC, to analyse the constituent merging strategies in clauses containing SVC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research applies decriptive-qualitative approach, by combining analitic and introspective methods. The data source of this research was 50 short story texts taken from Sastra slot in “Bali Orti”, weekly newspaper of Bali Post, completed with spoken texts, obtained by applying direct observation technique. The data was descriptively and analitically analysed by using the deductive-inductive-deductive approach. The theories applied in analysing SVC in Balinese were: tipological, semantic cognitive, and sintactic theories.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The result shows that typologically, SVCs in Balinese had three characteristics that is: phonetic, morphosyntactic, and semantic characteristics. Viewed from the integration of events in Balinese SVCs, it could be proved that SVCs in Balinese express a single macro-event and could be classified into two types, they were: component SVC and narative SVC. Syntactically SVCs in Balinese were biclausal constructions, some were monoclausal, and successive clauses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Key words: SVC, typology, event integration, constituent merging.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Balinese is a major regional language in Indonesia. It has orthographic system and is used by approximately three million people</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font0">Balinese is grouped into Western Malayo-Polynesian family, a sub-group of Austronesian languages (see, Blust, 1999:68; Artawa, 2004:2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pastika (1999:1) states that Balinese has two variations, that is high level Balinese (Basa Bali Alus) and low level Balinese (Basa Bali kasar). The difference between the two lies on the lexicon and the grammar does not play a major role. This is also confirmed by Artawa (2004:2) who states that the speech levels in Balinese are mostly coded lexically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The elaboration of Indonesian constitution 1945, Chapter XV, article 36 states that vernaculars which are still in use in communication by local society are maintained and preserved by the country. The preservation is based on the fact that the vernaculars are parts of the Indonesian cultures. One form of the vernacular preservation is through research on any linguistic aspects of the vernaculars in Indonesia. (Halim,1976:21).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In relation with the preservation of Balinese, in the form of research, there have been many studies conducted on Balinese linguistic aspects. Studies on Balinese verbs have also been done, such as: verbs with complements in Balinese by Suryati (1993), Balinese verbs: a Natural Semantic Metalanguage study by Sudipa (2004). However, none of them studies serial verbs occurred in a clause specifically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Serial Verb Constructions (SVC) are constructions where more than one verbs accur in a clause without any overt markers of subordinators or coordinators. SVCs are common fenomena in isolative languages which lack morphological markers for syntactic prosses. However in the use of Balinese (which is categorized as a language rich in morphological markers), both spoken and written, serial verbs in a clause are natural as noted in the following examples: Ia </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">baanga ngidih</span><span class="font0"> pipis (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">He was given some money</span><span class="font0">), Ia </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">meli</span><span class="font0"> buku </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">baanga</span><span class="font0"> memene (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">He bought a book for his</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mother</span><span class="font0">), Ia </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">edot nepukin</span><span class="font0"> tiang (he wants to see me), and Ia </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">edot tepukin</span><span class="font0"> tiang (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">He wants to be seen</span><span class="font0">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Serial verb phenomena as shown in the examples above are very interesting to be studied and have been discussed in the literatures (Senft, ed., 2008, Aihkenvald, 2006, Kroeger, 2004) but up to the present time SVCs still offer an opportunity to be analysed since their characteristics are typical, that is it depends on the language studied. Seeing the opportunity, SVC in Balinese is taken as the topic of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research is aimed at analysing and describing (1) typological characteristics of SVC in Balinese, (2) the types of SVC in Balinese viewed from the structure of events composing the SVC, and (3) the constituent merging strategies in clauses containing SVC.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2 . Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Philoshophically, this research was based on phenomenological approach which saw the Balinese SVCs as the object of this research, and understood them as linguistic facts used by the speakers (see Muhajir, 1989, Moleong, 1995, Chaer, 2007).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As a part of phenomenological approach, this research was also classified into descriptive-qualitative (Djajasudarma, 2006, Chaer, 2007) by applying introspective and analytic methods (the introspective method was applied since the researcher is also the native speaker of Balinese and it is generally assumed that native speakers have both grammatical and pragmatic competence of their languages so that the personal speech repertoire of the researcher can be used as data. Besides, the data taken from the language used in the society was also used for occuracy of the data). This was supported by Kibrik (1979) who states that language can be described or illustrated well if the researcher can speak the language well, and at the same time acts as the informant in his/her own research. The application of introspective and analytic methods is considered the most precise in such a research. The data of this</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">research was taken from written Balinese texts (from fifty short story texts), spoken texts taken from the Balinese native speakers were obtained by applying direct observation technique, and intuitive data was produced by the researcher through introspective technique. The data was analysed descriptive-analytically by applying deductive-inductive-deductive approach.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3 . Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The discussion of SVC in Balinese relates firmly on the result of the analysis based on the collected data. There are four important things discussed shortly in this section. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Structure of the Simple Clauses in Balinese</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The description of the simple clauses in Balinese shows that seen from the category that fills in the predicate, simple clauses in Balinese can be classified into two, they are: simple clauses with verbal predicates and simple clauses with nonverbal predicates.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the semantic-sintactic aspects, simple clauses with verbal predicates can be distinguished into intransitive, transitive, and bi-transtive clauses. Morphologically, intransitive clauses in Balinese can be classified into (i) the unmarked forms or the base forms and (ii) the marked forms called the derived forms which are distinguished into two: verbs marked in {ma-} and verbs marked in {N-}. Both verbs marked in {ma-} and verbs marked in {N-} can be derived from the noun base, adjective base, and precategorial base. Transitive clauses can be divided into: transitive clauses with two core arguments or mono-transitive clauses and transitive clauses with three core arguments which are called bi-transitive clauses. Transitive clauses are morphologically classified into two, they are: (i) the unmarked forms and (ii) the transitive clauses with {N-}. Unmarked transitive clauses take the undergoers as pivots while the ones with {N-}, take Actor as pivot. Clauses with non-verbal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">predicates can be classified into: clauses with noun or noun phrase predicates, clauses with adjective or adjective phrase predicates, clauses with prepositional predicates, and clauses with numeral predicates.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Balinese has three types of causative: analytic causatives, morphological causatives, and lexical causatives. Suffixes, {-ang}, {-in}, {pa-ang}, and {pa-in} can be applied as causative markers. Applicative constructions can be derived from precategorial bases, intransitive verb bases, and transitive verb bases by adding suffix {-in} or {-ang} therefore those suffixes can be considered as valency increasing suffixes. Semantically, the types of argument’s role increased in applicative clauses can be: Instrument, Locative, Benefactive, Source, and Stimulus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Resultative constructions in Balinese are marked with resultative constructions {ma-} and {ma-an}. These constructions are similar to passive constructions, however, the Agents of passive constructions are arbitrary, and they can be inserted by Agent oriented adverbial, while resultative constructions never occur with Agents and cannot be modified with Agent oriented adverbial.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Typological Perspectives of Balinese SVCs</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">SVC in Balinese can be defined as: a clause with more than one verbs which occur in series, can be inserted with other elements, without any markers of subordinators or coordinators, the verbs in Balinese SVC cannot always stand by itself in a single clause, all verbs in the construction have a complete range of morphological markers that single verbs in simple clauses would have, such as causative, passive, applicative, when applicable, and it expresses a single event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Phonologically, SVCs in Balinese have the same intonational properties as do mono-verbal clauses. They show single intonation without being separated by pauses. Morphosyntactically, Balinese SVCs can be classified into independent and co-dependent types. Semantically, they can express: motion, direction, manner,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">permission, purpose, instrument, commutative, aspectual, modality, cause-effect, causatives, orientation, commitment, and influence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bli Nyoman </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">teka &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ng</span><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">alih &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0">tiang tur …(1042)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">brother name Intr.come trans.look for 1T and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Brother Nyoman came to look for me and.…’</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Made Septiawan prajani </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">suud &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ng-raos</span><span class="font0">.(994)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">name &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;soon Intr.stop Intr.talk</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Made Septiawan stopped talking soon</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span><span class="font0">’</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ento mula </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ng-krana-ang </span><span class="font0">tiang </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ng-kumpul-ang </span><span class="font0">sekaa-ne dini ....(631) Dem. indeed cause-Kaus 1T gather-Apl. Group-Def here ‘that indeed made me bring togather the group....’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Phonologically, clauses 1up to 3 have single intonations, similar to the intonation in the simple sentences, since the assignment of pause in between the two verbs results in meaning differences or the ungrammaticality of the clauses. Morphosyntactically, clause 3 is classified into co-dependent SVC since there is pronoun </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tiang</span><span class="font0"> ‘ I ‘ inserted in between the two verbs so the structure shows argument sharing that is the object of the first verb becomes the subject of the second. Viewed from the morphological markers of the verbs in clauses1 up to 3, they all belong to independent types. The verb inflections are similar to those when the verbs occur by themselves in non SVC constructions. All the verbs in the three clauses except </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">suud</span><span class="font0"> ‘stop’ can stand by themselves in simple clauses. Semantically, SVC in clause 1 with V1 expressing motion </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">teka</span><span class="font0"> ‘come’ and V2 </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ngalih</span><span class="font0"> ‘look for’ expressing purpose, SVC in Clause 2 expresses perfective aspect and the one in clause 3 belongs to causative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event Integration in Balinese SVCs</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on event integration, SVCs in Balinese can be distinguished into two they are componential SVCs and narrative SVCs. A componential SVC is composed of two sub-events, one as framing event and the other as co-event, and both</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">composed a single macro-event. In terms of the types of framing event which form macro-events in Balinese SVCs, they can be divided into five, they are: (1) Balinese SVCs with motion as framing event, with co-events which have supporting relations such as manner, purpose, concommitment, and instrument to the framing events. (2) Balinese SVCs with temporal contouring events as framing events with co-events which have supporting relation constitutive to the framing events. (3) Balinese SVCs with state change events as framing events, with co-events which have supporting relations causative to the framing events. (4) Balinese SVCs with Action correlating as framing events, with co-events which have supporting relations constitutive to the framing events, and (5) Balinese SVCs with realizations as framing events, with coevents which have supporting relations, fulfillment and confirmation to the framing events.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Narative SVC in Balinese consists of a single complex macro-event composed of more than one macro-events. To prove that narrative SVCs are single clauses and not compound or coordinative structures, it can be tested with the addition of adverbial of time and relativesation. Therefore, based on the event integration theory it can be proved that an SVC in Balinese expresses a single event.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Constituent Merging in Balinese SVCs.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis on constituent merging in Balinese SVCs cover constituent merging in simple clauses which consists of constituent merging in intransitive, transitive, and bi-transitive, causative, and applicative clauses. Constituent merging in simple clauses follows the principles indicated in minimalist program, such as: (1) headedness principle (every syntactic structure is a projection of a head word, (2) binarity principle (every syntactic structure is binary branching), (3) extended projection principle (finite tense constituent T should be extended into a projection containing a subject). Since Balinese doesn’t have tense marker in the verbs, the term</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">inflection (I) is used so that a clause is a projection of Spec-CP, where complementiser heads the IP projecting into CP. In Balinese morphological markers in the verbs determain valency, voice, and transitivity of the clauses. The constituent merging in transitive clauses involve VP shell operations by applying light verb (v) to raise the constituent up. It is proved that the clause structure in Balinese is left headed and the complement is on the right.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The constituent merging in Balinese SVCs shows that SVCs in Balinese are bi-clausal structures, there are also mono-clausal and clause chaining. Bi-clausal construction can be control, raising, and object sharing constructions. Meanwhile, in mono-clausal constructions, the constituent merging is similar to that in a simple clause by locating V2 in the specifier since it behaves as an adverbial. Balinese SVCs which are classified into clause chaining constructions, the constituent merging operation shows argument raising until it reaches the position of the final Spec-IP.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Novelties</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Some novelties based on the analysis and previous literature reviews could be presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SVCs could be found in the use of Balinese which was classified into agglutinative type of language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;typologically, Balinese SVCs coul be defined as follows: a clause which had more than one verbs occuring in series could be inserted with other element, without any markers of subordinator or coordinator. all verbs in the construction had a complete range of morphological markers that single verbs in simple clauses would have, such as the markers: causative, passive, applicative, when applicable, and it expressed a single event.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the Balinese SVC had three different characteristics, they were: phonologically, it had one intonation similar to the intonation of a simple clause, without being separated by a pause. Morphosyntactically, the Balinese SVCs could be grouped into independent and co-dependent, and semantically they expressed motion,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">direction, manner, permission, purpose, instrument, commutative, aspectual, modality, cause-effect, causatives, orientation, commitment, and influence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seen from conceptual packaging, the Balinese SVCs could be proved to express single macro-events, and could be classified into component and narrative SVCs.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By applying constituent merging strategies, the Balinese SVCs fell into bi-clausal , mono-clausal, and clause chaining constructions. Bi-clausal constructions could be control, raising, and object sharing structures.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion and Suggestion</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Typologically, SVC in Balinese have phonological, morfosyntactic and semantic characteristics. Phonologically, the Balinese SVCs have single intonations. Morphosyntactically, They can be classified into independent and codependent SVCs. Semantically, SVCs in Balinese express: motions, directions, manner, permission, purpose, instrument, commutative, aspectual, modality, causeeffect, causatives, orientation, commitment, and influence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the conceptual packaging in Balinese SVCs, they can be proved to express single macro-events and are classified into component SVCs and narrative SVCs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Constituent merging in the Balinese SVCs shows that they are bi-clausal, mono-clausal, and clause chaining constructions. Bi-clausal structures can be classified into control, raising, and object sharing. While those belong to mono-clausal, their constituent merging processes follow those of simple clauses by putting V2 in the specifiers since they behave like adverbials. Those which are considered to be clause chaining structures the constituent merging operations show the raising of argument subjects several times until they reach the final Spec-IP.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This research has expressed various aspects related to SVCs in Balinese in detail, however there are still some that have not been discussed completely since this research stresses on the characteristics of SVCs from semantic and syntactic points of view. Phonological aspects of the Balinese SVCs cannot be discussed in detail. Besides, SVCs can also be seen from pragmatics and translation to uncover what exists behind the use of SVCs by the speakers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The aspects of the Balinese SVCs that have not been discussed completely are indeed interesting challenges for other researchers to be conducted through further research. Therefore information on the result of the study on the Balinese SVCs would be more complete and deeper.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acknowledgements</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, I would like to express my apprectiation and thanks to those who have contributed in one way or another to this research, especially Prof. Drs. Ketut Artawa, M.A., Ph.D. as a supervisor, Prof. Dr. Drs. Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, M.A., as co-supervisor I, Dr. I Nyoman Sedeng, M.Hum., as co-supervisor II, and the board of examiners: Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, Prof. Dr. I Ketut Darma Laksana, M.Hum., Prof. Dr. I Nengah Sudipa, M.A., Dr. Ni Made Dhanawaty, M.S., and Dr. I Nyoman Kardana, M.Hum., for their critical comment and suggestions for the improvement of this research. Remaining errors are all mine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Aikhenvald, Alexandra. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serial verb contruction in typological perspective</span><span class="font0">. In Alexandra Aikhenvald and Robert M.W. Dixon, eds., </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serial verb contructions : a cross-linguistic typology</span><span class="font0">. Oxford Universty Press. 1-87.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Arka, I Wayan. 1998. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">From Morphosyntax to Pragmatiks in Balinese: A Lexikal Functional Grammer</span><span class="font0"> (disertasi). Sydney: University of Sydney.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Artawa, Ketut. 1994. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ergativity and Balinese Syntax</span><span class="font0"> (disertasi) Melbourne: La Trobe University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Artawa, Ketut. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Balinese Language: A Typological Description.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: CV Bali Media Adhikarsa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Baker, Mark C. 1997. Complex Predicates and Agreement in Polysynthetic Languages. Dalam Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, dan Peter Sells (ed.). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Complex Predicates</span><span class="font0">. Stanford, California. 247-288.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Blust, RA (1999) Subgrouping Circularity and Extinction : Some issues in Austronesian Comparative Linguistics in E. Zeitoun and P.J.K Li (eds.), 3194.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bohnemeyer, Jurgen, 1999, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Event representation</span><span class="font0">: some primordial soup for the evolution of a research project on event representation in language and cognition. 2<sup>nd</sup> strongly revised draft November 11, 1999, Nijmegen: Mimeo.Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chaer, Abdul Drs. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Bahasa Struktur Internal, Pemakaian dan Pemelajaran.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: Rineka Cipta</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chafe, Wallace L. 1970. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning and the Structure of Language</span><span class="font0">. Chicago: the University of Chicago Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chomsky, Noam. 1965. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Aspects of the Theory of Syntax</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: MIT Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chomsky, Noam. 1977. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Essays on Form and Interpretation.</span><span class="font0"> Amsterdam:North Holland.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Djajasudarma, T Fatimah.2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik; Ancangan Metode Penelitian dan Kajian.</span><span class="font0"> Bandung; Eresco</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Halim, Amran (ed.). 1976. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Bahasa Nasional Jilid 1</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kibrik, A.E. 1977. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Methodology of Field Investigations in Linguistics.</span><span class="font0"> Paris: Mouton &amp;&nbsp;Co BV Publishers, The Hague.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kroeger, Paul R. 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Phrase Structure and Grammatical</span><span class="font0"> Relation </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">in Tagalog</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stanford, California: CSLI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Moleong, Lexy. 1994. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Muhadjir, Noeng H. 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font0">. Edisi III. Yogyakarta: Rake Sarasin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pastika, I Wayan. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Voice Selection in Balinese Narratif Discource</span><span class="font0"> (Ph.D Dissertation) Canberra: The Australian National University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Radford, Andrew. 1997. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Syntactik theory and the structure of English, a minimalist approach</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Radford, Andrew. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Minimalist Syntax: Exploring the Structure of English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sedeng, I Nyoman. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Predikat Kompleks dan Relasi Gramatikal Bahasa Sikka </span><span class="font0">(tesis). Denpasar: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sedeng, I Nyoman. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Morfosintaksis Bahasa Bali Dialek Sembiran. Analisis Tatabahasa Peran dan Acuan</span><span class="font0"> (disertasi) Denpasar: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Senft, Gunter. 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serial Verb Construction in Austronesian and Papuan Languages</span><span class="font0">. Australia: Pacific Linguistics Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sudipa, I Nengah. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Verba Bahasa Bali; Sebuah Kajian Metabahasa Semantik Alami.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suryati, Ni Made. 1997. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Verba Berkomplemen dalam Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font0"> (Tesis) Program Pascasarjana universitas Padjajaran Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Talmy, Leonard. 2000. Toward a Cognitive Semantics. 2 volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Van Valin Jr, Robert D. dan Randy J.La Polla. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Syntax: Structure, Meaning, and Function.</span><span class="font0"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">12</span></p>