---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TRANSLATION OF IMPLICIT MEANING IN ENGLISH INDONESIAN SUBTITLE OF THE MOVIE THE TWILIGHT SAGA ECLIPSE"
author: "Agus Hendra Adinata"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TRANSLATION OF IMPLICIT MEANING IN ENGLISH INDONESIAN SUBTITLE OF THE MOVIE THE TWILIGHT SAGA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ECLIPSE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wayan Agus Hendra Adinata</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non- Regular Program of English Departement Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;The Translation of Implicit Meaning in English Indonesian Subtitle of The Movie The Twilight Saga Eclipse&quot; . Definisi makna implisit merupakan bagian dari makna yang dimaksudkan untuk dipahami oleh penulis , tentang suatu kata atau kalimat yang merujuk . Penelitian ini difokuskan pada klasifikasi jenis makna implisit dan mengidentifikasi strategi subtitle (alih bahasa) yang digunakan untuk menerjemahkan makna implisit yang ditemukan dalam film Twilight Saga Eclipse ke dalam bahasa Indonesia .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini diambil dari film berjudul The Twilight Saga Eclipse . Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan observasi dan metode dokumentasi . Hal itu diikuti dengan memberi tanda pada data dengan cara menonton dan mengidentifikasi makna implisit dari subttitle yang ada pada film , mengcopy layar subtitle bahasa Inggris dan Indonesia diikuti dengan mengklasifikasikan makna implisit berdasarkan teori yang digunakan dan terakhir mengidentifikasi strategi subtitle yang digunakan untuk menerjemahkan makna implisit . Berdasarkan jenis makna implisit disusun oleh Larson ( 1984 ) dan subtitling strategi dikemukakan oleh Gotlieb ( 1992 ) .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari penelitian menunjukkan bahwa peneliti menemukan 3 jenis makna implisit, yang paling sering digunakan adalah organizational meaning , sedangkan makna implisit situational meaning menjadi tipe kedua dan yang terakhir adalah referential meaning. Di sisi lain , dalam menganalisis penggunaan strategi subtitle, penerjemah menggunakan 3 strategi subtitle dari total 10 strategi subtitle, parafrase, ekspansion, imitation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : makna implisit , strategi subtitle , subtitle, dialog.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">English is used by the people in almost every part of the world in this era. Beginning from educational to entertaintment world English are mostly used. To make it easy to understand the message for those people who do not speak English, some of the books and movies produced in english are translated into target language, in this case, Indonesian. Translation is needed in order to make other people or reader understand what the speakers or writers talk about. Therefore, to make the translation acceptable to the target reader, the translator should consider their target reader and make some adjustment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">An implicit maening is the message which is not transferred explicitly in the text, it is important for the translator to know in order to translate the message correctly. A translator has to be able or understand about the various types of implicit meaning written in the text. It is very important for the translator to prevent an error while they are doing the translation work, so the readers or audiences are not confused with the message written in the text. It is very substantial to transfer the implicit meaning into the taget language. For that reason, in this research, the researcher analyzed the kind of implicit meaning and procedure or method of translation of translating implicit meaning found in The Twilight Saga Eclipse.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of implicit meaning are found in the “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse”</span><span class="font2"> movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What subtitling strategies are found in translating implicit meaning in the “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse”</span><span class="font2"> movie into Indonesian?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the implicit meanings that are found in the “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse”</span><span class="font2"> movie</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate the subtitling strategies that are used to translate the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">implicit meanings that are found in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse </span><span class="font2">movie into indonesian</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were taken from the English-Indonesian subtitles of the movie entitled ”The Twilight Saga Eclipse”. The subtitled version of the movie into Indonesian could be found in the DVD. The Twilight Saga Eclipse was published in 2010. The movie has been chosen because it is very popular movie throughout the world because it is telling us teenager love story and it is also adopted from the most popular novel. It is the second series of Twilight movie. The movie is based on the novel entitled ECLIPSE by Sthephenie Meyer. It is produced by Summit Entertainment and in Indonesian version is distributed by Duta Cinema Multimedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The observation method was used by the researcher to collect the data, and then technique of documentation. There are several steps in collecting the data; First, identifying the implicit meaning of the source language ; secondly the implicit meanings were collected from English (Source Language) by screencapturing the English subtitles and follow by screencapturing Indonesian (target language) subtitles. Afterwards, the collected data were classified into type of meaning according to Larson (1984) and subtitling strategies proposed by Gotlieb (1992).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All the data collected were analyzed using qualitative method. In this research, the main purpose is a kind of implicit meaning and their subtitling strategies of translation into Indonesian. First of all, the implicit meaning found in the movie was classified by categorizing the implicit meaning itself, and then was checked the subtitling strategies used to translate the movie subtitles. After all, appropriating the kinds of implicit meaning based on the theory proposed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Translation of Implicit Meaning in English Indonesian Subtitle of the Movie The twilight Saga Eclipse.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Referential Meaning</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The use of referential implicit meaning can be seen when the subtitler translated the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“hoovering”</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“menghabiskan”</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“hoovering” </span><span class="font2">usually used to express how the vacuum cleaner cleaned the dust. This dialogue occurred when Jacob and Bella was coming late in the wolf’s family gathering</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and Seth told them that he saved some foods for them to eat. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“hoovering”</span><span class="font2"> was used to express how bad Paul finishing the foods, Paul ate all food very fast like how vacuum cleaner cleaned the dirt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of the paraphrase subtitling can be observed when the subtitler translated the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“hoovering”</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“menghabiskan”</span><span class="font2">. The meaning of hoovering itself is to remove something from a carpet, floor, etc with a vacuum cleaner, or it also has an informal meaning which means to get or collect something in large quantities. (Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary). The subtitler was translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“menghabiskan”</span><span class="font2"> as to it has closest meaning and refers to the situation when this dialogue occured. on the other hand, the subtitler also used the imitation subtitling strategy which can be seen when he/she re-write </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Jake”</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Organizational Meaning</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The organizational implicit meaning can be seen when the subtitler translated the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“the”</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“perbincangan”</span><span class="font2">. Roslee (Bella’s mother) was trying to remind Bella about her decision. The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“the”</span><span class="font2"> was left an implicit meaning, it refers to the serious conversation between Bella and her mother. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“the”</span><span class="font2"> describes the situation when this dialogue occured, the subtitler emphasized the meaning of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“the”</span><span class="font2">. The subtitler translated it into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“perbincangan” </span><span class="font2">which has the same meaning as conversation. The organizational implicit meaning was used to make the audience in target language understand the message on the dialogue easily.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expansion subtitling strategy occured when the subtitler translated the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“the”</span><span class="font2"> into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“perbincangan”</span><span class="font2">. The subtitler was added an explanation to make it clear and easy to understand. The subtiler was added </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“perbincangan”</span><span class="font2"> or conversation in the source language while on the dialogue, the speaker wasn’t mention the word conversation to be translated into</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">”</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">perbincangan”</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Situational Meaning</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brown-nose”</span><span class="font2"> was translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">”menjilat”</span><span class="font2"> in the target language, it was clearly seen that situational meaning occured in this dialogue. According to the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brownnose”</span><span class="font2"> means to treat the subject in authority with special respect in order to make them approve of you or threat you better. From the dialogue above, the cultural background between the source language and the target language text towards the italic words were introduced differently. From the context of situation, Charllie was mumbling to Bella when he saw Edward sending his daughter Bella. The phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brown-nose”</span><span class="font2"> here represents a special treatment to someone in authority to get the approvement or to get the better treatment from that someone, in the other words it means doing something to get a complimentary, in this case the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brown-nose”</span><span class="font2"> can be inffered as </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“menjilat”</span><span class="font2"> which has the same impression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From dialogue above we can also clearly see that the subtitler used praphrase strategy to translate the phrase </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brown-nose”</span><span class="font2">. On the dialogue </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“brownnose”</span><span class="font2"> was proposed to describe doin something to get a complimentary, therefore the subtitler tried to describe it using the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“menjilat”</span><span class="font2">. The use of this strategy was proposed by the subtitler to make it more comprehensible and readable for the target language audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The result show that in “The Twilight Saga Eclipse” movie subtitle the organisational implicit meaning was the most found in the movie’s subtitle followed by the situational and referential implicit meaning in the second and third range. It might cause organisational implicit meaning to refer to the repetition meanwhile the situational implicit meaning was mostly found when the subtitler translated some figurative language and referential implicit meaning was found when the subtitler emphasized the word’s meaning since the word/phrase in the source language was based on the speaker imagined.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In regard to subtitling strategy used in translating the implicit meaning, paraphrase and expansion were the most used strategy since both strategies are the most suitable subtitling strategy to translate the word/phrase which consists of implicit meaning while other subtitling strategy as used to translate the word/phrase explicitly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Aditya Dika. 2009 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Translation Implicit Meaning of English Personal Pronouns into Indonesia : A Situational analysis” Sentences which are containing implicit meaning in the novel “Gost Girl” and Indonesia version “Jadied” Tangisan Darah”.</span><span class="font2"> Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ghaemi, Farid and Benyamin,2010</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.”Strategies, Used In Translation Of Interlingual Subtitling”,</span><span class="font2"> Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">from:</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">(http;www.sid.ir/en/ViewPaper.asp?ID=207748&amp;varStr=3;GHAE MI%2CFARID,BENYAMIN%20JANIN;JOURNAL%OF%ENGLISH% 20STUDIES:WINTER%20200;1;1;39;49</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gottlieb, Henrik, 2005, Multidimensional translation: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic Turned Semiotics. </span><span class="font2">Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http:</span><a href="http://www.transedit.se/Bibliography.htm"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.transedit.se/Bibliography.htm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred L., editor. (1991).</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation: theory and practice, tension and interdependence.</span><span class="font2"> American Translators Association scholarly monographs, 5.Binghampton, NY: State University of New York. 270 p.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Milfred. L. (1984)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation.</span><span class="font2"> United States of America: 1984</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lestarian, Ningsih. 2011 “Indonesian Subtitling Strategies of The English Movie Inception. Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pramana, I Gusti Bagus Bayu.2012 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">” The Translation of Implicit Meaning In English Indonesia Subtitle of The Movie Sherlock Holmes”,</span><span class="font2"> Universitas Udayana. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Setianingsih, wiwin. 2011 “ The Translation Analysis of Implicit Meaning in Song Lyrics entitled “Everything you do”(M2M) and “I Quit (Hepburn). Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Twilight Saga, Eclipse 2010. Stephenie Meyer's 2007 novel Eclipse, USA</span></p>