---
layout: full_article
title: "CONFLICT ANALYSIS OF MAIN CHARACTER IN STEEL’S IRRESISTIBLE FORCES"
author: "Made Evidiana Putri Agneswari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CONFLICT ANALYSIS OF MAIN CHARACTER IN STEEL’S</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">IRRESISTIBLE FORCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">MADE EVIDIANA PUTRI AGNESWARI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Konflik merupakan suatu keadaan yang sering sekali terjadi di dalam kehidupan maasyarakat. Sumber dari munculnya konflik ini biasanya berawal dari kesalahpahaman di dalam suatu hubungan, ini terjadi karena adanya pilihan yang tidak memuaskan pihak tersebut. Hal ini menarik untuk dibahas bahkan dalam karya sastra sendiri karena karya sastra tidak akan pernah lepas dari masyarakat. Hal yang akan dibahas adalah konflik internal dan eksternal yang di hadapi oleh karakter utama pada Novel yang berjudul Irresistible Forces yang ditulis oleh Danielle Steel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dari analisis konflik, dapat disimpulkan bahwa Meredith adalah karakter utama. Karena kurangnya komunikasi dengan suaminya, pernikahan yang sudah empat belas tahun mereka jalani harus berakhir dengan perceraian. Salah satu kunci agar hubungan tetap harmonis adalah kejujuran. Sumber dari permasalahan yang dihadapi karakter utama adalah kurangnya rasa ingin memiliki anak dalam pernikahannya dan kesalahannya sendiri dalam menutupi perselingkuhannya dengan atasannya. Dalam menyelesaikan masalah ini strategi untuk menyelesaikan masalah sangat dibutuhkan sehingga tercipta suatu hubungan yang lebih harmonis. Ringkasan cerita dan biografis penulis disajikan untuk memudahkan pembaca memahami skripsi ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci : Konflik, Karakter, Internal konflik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature means writing valued as work of art. Taylor (1981:81) states: “Literature, like other arts, is essentially an imaginative act of the writer’s imagination in selecting, ordering, and interpreting life experience”. Literature is also based on the life experience. It also gives us explanation that literature cannot be separated from life. It can be concluded that literature is one of the bridges to make someone communicable with the society about life’s condition by his works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Diyanni states (2001:7) that there are three major types of literary work such as: poetry, drama, and fiction. Meanwhile fiction can also be divided into the novel, novelette, and short story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Literary work is fundamentally developed by two elements, such as intrinsic and extrinsic elements. The function of intrinsic element is to build up the literary creation itself such as theme, plot, setting, character, conflict, point of view, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney (1966:19) states: “the conflicts with which fiction concern itself are of many kinds. A story may deal with a conflict within a single man, a conflict between man and society, between man and nature, and so on”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">With reference to what Kenney says about the conflict above, it was found that conflict referred to a person which dealt with life situation. It is only situation that offers a conflict. The focus of this study is the main character’s conflict as portrayed in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict is about how the main character faces her conflict; her conflict with herself, her conflict with another individual and also her conflict with society. It is conflict that makes a story full with intense. How it is started, faced, and solve it for better solution in order to get wisdom living.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, there are two problems in this study, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who is the main character of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What conflicts are faced and solved by the main character</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of the study in this research are based on the problem formulated above. There are two aims in this study, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the main character of the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the main character faces the conflict and eventually solves the conflict, internally and externally.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The process used to collect information and data is usually in steps for the purpose of making a decision. It includes:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study is a novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1"> by Danielle Steel (1999). The data source was chosen because it could provide much information related to the conflict on characters which is very interesting to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Documentation method was used to collect the data. Firstly, the data were collected by reading the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1"> (1999) intensively, repeatedly and was underlined the important information from the sources which explained about the conflict in the story. Secondly, the writer used some books and several other resources about conflict as references related to the subject matter being analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method and technique of analyzing data means how all the data were analyzed to find out the solution to the problem. In this step, firstly the writer determined the main character by classifying the character based on the theory proposed by Diyanni (2001). Secondly, the writer grouped the conflict and the motive of conflict, in order to ease the writer to analyze the data. After the data were collected then all the selected data were being</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">analyzed to achieve the objective of this study and finally a conclusion was drawn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of The Main Character In Steel’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Analysis of the Main Character</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Character is a representation of human being, the inner itself that determines thought, speech and behavior. Diyanni (2001:55) states that characters in fiction can be conveniently classified as major and minor, static and dynamic. The main character of this story is Meredith and she has dynamic character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Major Character</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1"> written by Danielle Steel, has several characters which have their own positions and roles in the story. Based on the degree of the involvement of the characters in various events in the story, it could be determined that Meredith Smith Whitman is the major character in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces.</span><span class="font1"> She is considered the major character because she functions to determine where the story goes. The major character is the most important figure in the centre of the story. From the beginning until the end, Meredith Smith Whitman dominantly plays an important role and determines the flow and progress of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dynamic Character</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">At the beginning of story she is described as a married woman and very faithful with her husband named Steve. When she must work away from his husband who is in New York and she herself in San Francisco makes an affair with another man. But</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">after she meets Callan who is her co-worker as well as her boss, she becomes fall in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">love with him. They have an affair. The reason she love Callan is that they always spend more time together and she feels comfortable with Callan. In the beginning of the story she does not want to have any child from her husband, but when she meets Callan she wants to have a child with him. She does her affair without being known by Steve. Problems also arise due to her affair. Her changes in attitude make her husband want to divorce. After her divorce, she does not take a long time to open her heart to Callan. She has loved Callan more than she loves Steve. And after she is divorced she quickly accepts Callan’s desire to marry with her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Analysis of Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">External Conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this novel the analysis of external conflict is between the main character (Meredith) and the supporting characters (Steve Whitman, and Charlie McIntosh), the conflict between the main character with society, and the conflict between the main character with the natural forces.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and Steve Whitman</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of her conflict is that they have different opinions (incompatible goals) about the desire of having a child.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategies of management conflict she used are avoidance, by inviting him to discuss the presence of a child in another time and compromise, by putting jokes joke in every conversation about a child.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and Charlie McIntosh</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of her conflict is that they have different opinions (incompatible roles) about the Dow Tech firm which goes public.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strategies conflict management strategies are avoidance, by talking about that firm repeatedly with Charlie as well as competition, by making Dow Tech firm go public by herself without Charlie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and Society</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of conflict is there incompatible roes are trying to cover her affair with her boss, named Callan Dow.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict Management Strategies used is avoidance, keeping her attitude in public as well as pacification, by she realizing the public that she is a married woman and Callan is just her friend.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and Nature</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of her conflict is Incompatible roles as a snowstorm comes abruptly.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict management strategies used are avoidance; cancelling all her plans including her flight as well as compromise, telling Steve immediately that she cannot meet him</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Internal Conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and her own mind about having a child (Conflict of someone with her own mind)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of her conflict is incompatible goals, about the desire of having children just on Steve’s mind.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict management strategies used are avoidance; reducing the intensity about the presence of a child as well as compromise; telling Steve that he will not be too old when she is ready to have a child.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict between Meredith and a new relationship with another man</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Conflict of someone with her own mind)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The source of her conflict is incompatible roles; what she wants in fact about her affair is different from her own mind.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The conflict management strategies used is avoidance; she considers that Callan is just her friend as well as pacification; she tries to be honest with her feeling that she loves Callan.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the main character of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces</span><span class="font1"> is Meredith Smith Whitman. Because it seems that she dominates almost the whole story and she gives spark of conflict in the story. The other characters in this study are also analyzed based on their function, such as protagonist and antagonist characters. In this novel, Meredith Smith Whitman is categorized as an antagonist character. The supporting characters such as Callan Dow and Anna Gonzales are also included in the antagonist characters. The protagonist character in this novel is Steve Whitman because he shows something which agrees with the reader’s view and hope. The antagonist characters are often present in the story because they are always associated with the conflict. Those conflicts brought by the antagonist character could make the story appear to be more attractive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this novel, the main character faces two kinds of conflicts, the first one is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">external conflict</span><span class="font1"> and the second one is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">internal conflict</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the analysis of conflict above, it can be concluded that Meredith is a woman who is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ambitious</span><span class="font1"> in her career. Besides due to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a lack of communication</span><span class="font1"> with her husband, their fourteen years marriage finally comes to an end. The sources of her conflict are her lack of having children from her husband and her own mistake in covering her relationship with Callan and it causes her to be divorced with Steve. In this situation, conflict management is needed to resolve the conflict whether it is right or wrong.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Deetz, Stanley. A and Sheryl. L. Stevenson. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing Interpersonal Communication.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Chapter &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Diyanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading, Fiction, Poetry, and Drama.</span><span class="font1"> McGraw-Hill International Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Pengkajian Sastra. Gadjah Mada University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Steel, Danielle. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Irresistible Forces,</span><span class="font1"> New York: Dell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Taylor, Richard. 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding The Elements of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> New York: The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Macmillan Press.</span></p>