---
layout: full_article
title: "TOURISM AS REFLECTED IN TRAVELLING WOMEN: A COMPARATIVE CULTURAL STUDY ON THE NOVELS OF DAISY MILLER, A PASSAGE TO INDIA, AND PADA SEBUAH KAPAL"
author: "Sri Hartiningsih, I Wayan Ardika, I Nyoman Kutha Ratna, I Gde Paramartha"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3589 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3589"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3589"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">TOURISM AS REFLECTED IN TRAVELLING WOMEN:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A COMPARATIVE CULTURAL STUDY ON THE NOVELS OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">DAISY MILLER, A PASSAGE TO INDIA,</span><span class="font1"> AND </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">PADA SEBUAH KAPAL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sri Hartiningsih </span><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>¾ </span><span class="font1">I Wayan Ardika</span><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font1">, I Nyoman Kutha Ratna</span><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font1">, I Gde Paramartha</span><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font1">School for Graduate Study, Udayana University </span><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font1">Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:malangharti2001@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">malangharti2001@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Travelling has occurred since a long time ago. Travelling is not only done by men but also by women. In relation to travelling, travelling done by women is examined, especially the landlady’s environment, as there is a relationship between the host and the guest. The research problems are (1) how is reflection of tourism in the travelling women portrayed on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapa</span><span class="font1">l?. (2) How are motivating and attracting factors related to tourism as reflected in the travelling women articulated on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapa</span><span class="font1">l?. (3) How do cultural barriers occur in tourism as reflected in the travelling women on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, a Passage to India</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapa</span><span class="font1">l novel? In general, this research is to find out the comparison of travelling done by women. Specifically, it is to discover the reflection of tourism, how the motivating and attracting factors and cultural barriers occur in tourism as reflected in the travelling done by women.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is conducted on three novels</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1"> written by Henry James</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, A Passage To India</span><span class="font1"> by E.M. Forster</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> by NH. Dini called comparative literature showing the continents of America, Europe and Asia. Discussing the three continents, this research is called global literature. Hermeneutic method was used to interpret the content of those three novels by employing deconstruction, postcolonial and feminism theories. The main data were taken from those novels and the location of the research was both at private libraries and state libraries or institutions and websites. To support the main data, secondary data were also needed, which in this case, were obtained by interviewing the women who have travelled abroad. Then the results were formally and informally presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The findings show that the reflection of tourism in travelling done by women is represented by family companion, and that the means of transportation to their destinations are indigenous means of transportation and that the tourist objects visited are art metamorphosis, travel hyperreality, sacred places and natural and human recreational places. The factors motive ting the women to travel are inter personal, cultural, status and prestige. The things making them interested in travelling are: the Castle of Chillon in Switzerland and the regions’s history, the evening party in Italy as a tradition to welcome new people, the architectures of Caesars’ Palaces, the Coliseum and Chandrapore club as a tradition to welcome new people, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the bridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">party</span><span class="font1"> to know the language spoken and dress worn – traditional costumes of India, Koyasan as Buddhist religion and Paris as the centre of dress model. Cultural barriers refer to different etiquettes, ideologies and moral values resulting in different ways of travelling and their solutions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knowing the culture of the destination that is going to be visited is really needed, at least in order not to know nothing at all about such a destination; furthermore, it reduces cultural barriers. That is why </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cross cultural understanding</span><span class="font1"> is really necessarily given not only to the doers of tourism but also to all institutions in order to reduce misunderstanding and increase appreciation towards each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key word: reflection, travelling women, motivating and attracting factors, cultural barriers</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This study discusses “Tourism as Reflected in Travelling Women: A Comparative Cultural Study on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">”. It was conducted because tourism is an industry that gives less negative effects on the environment if compared to other big industries such as mining, manu facturing, textile, automotive and pharmacy, making it well known an industry without any chimney and it has become a global industry that has employed 10.6% of the world’s work force (John Naisbit in Asrama, 2006). In fact, tourism receives less attention (Crick, 2002:18-19). Travelling is part of tourism. Travelling takes place as one could not deny interaction with others. Human interaction refers to seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and interacting with real things. That is why travelling causes a great wish to see other people individually. It is such an interaction that inspires tourism. However, travelling creates a new problem, as one will misperceive others (Y. Reisinger, 1997:129130). Related to travelling, that done by women is observed as it is related to the relationship between the host and the guest in tourism and usually the landlady’s environment is observed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This research is done with three novels as the data sources. They are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1"> (1878) written by Henry James</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, A Passage To India</span><span class="font1"> (1924) by E.M. Forster</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> (1972) by NH. Dini. This is called a comparative literature showing the continents of America, Europe and Asia; and therefore, it is termed as global literature. Daisy Miller is a female</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">character on the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy</span><span class="font1"> Miller , and Adela Quested on the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Passage to India</span><span class="font1"> is too and so is Sri or Mrs. Vincent on the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> . All of them are the main characters and they are faced with different conflicts and things in their new places. There are three research problems in this study. First, how the reflection of tourism in the travelling women is portrayed on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Daisy Miller, Passage to India,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal. </span><span class="font1">Second, how motivating and attracting factors are related to tourism as it is reflected in the travelling women on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India, </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">. And third, how cultural barriers occur in tourism as reflected in the travelling women on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Generally, the aims of this study are to observe American, European and Asian women when travelling and to understand post-modern or contem porary topics, and to observe social and historical background of travelling women. Specifically, this study aims at describing how the reflection of tourism in the travelling women is portrayed on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Daisy Miller, Passage to India,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Next it aims at finding out how motivating and attracting factors related to tourism are reflected in the travelling women on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India, </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">. And finally, it discovers how cultural barriers occur in tourism as reflected in the travelling women on the novels of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller, A Passage to India,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> .</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Academically, this research has some benefits: first, it contributes to adding knowledge about the travelling women seen from political, cultural and moral point of view in literary works. Second, it gives significance as one model to motivating researches on literature that are always intrinsically and structurally focused. And third, it gives significance for further researches on both Indonesian and foreign literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore, practically, this study is beneficial to the Indonesian government when making policies corcerning travelling. It can also serve as the guidance for women who are going abroad. Literary works are also able to form the society’s personality. The society members are expected to read both Indonesian and foreign literary works. By reading literary works, one is going to know cultural differences. By knowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">cultural differences, differences will be understood and appreciated. In addition, this will be useful to the doers of tourism. They will recognize who will come as the tourists and where they come from. Apart from this, they will have the guidance that can give them information about the tourists’ attitudes.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>MATERIAL AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This research applied qualitative method illustrating the travelling done by women. Reflection of tourism, motivating and attracting factors, and cultural barriers were investigated. First, primary and secondary data were collected, and then the appropriate theories were chosen for analyzing the data. After that, the selected data were selected and interpreted, and finally, the process of report writing and constructing all the results was done. In order to achieve the goal, various theories were applied such as the theories of deconstruction, postcolonial and feminism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In order to know the results of this study, the explanation is as follows: first, the analysis on reflection of tourism in the travelling done by women is focused on companion, transportation, and visited</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">objects. The travelling women intended are Daisy Miller on the novel of Daisy </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Miller</span><span class="font1">, Adela Quested on the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Passage to India</span><span class="font1">, and Sri on the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">. They use companions for travelling. Their companions, who are reflected in different ways, are their family members such as mother, future mother-in-law, and daughter. Related to their ways of travelling, they used local means of transportation, and the destinations visited depend on the women’s interests and the destinations available.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second, the analysis shows that the motivating and attracting factors reflected in the travelling women on the novels of Daisy </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Miller, a Passage to India</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> are their motives, types and behaviours. Moreover, dealing with the motives of travelling, the women have interpersonal motivations. Related to the cultural aspects, Daisy Miller is made to visit the Castle of Chillon in Switzerland by the history of the region, the evening party in Italy as the tradition to welcome new people, and the architecture in the Palace of Caesars and the Colosseum. It is greatly different from Daisy Miller; Adela Quested is interested in visiting Chandrapore club as it has the tradition of welcoming new</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">people, the bridge party as the place to know the language and dress – the traditional costumes of India, while Sri is interested in Koyasan as Buddhist religion. Furthermore, related to the type of travelling, Daisy Miller in the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1"> written by Henry James, travels as she likes (indulger), whereas Adela Quested on the novel of A </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Passage to India</span><span class="font1"> by E.M. Forster, travels as an adventurer, and Sri on the novel of Pada </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sebiah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> written by N.H. Dini, travels as economizer traveller. Referring to the patterns of behaviour, Daisy Miller is an unculturalzed and rich tourist; in addition, she is also considered an exploiting tourist. The other travelling woman, Adela Quested is an alternative tourist, while the last travelling woman, Sri, is considered an exploiting tourist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Third, cultural barriers, related to tourism as reflected in the travelling women in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1">, refer to ethical values, in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Passage to India</span><span class="font1"> refer to being a colonial, and in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1"> refer to moral values. Ethical values occur between the European (the host) and the American (the guest). They refer to the host’s view and create ethnocentrism shown by the European who feels more superior than the outsider of her or his group. Consequently, what the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">guest does is inappropriate with the host’s view. Moreover, the guest or traveller gets a cold welcome and a cynical behaviour from the European. Related to colonialism, the Indian society (the native), as colonized people, is considered irrational, easily controlled and manipulated by the colonist (British). Those views toward the Indians or natives have something to do with legimitation of being bad or weak making the British easily manage or control them. These views are going to be repeated and spread to the Indians who believe and admit them. In fact, India has two sides, good and bad ones but only their badness is explored and the aim is to show to them that they are inferior to the colonialist. Another thing to think is that the Indian’s characteristic shows indigenous things in it. Related to the moral values, something occurs between the Indonesian and Western views. Sri, the main character in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">, represents orietalism that is challenged by Charles Vincent, her husband who represents western culture. The moral values appearing dominantly in their marriage are purity and loyalty. The husband is superior over his wife. Consequently, he can do everything over his wife making the wife subordinate. Being subordinate is suffering. It is not in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">line with the spirit of equality in feminism. The relation between the East and the West should be in equal position. If it does not happen, it makes unbalance as happening in the family. To get equality, the wife should not just keep silent and remaining obedient but she should act by arguing. Those are cultural barriers. However, nowadays they are no such cultural barriers anymore because the difference is appreciated, whereas before it was only frightening. Improved knowledge of other countries through cinema and television has made such a shift, that is, from being frightened to being appreciated. . This is called multiculturalism.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESEARCH NOVELTY</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The deconstruction has been applicable in the beginning of nineteenth century as long as the spirit of feminism. It was employed by Henry James in creating the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1"> in 1878 to deconstruct the companion in travelling with the spirit of feminism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The three travelling women, Daisy Miller, Adela Quested, and Sri have different patterns of behaviour. It does not matter they have different behaviours because tourism celebrates</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">cultural difference (Culler, 1988:167) between the host and the guest and among the guests. In other words, one should learn and receive others as what she or he is as Mangunwijaya (1993:25) states “Kita harus belajar menerima orang lain seperti apa adanya”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Different etiquettes, ideologies and moral values could result in conflicts but not all of the conflicts are negative if considered as natural. Moreover, difference is not always bad, and one could not force others to do the same thing as she or he does. In other words, cultural barriers still exist but they depend on how one faces it.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESEARCH CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The conclusion of this research is that there is a change in companion, transportation as well as visited objects. Previously, the companion is for protection but nowadays it is for pleasure; the means of transportation used is indigenous means of transportation available; and natural objects visited change to cultural ones. Another change is that previously the difference is frightening but now it is sought for in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">tourism and it is an attractive thing for travellers to visit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I would like to take this opportunity to express my great thanks to Prof. Dr. I Wayan Ardika, M.A., as my promoter, Prof. Dr.I Wayan Kutha Ratna, S.U. as copromoter I and., Prof. Dr. I Gde Parimartha, MA.as co-promoter II who have attentively given me support, encouragement and guidance starting from the proposal writing to the last process of completing this dissertation report. I would also like to deliver my deep appreciation to the Rector of Muhammadiyah University of Malang for giving chance and funds to study, the Rector of Udayana University, the Director of PostGraduate Program Udayana University and staff, and the Head of Cultural Studies Doctorate Program of Udayana University and staff.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Abdullah, Irwn. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sangkan Paran</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gender.</span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Adian, Donny Gahral. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perempuan Multicultural, Negoisasi dan Representasi: &nbsp;&nbsp;Feminisme &nbsp;&nbsp;yang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bersuara Jamak.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: Desantara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Anderson, Luella F and Mary Ann Littrell. 1995. Annals of Tourism Research: Souvenir – Purchase Behavior of Women Tourist. USA: Pergamon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Anwar, Khaidir. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Sosio-Kultural, Masalah Bahasa: Filsafat dan Sastra.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ardana Putra, I Made. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Representation Of Cultural values in Language and Literature: Tourism English and Culture Shock in Tourism Industry. </span><span class="font1">Semarang: Soegija pranata Chatolic University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ardika, I Wayan. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pusaka Budaya &amp;&nbsp;Pariwisata.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Pustaka Larasan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_______. &nbsp;&nbsp;2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pariwisata Budaya Berkelanjutan: Komponen Buda ya Bali Segabai Daya Tarik Wisata. </span><span class="font1">Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin. 2003. Menelanjangi </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kuasa Bahasa: Teori dan Praktik Sastra Poskolonial.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Asrama, B. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Merekam Pariwisata Bali dalam 35 tahun, Narasi Mencemaskan bagi Sustainable Tourism</span><span class="font1"> Makalah seminar dan Lokakarya Nasional Bali Tourism Sustainable develop ment and Law Inforcement, Inna Grand Bali beach Sanur 25 Februari 2006.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Christ. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1">London: Sage Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barrett, Terry. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Criticizing Art: Understanding the Contem porary. </span><span class="font1">California: Mayfield Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Baso, Ahmad. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perempuan Multicultural, Negoisasi dan Representasi:Ke Arah Feminisme Postradisional.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: Desan tara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Budianta, Melani. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra and Kajian Budaya.</span><span class="font1">Publict lecture and Workshop </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Asian Studying Asia: Cultural studies for Asia context</span><span class="font1">. Yoggyakarta:May 14 –17.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Budiman, Kris. 1999. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Feminografi. </span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Burn, Peter M. &amp;&nbsp;Andrew Holden. 1995.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: a new perspective.</span><span class="font1"> UK: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Butler, Kathleen L. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research: Independence for Western Women Through Tourism.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Byrne Swain, Margaret. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annal of Tourism Research:Gender in Tourism.</span><span class="font1">USA: Pergamon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">C. Bogdan, Robert and Knopp Bliklen, Sari. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Qualitative Research for Education: Introduction to Theory and Methods.</span><span class="font1"> Boston: Allyn and Bacon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Crick, Malcolm. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Sociology of Tourism: Representations of International Tourism in Social Sciences; Sun, Sex, Sights, Savings, and Servility.</span><span class="font1"> London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cowie, Alexander. 1951. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Rise of the American Novel.</span><span class="font1"> USA: American Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Culler, Jonathan. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Framing The Sign, Criticism and Its Tourism: The Semiotic of Tourism.</span><span class="font1"> London: University of Oklahoma Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">De Beauvoir, Simon. (Penterjemah Toni B. Febriantoro). 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Second Sex.</span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Pustaka prome thea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dini, N.H. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pada Sebuah Kapal</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eco, U. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Travels in Hyper-Reality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">London: Picador.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Evans, Sara M. (Penterjemah sri Kusdyantinah Sb).1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lahir untuk Kebebasan.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Forster, E.M. 1971. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Passage to India. </span><span class="font1">England: penguin Books Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gandhi, Leela. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Poskolonial: Upaya Meruntuhkan Hegemoni Barat.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gee, Chuck Y. 1999. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Tourism: A Global Perspective.</span><span class="font1"> Spain: World Tourism Organi zation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halevy, Elie. 1949. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">England in 1815. </span><span class="font1">London: Ernest Been Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hartiningsih, Sri. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Women’s Struggle to Regain their Reputation in Oscar wilde’s “Lady Windermere Fan’ and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“A Woman of no Importance’. </span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Faculty of Letters, Gadjah Mada University. Thesis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">______2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hotel Vacancy in Malang for English Language Graduates. </span><span class="font1">Malang: UMM</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">______2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oscar Wilde’s Perspective on Ideal Women as seen in “Lady Windermere’s Fan” and “An Ideal Husband”.</span><span class="font1"> Malang:UMM</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hutomo, Suripan Sadi. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Merambah Matahari:Sastra &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perbandingan.</span><span class="font1"> Surabaya: Gaya Masa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">James, Henry. 1962. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daisy Miller</span><span class="font1">.USA: A Signet Classic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jost, Francois. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Comparative Literature.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Pegasus: A Devision of the Bobbs-Merrill Company Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kinard, Jerry. 1988.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Management.</span><span class="font1"> USA: D.C. Heath And Company</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Krippendorf, Jost. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Earthscan reader in Sustainable Tourism: Behabiour and Experiences While Travelling.</span><span class="font1"> UK: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Earthscan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Publications Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">______. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Earthscan reader in Sustainable Tourism:The Motives of the Mobile Leisureman – Travel Between Norm, Promise and Hope. </span><span class="font1">UK: Earthscan Publications Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kutha Ratna, Nyoman. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode, dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">______2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Cultural Studies</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">______2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Postkolonialisme Indone sia: Relevansi Sastra.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;Yogya arta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Liliweri, Alo. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-Dasar Komunikasi Antar Budaya. </span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leheny, David. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research: A Political Economy Of Asian Sex Tourism.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Loomba, Ania. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kolonialis me/Pascakolonialisme.</span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Bentang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mackinnon, C. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Feminism Unmo dified.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mackinnon, C. 1991. ‘Differenceand Domination’ in K. Bartlet and R. Kennedy (eds) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Feminist Legal Theory.</span><span class="font1"> Boulder, Co and London:Westview Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McIntosh, Robert W. and Goelner, Charles W. 1990. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: Principlea, Practices, Philoso phies.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Jogn Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meisch, Lynn A. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research: Gringas and Otavalenos, Changing Tourist Relations</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mezger, June. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bridging the intercultural communication gap: A Guide for TAFE Teachers of International Students (A Guide for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TAFE Teachers of International Students.</span><span class="font1"> Tasmania: National TAFE Overseas Network.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mill, R. 1990. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: The Internati onal Business.</span><span class="font1"> London: Prentice Hall</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muhadjir, Noeng. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Peneli tian Kualitatif.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta; Rake Sarasin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nas, Peter J.M. (TT). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Globalization, Localization, and Indonesia. </span><span class="font1">Indonesia:KITLV and KITLV</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nuryanti, Windu. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and Culture: Global Civilization in Change</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nurwijaya, Hartati. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perkawinan AntarBangsa: Love and Schock. </span><span class="font1">Jakarta: Restu Agung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Palmer, Richard E. Mesneer Hery &amp;&nbsp;Damhuri Muh (penterjemah). 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutik. Teori Baru Mengenai Interpretasi.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Page, Stephen J. And Getz, Don. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Business of rural Tourism: International Perspectives.</span><span class="font1"> UK: International Thomson Business Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pruitt, Deborah and LaFont, Suzanne. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Rese arch: For Love and Money, Romance Tourism in Jamaica.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pruitt, Deborah J. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Foreign Mind”: Tourism, Identity and Development in Jamaica.</span><span class="font1"> PH.D. dissertation. University of California at Berkeley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reisinger, Y. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Earthscan Reader in Sustainable Tourism: Social Contact Between Tourists and Hosts of Different Cultural Backgrounds. </span><span class="font1">UK: Earthscan Publication Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richards, G. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Tourism in Europe: The Social Context of Cultural Tourism.</span><span class="font1"> London: CAB International</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">___________1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Tourism in Europe: Introduction, Culture and Tourism in Europe.</span><span class="font1"> London: CAB International</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan. C. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Recreational Tourism: A Social Science Perspective.</span><span class="font1"> London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Padmo, Soegijanto. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bunga Rampai Sejarah Sosial-Ekonomi Indonesia: Migrasi dan Ekonomi Rakyat:Perubahan Pola Migrasi di Jawa dan Luar Jawa, 1900-1980. </span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Aditya Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stallknecht, Ed. Newtown P. And Frenz, Horst. 1990. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra Perbandingan: Kaedah dan Perspektif.</span><span class="font1"> Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Swain, Margaret. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research: Gender in Tourism.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tombari Harper, Barbara. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Etiquette. </span><span class="font1">Jakarta: Kesaint Blanc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tanuwibowo, Budi &nbsp;&nbsp;S. et.al. &nbsp;&nbsp;2002.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pluralisme, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Konflik Dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perdamaian</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Urry, John.2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Sociology of Tourism. Theoritical and Empirical Investigation: Tourism Culture And Social Inequality.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Van Der Borg, J and P. Costa. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Tourism in Europe: Cultural Tourism in Italy.</span><span class="font1"> London: Cap International.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winardi, Andreas. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Representation of Cultural Values in Language and Literature: The Utilization of Literature to Develop The Understanding of Other Culture. </span><span class="font1">Semarang: Soegijapranata Catholic University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wilkinson, Paul F and Wiwik Pratiwi. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research: Gender And Tourism in an Indonesia Village.</span><span class="font1"> USA: Pergamon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Williams, Chuck. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Management.</span><span class="font1"> USA: South-Western College Publishing, Thomson Learning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">11</span></p>