---
layout: full_article
title: "REINFORCEMENT OF THE MYTH OF MANGUNI  IN MINAHASAN COMMUNITY, NORTH SULAWESI"
author: "Mayske Rinny Liando"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-8421 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-8421"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-8421"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">REINFORCEMENT OF THE MYTH OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">MANGUNI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN MINAHASAN COMMUNITY, NORTH SULAWESI</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Mayske Rinny Liando</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">State University of Manado (Unima) e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:liandomeys@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">liandomeys@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Oral traditions may be found in many regions. One of them which enriches the treasure of local culture is the oral tradition of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> (owl), which, in Minahasa, North Sulawesi, is purified and constitutes part of the local traditions which may help the local people overcome their problems. The oral tradition of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> constitutes one of the local cultural products which may be potentially created, as can be seen in the creative industries currently motivated by the government of Indonesia. This present study was particularly intended to identify the form, ideology, and implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The result of the present study showed that the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> was reinforced by the community in Minahasa, North Sulawesi, not only in the form of the creative industry of souvenirs, which are highly economically valuable, but also in various forms of symbols. The reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi, contained the ideology of heroism, the myth of the origin of Minahasa, amusement, the communication between human beings and the Creator, conservation, and commodification. The implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi, on the socio-culture of the Minahasan people included the aspect of ideological superstructure, the aspect of socio-culture and the aspect of material infrastructure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: reinforcement, myth, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> bird, community of Minahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The treasure of local culture in the form of oral tradition may be found in many regions. In North Sulawesi, for example, the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> is found as an oral tradition. In the community of Minahasa, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manguni</span><span class="font0"> is purified and constitutes part of the local tradition which may help the local people overcome the various problems they may have. The oral tradition in the form of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> is one of the local cultural products which is potentially created from the perspective of creative industries, although the products produced need to be increased qualitatively and quantitatively. The responses given by the public to the creative industries of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> are in the forms of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">batik</span><span class="font0"> industry, souvenirs (key hanger, miniature, house door hanger), painting, doll, pin, brooch, necklace, magazine, book, statue, and symbols of government, the biggest</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">church, social organization, group, and youth organization. Many shops and trades are also named after this myth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In relation to such a phenomenon, the problems of the present study were in the forms three questions related to the form, ideology, and implication of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> on the community of Minahasa in North Sulawesi. In general, this present study was intended to explore the values of the oral tradition which are deeply rooted in cultural studies, and to give information to the public on the form, ideology, and implication of the myth. In addition, this present study was also aimed at giving contribution to the local government when making policies related to culture to resurrect any local tradition which is getting extinct as a consequence of globalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It was expected that the result of the study would contribute to any attempt made to develop cultural studies, or any fact intended to develop the concepts related to the understanding of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0">. Such concepts are in the form of the studies which were intended to explore the form, ideology, and implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> related to the creative industries. In practice, it was expected that the result of the present study would give input to the documentation of the culture of listening to the sound produced by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> as an initial symbol and sign in all the activities of life done by the community of Minahasa, give input needed for preserving the oral tradition in the Archipelago in general and in Minahasa in particular, for supporting the government’s program in preserving the oral tradition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The paradigm of cultural studies with the principles of qualitative method was used in the present study which explored the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> reinforced by the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi. It was randomly conducted in Minahasa Regency, North Sulawesi. The data were collected through observation, interview, and documentation study. Qualitative data which were expressed in the forms of expressions, sentences, and events related to the form, ideology, and implication of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the treasure of creative industries on the community of Minahasa were used. The theories used in the present study were the theory of mythology (Barthes, 2007), the theory of deconstruction proposed by Derrida (in Barker, 2005), Pilliang (2003), which was compared to the concept of ideology proposed by Larrain (1996), Van Zoest (1993), Thompson (2003), and Volosinov (1973), was used to analyze</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the ideology of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa; the theory of semiotics proposed by Hoed (2008), Danesi (2010), and Sobur (2009), and the theory of commodification proposed by Fairclough (1985) were used to analyze the implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Different interests caused the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> as a local tradition not to be simply adopted from the model, pattern, and form of the Western creative industries. The reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> was not simply inspired by economic interests either. Cultural interests also inspired the development and reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> as a local tradition as an attempt to maintain the Minahasan identity. In other words, entrepreneurs and cultural observers adapted and modified the pattern and model of creative industries in accordance with the context and interests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi, was realized not only in the form of souvenirs with their highly valuable value, but also in the forms of the local governmental symbol, the symbol of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Brigade Manguni </span><span class="font0">(the traditional biggest organization), the symbol of the Church of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Masehi Injili Minahasa/GMIM</span><span class="font0"> (denomination of the biggest church in North Sulawesi, the symbol of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waraney Wuaya</span><span class="font0"> Community, which means preservation of the regional identity, the community integration, and Minahasan cultural religiosity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The ideology of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa was revealed to identify the general socio-culture which directs and exemplifies the Minahasan way of thinking. Such identification was combined with the concept of ideology and the theory of deconstruction to destruct and find out the ideology forming the cultural description the Minahasan community. Such an ideology was not strange to the Minahasan community; it had been so integrated into the people’s way of life that they did not recognize it. Further, the ideology which did not benefit the human entity contributed to the acknowledgement of the human nature. As stated by Thompson (2003: 18) that an ideology functions to tighten the social relation which is collectively agreed. The reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the Minahasan community, North Sulawesi, contained the ideology of heroism, the myth of the origin of Minahasa, amusement, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">communication between human beings and the nature and the Creator, conservation, religiosity, and the ideology of communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the community of Minahasa, North Sulawesi, on the system of the Minahasan socio-culture included the aspect of ideological superstructure, the aspect of social structure and the aspect of material infrastructure. From the dimension of ideological structure, the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni </span><span class="font0">was made to be getting popular as a creature which was able to transmit the message of natural phenomenon which could be both positive and negative to the lives of the Minahasan people. Apart from that, the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> also implied the development of sciences and became the source of inspiration in the development of the values of art, literature, and heroism of the Minahasan people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Its implications on the social structure included the political, kinship, and character educational aspects. In the political aspect, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> was frequently used as a discourse by many parties (especially the bureaucrat, politician, and non government organization) to acquire support and socio-cultural and political legitimacy for the sake of power. From the family and kinship dimension, the Minahasan people ’s awareness of the important meaning of the signs provided by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> as the attempt made by human beings to maintain the harmonious relationship between themselves and their fellowbeings, between themselves and the nature, and between themselves and the Creator, was getting better. Apart from that, what the Minahasan people believed in the signs provided by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> before doing any activity was getting stronger. The reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the Minahasan community from the educational dimension strengthened their belief that </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> was smart, brave, and wise which should be exemplified in education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Economically, such reinforcement could increase the Minahasan level of life by creating items such as souvenirs which were highly valuable economically and specific to Minahasa. From the ecological dimension, such reinforcement caused the Minahasan people to be aware of preserving the habitat of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0">, which was getting scarce, so that its population would increase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Several conclusions could be drawn. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">First</span><span class="font0">, the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the Minahasan community was realized in the forms of economic value and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">regional symbol. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Second</span><span class="font0">, the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the Minahasan community, North Sulawesi, contained the ideology of heroism, the myth of the origin of Minahasa, amusement, the communication between the nature and the Creator, conservation, religiosity, and the ideology of commodification. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Third</span><span class="font0">, the implication of the reinforcement of the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> in the Minahasan community, North Sulawesi, on the Minahasan socio-culture included the aspect of ideological superstructure, the aspect of socio-culture and the aspect of material infrastructure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The regional government should carry out the programs it has planned continuously as oral traditions are the state and regional assets which should be protected. The cultural observers and stakeholders should actively participate in socializing the values that the myth of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manguni</span><span class="font0"> contains to the Minahasan community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, the writer would like to thank and highly appreciate Prof. A.A. Bagus Wirawan, S.U. as supervisor for his full attention, supervision and encouragement during the completion of this present study, Prof. Dr. A.A. Anom Kumbara and Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, as co-supervisor 1 and co-supervisor 2 for their supervision during the completion of this dissertation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chris. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktek</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana. Barthes, Rolan. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Membedah Mitos-mitos Budaya Massa</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra. Danesi, Marcel. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pesan, Tanda, dan , Makna</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fairclough, Norman. 1995. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse and Social Change</span><span class="font0">. Chambridge: Politi Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Larrain, Jorge. 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Konsep Ideologi</span><span class="font0"> (terjemahan). Yogyakarta: LKPSM.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mayske Rinny Liando. 2013. “Pemberdayaan Mitos Burung Manguni dalam Khazanah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Industri Kreatif pada Masyarakat Minahasa di Sulawesi Utara”, disertasi, Program Doktor, Program Studi Kajian Budaya, Program Pascasarjana, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hipersemiotika Tafsir Cultural Studies atas Matinya Makna</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Thompson, John B., 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Ideologi, Kritik Wacana Ideologi-Ideologi Dunia</span><span class="font0">. (Terjemahan). Yogyakarta: IRCiSoD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">van Zoes, Aart. 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika</span><span class="font0"> (terjemahan). Jakarta: Yayasan Sumber Agung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Volosinov, N. V, 1973. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Marxism and the Philosophy of Language</span><span class="font0"> (judul asli </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Markizm I</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Filosofia</span><span class="font0"> (terjemahan Ladislav Matejka &amp;&nbsp;I.R Titunik). New York and London: Seminar Pre</span><span class="font1">ss.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">5</span></p>