---
layout: full_article
title: "CHARACTERIZATION, MORAL AND SOCIAL VALUES IN JONASSON’S NOVEL THE HUNDRED YEAR OLD MAN WHO CLIMBED OUT THE WINDOW AND DISAPPEARED"
author: "A. A. Ngurah Bagus Wira Udayana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.2 Pebruari 2016: 1-6</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">CHARACTERIZATION, MORAL AND SOCIAL VALUES IN JONASSON’S</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NOVEL </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">THE HUNDRED YEAR OLD MAN WHO CLIMBED OUT THE WINDOW</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">AND DISAPPEARED</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anak Agung Ngurah Bagus Wira Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">email:</span><a href="mailto:anakagungngurahbagus@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> anakagungngurahbagus@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Judul penelitian ini adalah Karakterisasi, Moral dan Nilai Sosial dalam Novel The Hundred Year Old man Who Climbed Out The Window And Disappeared. Pembahasan penelitian ini difokuskan pada analisis metode karakterisasi digunakan untuk mengkarakterisasi karakter utama dan analisis nilai-nilai moral dan sosial tokoh utama dalam novel. Data penelitian ini diambil dari novel The Hundred Year Old man Who Climbed Out The Window And Disappeared ditulis oleh Jonas Jonasson. Ada dua teori dasar yang diterapkan dan dapat mendukung penelitian ini. Teori sastra yang berkaitan dengan karakterisasi dari Kenney (1966) dan teori nilai yang berkaitan dengan nilai moral dari Carol K. Sigelman (1995) dan Bernhardt (1952), nilai sosial dari Warren dan Roucek (1963). Teori akan digunakan untuk menyelesaikan masalah yang terkait dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dari analisis penelitian ini, dapat disimpulkan bahwa tokoh utama dalam novel ini adalah Allan Karlsson, seorang pria berusia seratus tahun. Allan digambarkan sebagai karakter kompleks karena karakternya digambarkan dari dua sisi buruk dan baik. Karakter perubahannya ketika ia tumbuh dari anak sampai ia menjadi dewasa. Penulis menggunakan metode diskursif untuk mengkarakterisasi karakter utama, Allan Karlsson. Ada banyak nilai-nilai moral dan sosial yang ditemukan dalam karakter Allan Karlsson. Dalam hidupnya, ia selalu dihadapkan ke arah sosial masalah dalam keluarganya, teman-temannya, di masyarakat dan isu-isu sosial di negara ini. Dari semua itu, Allan bisa menentukan sikapnya terhadap sesuatu yang baik dan sesuatu yang buruk. Allan, sebagai makhluk sosial, ia selalu berusaha untuk membantu orang lain dalam bukunya hidup, meskipun kadang-kadang ia membuat beberapa kesalahan, dia selalu berusaha untuk memperbaiki masalah sehingga semuanya akan kembali normal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: karakterisasi, nilai moral, nilai sosial, Novel</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature can be defined as the art of writing or creative writing which expresses spirit, thought, feeling, ideas, experience that expressed by human beings. Most of the literary works always have moral and social values. The novel as a kind of literary work, is the reflection of life that could be created depending on the auhor’s experiences which contain values for people’s lives. Moral values are values concerning principles of right and wrong and the standards of behavior (Hornby, 2011:285). The social value is value or the quality of the relations between people in communities (Hornby, 2011:421). The novel that most people like to read, they enjoy reading novel because they can learn many things. That is why here deep analysis on a novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Hundred Year Old Man who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared”</span><span class="font2"> written by Jonas Jonasson. It is an interesting story that is full of moral and social values which are very useful for life and education.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing moral and social values , there are some problems that may appear. The problems addressed in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What methods of characterization are used to characterize the main character in novel?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What moral and social values are found in the main character in novel?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the previous question, this study covers 2 major aims of study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the methods of characterization used to characterize the main character in the novel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the moral and social values of the main character in the novel.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data was taken from novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hundred Year Old Man who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared</span><span class="font2"> written by Jonas Jonasson (2009). The data is collected by using the qualitative method and it is collected through the documentation method. The data was analized by using the descriptive method on moral and social values presented by the author. This method is used in presenting the analysis through the words and sentences without using table.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Characterization Method</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(Chapter 1, page 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">You might think he could have made up his mind earlier, and been man enough to tell the others of his decision. But Allan Karlsson had never been given to pondering things too long.</span><span class="font2"> So the idea had barely taken hold in the old man’s head before he opened the window of his room on the ground floor of the Old People’s Home in the town of Malmköping, and stepped out – into the flowerbed. This manoeuvre required a bit of effort, since Allan was one hundred years old.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The author says that that although Allan is a hundred years old, he is not a clever man to make a decision, it can be seen in the sentence, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“You might think he could have made up his mind earlier, and been man enough to tell the others of his decision. But Allan Karlsson had never been given to pondering things too long.”</span><span class="font2"> Allan is not thinking about his decision correctly, even seem lika a desperate person. However, he still making and choosing his the decision to continue his wishes. On the other hand, he does not know what he would face later on, because Allan took the decision in a hurry. Based on Kenney’s theory (1966:34), the author used the </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">discursive method </span><span class="font2">to describe his character in the story. From the underlined sentence, the author clearly tells the character’s of Allan Karlsson who is not a clever man to make a decision.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moral Values</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(Chapter 2, page 8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Allan Karlsson hesitated as he stood in the flowerbed that ran along one side of the Old People’s Home. He was on the run from his own birthday party, another unusual thing for a hundred year-old, not least because even being one hundred is pretty rare.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Better to be on his way while he could, Allan thought, as he stepped out of the flowerbed on creaking knees. In his wallet, as far as he could remember, he had a few hundred-crown notes saved – a good thing since he’d need some cash if he was going into hiding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">He turned to take one last look at the Old People’s Home that – until a few moments ago – he had thought would be his last residence on Earth, and then he told himself that he could die some other time, in some other place</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Allan convinces himself to go out of the nursing home, but he thought that he could die if he came out. Allan already had a place to stay, lots of friends, but on his hundredth birthday he still decided to leave the nursing home. It is relevant with Sigelman’s theory (1995:330), A </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">cognitive component </span><span class="font2">which is focusing to conceptualize right or wrong and make decisions about how to behave. It can be seen from the sentence, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“He turned to take one last look at the Old People’s Home that – until a few moments ago – he had thought would be his last residence on Earth, and then he told himself that he could die some other time, in some other place”</span><span class="font2">. Based on Bernhardt’s theory (1952:53), think negative or be ungrateful with something is can be said as a </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">wrong attitude</span><span class="font2">. The moral values that can be seen here is we always should think positive and should be grateful for what we have today, because nothing is perfect in this world.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Values</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(Chapter 2, page 11) Yes, Allan thought it would. </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">The little man told him that the bus left from outside the terminal door and that it would be most convenient to buy a ticket directly from the driver.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Allan wondered what the little man did behind the window if he didn’t sell tickets, but he didn’t say anything. The little man possibly wondered the same thing. Allan thanked him for his help and tried to tip the hat he had in his haste not brought along.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although the little man did not talk too much with Allan, at least he gives Allan an information to continue his journey. Allan thanked the little man. It can be considered as </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">social interaction</span><span class="font2">, it is a process in which the responses of each party become, successively, stimuli for the responses of each others. Interaction is basic in the sense that is inderlines all social process (Warren and Roucek, 1963: 41). It can be seen from the sentence, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The little man told him that the bus left from outside the terminal door and that it would be most convenient to buy a ticket directly from the driver.”</span><span class="font2"> There is a </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">social value </span><span class="font2">that can be seen from Allan’s attitude who appreciates the help of the little man with gratitude. We should appreciate the slightest help from anyone else, because we are social beings whose lives to help each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The main character in the novel “The Hundred Year Old Man Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared” is Allan Karlsson, a hundred year old man. Allan was described as a round character because his character is described from two side bad and good. His characters changes when he grows up from child until he become an adult. The author used the discursive method to characterize the main character, Allan Karlsson. The author explains all about Allan’s character in the story of the novel directly. The author succeed to explain the attitude of Allan, how he interacts with his family, his friends and the society. There are many moral and social values found in the character Allan Karlsson. In his life, he always faced towards social issues in his family, his friends, in the community and social issues in the country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From it all, Allan could determine his attitude toward something good and something bad. Allan, as a social being, he is always trying to help others in his life, although sometimes he made some mistakes, he always tried to fix the problem so everything is going back to normal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bertrand, L Alvin. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology</span><span class="font2">. Surabaya: PT. Bina Emas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carol K. Sigelman Staugtan, Roger, Wilson, John. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Philosophers On Education</span><span class="font2">: Hongkong, Macmillan Press ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DiYanni, Robert. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Modern American Poets: Their Voices and Visions ,Second edition</span><span class="font2">. Boston: McGraw-Hill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Drs. H. Kaelan, M.S. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan Pancasila</span><span class="font2">. Penerbit Paradigma: Yogyakarta Homby, AS. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford; University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Immanuel Kant. 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Critique of Practical Reason</span><span class="font2">. Bucharest. Scientific.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Karl Bernhardt. 1952. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font2">. New York: Michigan University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ludwig Grünberg. 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Axiology and the human condition</span><span class="font2">. Publishing Policy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Paul Edwards. 1967. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ideology in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy</span><span class="font2">. New York: Macmillan and The Free Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">R. J. Sternberg. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reflection on Ethical Leadership: Morality, Ethics, and Gifted Minds</span><span class="font2">. New York: Springer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Raymond Polin. 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The creation of values</span><span class="font2">. Paris: Library Philosophical J. Vrin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Roucek, Joseph S., and Warren, Roland S. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology An Introduction</span><span class="font2">. New Jersey: Littlefield, Adams &amp;&nbsp;Co, Paterson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stumpf, Samuel Enoch. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Socrates to Sartre: A History of Philosophy</span><span class="font2">. United State: McGraw Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek and Warren. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. New Brunswick, N. J. : Rutgers University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">William Kenney. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyse fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">6</span></p>