---
layout: full_article
title: "MANAGEMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF SIDEWALK TRADERS IN WEST DENPASAR SUB DISTRICT DENPASAR CITY: IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES"
author: "I Wayan Wana Pariartha, I Made Suastika, Emiliana Mariyah, I Ketut Sudibia"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3626 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3626"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3626"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">MANAGEMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF SIDEWALK TRADERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN WEST DENPASAR SUB DISTRICT DENPASAR CITY: IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Wayan Wana Pariartha<sup>1</sup>, I Made Suastika<sup>2</sup>, Emiliana Mariyah<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Sudibia<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>Postgraduate Program, Udayana University </span><span class="font0">2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University <sup>3</sup>Faculty of Economics, Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Sidewalk traders, as informal economic sector, have been in existence in almost all the cities in Indonesia. As an impact of migration of people, they have been recognized as a structural phenomenon which will always exist. They will always exist in Denpasar City. In West Denpasar Sub District, as part of Denpasar City, their existence has been assumed not only to cause the city to look disorganized but it has also been assumed to create discomfort and to disturb public order. However, as Indonesian citizens, they have the right to have occupation and live properly as stated in Article 27 of the 1945 Constitution. The empowerment management of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District refers to the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font1">) of number 3 of Year 2000. However, the fact in the field shows that what has been expected has not been properly coming true yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on this fact, a research was conducted with the problems formulated as follows: 1) how the government managed the empowerment of the sidewalk traders; 2) what responses were given by the community to the model of such a management of empowerment; 3) and what were its effects and meanings. As a consequence, this research aims at 1) identifying the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders; 2) identifying the responses given by the community to the model of such a management of empowerment; 3) identifying its effects and meanings. From the aspect of methodology, this research is classified as a qualitative one. The theory of deconstruction, the theory of hegemony, the theory of response, the theory of motivation and achievement were employed for exploring the problems formulated above. The techniques employed for collecting the data needed were the technique of observation, the technique of interview, the technique of observation and focus discussion group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The findings show that the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font1">) of Number 3 of 2000, which is derived from the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font1">) of Number 15 of Year 1993, which is used as the reference of how such a management of empowerment is conducted, does not accommodate the problems related to the sidewalk traders. In fact, it has been implemented by the government in the following three ways; (1) through the sub district governmental agencies; (2) through direct supervision of the municipal, sub district, administrative village and neighborhood governmental agencies; (3) through traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman/adat</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The responses given by the community varied. The responses given by the community of consumers were negative resulting from lack of socialization. The responses given by the sidewalk traders were negative as well. However, socially, economically and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">politically, the empowerment management of the sidewalk traders gave positive and negative impacts. And the meanings given by such a management of empowerment were related to solidarity, well being and psychology. Based on the findings of the research, a model of management of empowerment through the cooperation among the government, private parties and the sidewalk traders was recommended.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: Sidewalk traders, Model of empowerment, Informal sector, Management</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Economically, politically and socio culturally, the development in every sector of life conducted by the government has resulted in many changes. However, the changes resulting from such a development may lead to progress as well as decline. The decline, in this case, can be illustrated by the economic recession, crisis and the uncontrollable rate of inflation both nationally and regionally. The economic changes may change the pattern of life of the community both in rural and urban areas. The progress achieved in urban areas resulting from both the industrial development and educational improvement has made the cities interesting. This has inspired people to migrate from the rural areas where they live to urban areas which may belong to different regencies and provinces. In addition, the regional development in economy, transportation, and communication has also contributed to the volume and direction of the migration (Pariartha, 1982: 2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sidewalk traders are basically the migrants coming from rural areas with low expertise and education, making them not have the access to the formal sectors of life. They usually run their businesses with small capital. Therefore, they can be classified as the people with low income. They usually live in slum areas or in the suburbs, where it is possible for them to find cheap boarding houses. They live in very small and simple houses where they can “have break and sleep”. Their low income has also motivated them to minimize their expenditures, just for food and clothing. The attempt made to renovate their shelter reflects that they have very limited capital (Andre et.al. 1979: 48). Such a condition shows that the sidewalk traders are a group of less powerful people in every aspect of life especially economically; therefore, they need to be empowered.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sidewalk traders, as part of the economic informal sector, have been in existence in all the Indonesian cities in general, including in Denpasar City and West Denpasar Sub District in particular. As the main impact of the migration of people, they are recognized as a structural phenomenon which will always exist. On one side, their existence in West Denpasar Sub District, Denpasar City, has been considered not only to cause the city to look disorganized but has also been considered to be responsible for discomfort and to disturb public order. On the other side, they are human beings who have the right to have occupation and to live properly as stated in the 1945 Constitution. Trading is one of the activities they can do for a living. Actually, they have been made to exist by the system of the societal activities which has been in existence since a very long time ago. The community members have been accustomed to buying things made available by the sidewalk traders. They have been forced or have not been forced to live in the situation in which economy is not stable, even though they have been playing an important role in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">fulfilling what is needed by the consumers from all the layers of the community. Therefore, if their existence is well managed with proper management of empowerment, it is by all means that their lives will be better and that they will contribute to the original regional earnings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District has been actually performed with reference to the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font1">) of Number 3 of Year 2000. However, the fact in the field shows that what has been achieved has been far from being adequate. It is based on this fact that a research was conducted with the problems formulated as follows: (1) how the management of empowerment had already been and was being performed by the government of West Denpasar Sub District?; (2) what responses were given by the community to the model of the management of empowerment performed by the government?; (3) what impacts and meanings were given by the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District? This study aims at identifying the model of the management of empowerment performed by the government, identifying the responses given by the community to such a model of the management of empowerment and at identifying the impacts and meanings given by the model applied. The theory of postmodern, the theory of deconstruction, the theory of hegemony, the theory of responses and the theory of motivation and achievement were employed to answer the above mentioned problems. From the methodological aspect, the research is classified as a qualitative one. The technique of observation, the technique of interview, the technique of documentation and focus group discussion were employed to obtain the data needed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The findings show that the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District does not have any particular model yet. The implementation in the field refers to the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perda)</span><span class="font1"> of Number 3 of Year 2000, which is modified from the Local Rules and Regulations of Number 15 of Year 1993. The Local Rules and Regulations of Number 3 of Year 2000 does not accommodate the interests of the government, the sidewalk traders and of the consumers as those who consume what is prepared by the sidewalk traders. This means that the governmental hegemony has taken place over the sidewalk traders.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If viewed from the theory of motivation of needs, the objective of what they do is to fulfill their primary needs such as food, clothing, shelter and education. In other words,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">what they do is to fulfill their physical needs. On the other hand, the governmental agencies under the government of West Denpasar Sub District perform their responsibilities based on the applicable rules and regulations. They work for the sake of achievement, position and promotion. What they want to achieve is work achievement, prestige, and promotion or power. Such differences in motivation have led to different justifications and blaming each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District have struggled so hard that they can survive even in a very critical condition. Based on the leadership characteristics, they may be classified as hard and highly-motivated workers. As a result, the leadership approach applied should be the participative leadership. It is in accordance with the postmodern theory, in which the leader should coordinate with those he/she lead, thereby those who are led feel that they are protected. They feel that what the leader does is for them. They have a sense of belonging and will be responsible for the success of the programs already formulated. It is this which has not been performed in West Denpasar, Denpasar City yet. The reason is that the applicable local rules and regulations have given authority to the traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman, desa adat</span><span class="font1">) and administrative villages to organize the sidewalk traders (Article 32 A of the Local Rules Regulations of Number 3 of Year 2000, clause (1)).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is necessary to deconstruct the Local Rules and Regulations of Number 3 of Year 2000 for the reason that they have not accommodated all the interests. They have not referred to the higher rules and regulations either such as the 1945 Constitution, the Rules and Regulations of Number 39 of Year 1999 concerning human rights, and the Rules and Regulations of Number 9 of Year 1995 concerning small businesses. Their rights, as citizens, have been neglected and forgotten. It is clear that their rights have been included in the 1945 Constitution, the Rules and Regulations of Number 39 of Year 1999 and the Rules and Regulations of Number 09 of Year 1995.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The model of the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders has been performed by the government through three ways such as: 1) the way in which the governmental agencies are indirectly involved; what is meant is that the governmental agencies are hierarchically involved, in which the governmental agencies in the levels of sub district, administrative villages and neighborhoods are the main doers; (2) the way in which the municipal and sub district governmental agencies are directly involved in supervising the sidewalk traders, especially those who sell their merchandise along the main streets such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Diponogoro</span><span class="font1"> Street, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teuku Umar</span><span class="font1"> Street, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mahendradata</span><span class="font1"> Street, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Agung</span><span class="font1"> Street and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Imam Bonjol</span><span class="font1"> Street; (3) the way in which how to manage the sidewalk traders is the responsibility of the traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa pakraman/adat</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the managerial aspect point of view, how the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar are empowered does not have any particular management yet as the reference. It still refers to the governmental management, leading to an ambiguity between the governmental management and the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders. The management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District has not been sufficiently performed both vertically and horizontally (secondarily), which has been responsible for different interpretations among the related components. Furthermore, there has been less coordination among them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The government, in this case, the government of West Denpasar Sub District, through its administrative villages, Community Empowerment Institutions (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lembaga Pemberdayaan Masyarakat)</span><span class="font1"> and traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman/adat</span><span class="font1">) has performed the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders institutionally; however, in its implementation, an overlap has been found among the institutions. Having different references, this can be understood. Such an overlap would not occur if there were good coordination among the institutions. It is recognized that so far, on one side, the coordination has not been so good; on the other side, urgent actions need to be taken; otherwise, the existence of the sidewalk traders will be getting more problematic as a result of a higher current of migration. The rapid development of Denpasar City has made it more interesting, which, then, has been responsible for the higher current of migration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sidewalk traders and consumers have not given any response to the management of empowerment. The reason is that it has not been sufficiently socialized yet or the extent to which it has been socialized has not fully achieved the target. The sidewalk traders and consumers have been made not responsive and have not been able to perform their activities as they like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The uncertainty of the management of empowerment performed by the government has affected the societal social life such as in the forms of slum areas, disorganization, environmental problems, street kids and crimes. Economically, it has been responsible for the higher competition among the sidewalk traders. The reason is that more and more are coming. Furthermore, it is predicted that there are formal entrepreneurs who package their businesses through sidewalk traders. In addition, politically, the management of empowerment performed by the government and the traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pekraman/adat</span><span class="font1">) refers to their own justifications. Moreover, there are some indicators that the sidewalk traders are protected by particular groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The actions taken by the governmental agencies in carrying out their responsibilities has resulted in solidarity among the sidewalk traders and between them and the consumers. The sidewalk traders have been satisfied with what they earn which has been better than what they earned when they lived where they originally come from. This is what is meant by well being. Psychologically, such a better well being has improved their prestige and trust in themselves.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Closing</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on what has been described above, as far as the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District is concerned, four findings can be found. The first finding is that the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders in West Denpasar Sub District does not have any distinct form yet. The reason is that the Local Rules and Regulations of Number 3 of Year 2000 do not accommodate all the related interests. It turns out that, as the second finding, the model of the management of empowerment has been performed in three ways. The first is through the administrative villages, the second is directly performed and the third is through the traditional villages (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman/adat</span><span class="font1">). However, such a model has not been completed with planning, organization, staffing, and proper direction and supervision. The third finding is that the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders is negatively responded by the sidewalk traders themselves and the consumers. The fourth finding is that the failure of the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders has social, economic and political effects and has the meanings of solidarity, well being and psychology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the above mentioned findings, a model of the management of empowerment of the sidewalk traders through coordination among themselves, strong entrepreneurs (private) and the government is recommended. The sidewalk traders are organized based their own business areas with a simple organization, in which the leaders are taken from themselves. The government is only the mediator in the formation of such an organization, while the initiatives are from the traders themselves. The assistance in the form of capital may be provided by private organizations (strong entrepreneurs and the government-owned companies) or the government itself through cooperatives and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">organizations of the traders. The government may impose retributions on the traders in accordance with the policy implemented.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The writer would like to thank the Rector of Udayana University, Prof. Dr. dr. I Made Bakta, Sp.P.D. (K.) for the facilities and opportunity provided to attend the doctorate program at Udayana University. The writer would also like to highly appreciate the Director of the Postgraduate Program of Udayana University, Prof. Dr. Ir. Dewa Ngurah Suprapta, M.Sc. for the opportunity provided to be a student at the Doctorate Program of Udayana University. The writer would also like to extend his high appreciation to Head of the Doctorate Program of Cultural Studies of the Postgraduate Program of Udayana University, Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U., as the Promoter as well, for all the guidance, supervision and motivation provided so that this dissertation can be completed as expected. Many thanks also go to Prof. Dr. Emiliana Mariyah, M.S., and Prof. Dr. I Ketut Sudibia, S.E.,S.U., as Co-promoter I and Co-promoter II, for their real supervision so that this dissertation can be completed.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Anonymous, 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang Dasar Negara Republik Indonesia Tahun 1945</span><span class="font1"> dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang No.24 Tahun 2003. Jakarta: Mahkamah Konstitusi Republik Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar Dalam Angka</span><span class="font1">. Bappeda, Badan Pusat Statistik (BPS) Kota Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">--------------, 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Himpunan Beberapa Peraturan Daerah Kota Denpasar.</span><span class="font1"> Dinas Trantib dan Satpol. PP Kota Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Agus Nuryanto, M. 2003. ”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Kritis dan Pengaruhnya Terhadap Aliran Pendidikan Kritis”</span><span class="font1">. Dalam Wanana. Jurnal Ilmu Sosial Transformatif, Edisi 15 Tahun IV. Yogyakarta: Insist Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Andre T.D. Pantouw dkk., 1979. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kehidupan Sosial Pedagang Kaki Lima Yang Belum Dilokalisasi Dihubungkan dengan Tata Keindahan Kota dan Ketertiban di Kota Madya Bandung</span><span class="font1">. Universitas Katolik Parahyangan, Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Astawa, I Nengah Dasi. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pemberdayaan Ekonomi Kerakyatan di Kabupaten Jembrana, Propinsi Bali. Perspeketif Kajian Budaya</span><span class="font1">. Desertasi S3 Kajian Budaya UNUD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bappeda Kota Denpasar, BPS Kota Denpasar. 2007. ”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kecamatan Denpasar Barat Dalam Angka”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktik</span><span class="font1"> (terjemahan). Yogyakarta, PT. Bentang Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Best, Steven and Kellner Douglas. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Postmodern Theory; Critical Interrogations</span><span class="font1">. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Boskoff, Alvin. 1964. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Recent Theories of Social Change</span><span class="font1">”. Dalam </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Werner J. Cahnman dan Alvin Boskoff, Sociology and History</span><span class="font1">: Theory of Research. London: The Free Press of Glencoe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dalle Daniel Sulekale. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Miskin di Era Otonomi Daerah</span><span class="font1">: </span><a href="http://www.ekonomirakyat.org"><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.ekonomirakyat.org</span></a><span class="font1">. 18-06-2004.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dharmayanti,Diah. 2006. ”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis &nbsp;Sensitifitas Respon Konsumen Terhadap</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ekstensifikasi Merek (Brand Extension) Pada Margarine Merek Filma di Surabaya”.</span><span class="font1"> Jurnal Managemen Pemasaran, Vol. 1, No. 2, Oktover 2006: halm. 65-73.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keller, Douglas.2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sosial Radikal</span><span class="font1"> (terjemahan). Jakarta: Syarikat Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mariyah, Emiliana. 2006.”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Budaya,, Local Genius dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat</span><span class="font1">”. Seminar Nasional S2/S3 Kajian Budaya Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moleong, L.J.. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Remaja Rosydakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mubyarto, 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pemberdayaan Ekonomi Rakyat dan Peranan Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Najib Ufi. 2006. ”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Aplikasi Teori Postmodernisme Terhadap Aspek Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (Community Empowerment) Daerah Tujuan Wisata</span><span class="font1">”. Pustaka (Jurnal Ilmu-Ilmu Budaya). Vol. VI, No. 11.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Norris, Christopher. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Membongkar Teori Dekonstruksi Jacques Derrida</span><span class="font1">. Yorgyakarta: Art-Ruzz.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pariartha, I Wayan Wana. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Permodalan, Jam Kerja dan Pendapatan Pedagang Kakilima di Pasar Kereneng, Kotamadya Denpasar</span><span class="font1">. Tesis S2, Program Studi Kependudukan, Jurusan Antar Bidang UGM, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2005. Cultural Studies and Postmodernism: Isyu, Teori dan Metode. Makalah disampaikan dalam seminar pada Program Magister dan Doktor Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana, 12 Juli 2005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Cultural Studies, Representasi Fiksi dan Fakta</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suastika, I Made. 2003. ”</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kajian Budaya dan Paradigma Yang Dikembangkan</span><span class="font1">”. Dalam Pemahaman Budaya di Tengah Perubahan. Denpasar: Program S2 dan S3 Kajian Budaya UNUD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winardi, J. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Motivasi dan Pemotivasian dalam Manajemen</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>