---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF WILIAM WORDSWORTH’S POEM ENTITLED ODE TO DUTY"
author: "Ni Ketut Yani Pratiwi Maryana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF WILIAM WORDSWORTH’S POEM ENTITLED ODE TO DUTY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Ketut Yani Pratiwi Maryana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty merupakan salah satu puisi yang paling memiliki nilai moral tinggi dalam kesusastraan Inggris. Penyairnya menulis puisi ini ketika dalam keadaan tekanan batin yang amat sangat dan jiwanya dalam titik terendah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ketika kekuatan fisik dan percaya diri sebagai seorang muda mulai pudar, Wordsworth mencoba mengembalikan kayakinan moralnya dalam puisi yang ditulisnya ini. Penggunaan pendekatan intrinsik dan ekstrinsik, begitu juga pengalaman hidup penyair memiliki hubungan yang dekat dengan analisis pandangan moral Wordsworth dalam Ode to Duty yang merupakan konsep makna kata dalam puisi dan pengertian bahasa kiasannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ada dua teori yang diaplikasikan dalam penulisan ini. Yang pertama teori dari Knickerbocker yang menyatakan sebagai langkah pertama dalam mengerti suatu puisi, sangat membantu untuk membuat paraphrase yang mengandung makna sederhana. Setiap makna dari masing-masing bagian puisi membantu menentukan arti dari keseluruhan puisi, dan selanjutnya seluruh puisi membantu menentukan dari masin-masing bagian. Dan teori yang ke dua adalah teori dari Wellek tentang teori pendekatan biografi dalam hal imi adalah analisis intrinsic, untuk mendapatkan hubungan antara kehidupan nyata dari penyair dan isi syair yang diceritakan dalam puisinya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty menyatakan perhatian Wordsworth pada nilai-nilai moral dan ketaatannya pada kewajiban, kejujuran dan ketulusan. Kewajiban menurutnya adalah pemberian hukum yang keras yang mengatur perbuatan manusia. Wordsworth dengan jelas memerintahkan dirinya untuk mengatur kewajiban karena dalam kehidupan manusia, mereka tidak bisa berbuat lebih baik, Wordsworth menyesal bahwa walaupun keyakinannya ada pada dirinya tetapi tidak ada tempat bagi kewajiban, padahal cinta dan kesukaan bisa menuntun manusia untuk segala kebaikan dan dalam pengharapan Wordsworth, hari yang lebih baik akan tiba ketika cinta dan kesukaan akan berkuasa mutlak dan kewajiban dapat dilepaskan. Akhirnya Wordsworth menyatakan reaksi dirinya melawan aspirasi Romantisme setelah terjadi kebebasan yang tidak terbatas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">duty, law, moral.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This poem reveals Wordsworth’s great concern with moral values and devotion to duty, integrity and uprightness. Duty according to him is the stern lawgiver who moulds and controls human actions. It is in fact the ‘Voice of God’ and the ‘Light of Truth’. It is the name that anyone would love to be a guiding light, a correction rod to rectify the errors and to reprove. It is the victory and law which overcomes empty terrors that are overawe. Indeed, ‘Duty’- the stern voice of God sets us all free from all the vain temptations and calms the weary strife of frail humanity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are those who feel that they do not need the eyes of God watching over them, but who depend absolutely on love and truth and commit no misgivings in life. They solely rely on the genial sense of youth, their glad hearts without reproach or blot, who do their duty with gladness and without complain. Yet even if they fail with misplaced confidence, the dreadful power of Duty’s saving arms cast around them and they are given one more chance to restart everything.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Their days would be serene and bright and their nature would be happy when love becomes an unerring light and joy its own security. Even now they may hold a blissful course and though they are not unwisely bold, they live in the spirit of this creed. According to their need, they seek firm support from the same spirit of creed to perform their utmost duty to the best of their ability. The narrator loves the untried freedom which is not yielding to any wayward impulse or temptation, yet at the same time he should be a guide to himself especially when he has reposed his trust too blindly. Quite often, when he hears Duty’s timely mandate in his heart, he deferred the task in smoother walks to stray, but now if he may, he would serve his duty in a more strictly manner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Finally it can be said that although a little strained in the language, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1"> in its own way to a dignified poem. This poem marks a reaction against Romantic aspirations after unlimited freedom. In a cold stern hand is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">laid upon the claims of passion and the individual. Here, the conservative of Wordsworth, the church leaders and the state, which sprinkled the humblest events</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">with ideal and ethical notions, are found. Wordsworth then distinctly reigns himself to the control of duty because, at his time of life, a man can do no better. He regrets that even his faith has been with him, duty has no place, the belief that joy and love can guide man to all good, in Wordsworth’s hope that better days may come, when joy and love reigning supreme, duty can be dispensed with.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1">, there are two problems which need to be discussed; they are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the message in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1"> that the poet intended to deliver to readers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does Wordsworth’s biography help the readers to understand the poem?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study is intended to fulfil three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to poetry in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out the critical estimate of the poem and what message the poet wants to convey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department to write a scientific work which gives contribution to this department, so this writing can be used as reference to help the student who takes the same topics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of Collecting and Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method that is used in collecting the data in this study is observation method. In this study observation was done by observing the data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">source. In observing the data source, the poem is read repeatedly and carefully to be able to find the ideas used in the poem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the poem is related to the theoretical basis in order to be able to find message conveyed in the poem and to determine their meanings through an interpretation. The analysis of the data is presented descriptively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter discusses about the biographical approach to the study of literature, which in principle tries to find the interrelation between the life of the author and his works. The concepts which are related to the features of literature and biography of the author are also presented in this chapter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The most obvious cause of a work of art is its creator, the author; and hence an explanation in terms of the personality and the life of the poet has been the best established methods of literary study because the biography itself explains and illuminates the actual production of poetry which directly advocates the intrinsic interest of biography and shifts the centre of attention to human personality. Biographical interest can even provide materials for a science, especially which is connected with the psychology of artistic creation (Warren and Wellek, 1962: 75).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the personal element in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1">, Wordsworth’s poem is obviously a landmark in the history of his mind. Here he repudiates the unchartered freedom and welcomes the guidance of the Stern Lawgiver Duty. The poem takes an autobiographical tone and Wordsworth becomes confessional. He admits that he was inexperienced and was unaware of the perils of trusting his own impulses blindly. Of course, he was not swept away by the winds of passion, yet he opted out to be his own guide committing his</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">faith blindly on his own natural impulses. He has been leading a life of selfindulgence. He had often heard the call of Duty in his heart but on all those occasions, he deferred the carrying out of her summons. He had to turn his back on his life of self-indulgence to listen to the voice of Duty and he did not like to turn</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">away. However, from now on Wordsworth will be different and he will serve Duty rigorously and subjugate himself to her stringent discipline.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wordsworth humbly implores Duty to subject him to her exacting discipline and to wield her absolute control over him. And then, Wordsworth brings out the reason for his subjugation to the power of Duty. It is not any disturbance or conflict in the mind that makes him seek the guidance of Duty. Nor is it any feeling of guilt or penitence for anything awful he could have done that makes him turn to her authority. On the other hand, he turns to Duty with a calm and peaceful mind and the decision is not an impulsive one. Actually, unrepressed freedom has lost its allure for him. Casual longings tempt his soul to restlessness and oppress him. He realises that he has been shifting the objects of his pursuit rather too regularly. He now hankers for a lifelong peace, one which will never change.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Duty is a strict and severe lawgiver. Yet Wordsworth perceives beauty coexistent with her sternness. Duty is embellished with the same grace as there is on God’s face. There is nothing on earth like to her beauteous and graceful smile. Flowers laugh when they see her beautiful face. The touch of her feet makes the ground she walks on fragrant. Stars get their fixedness from her, who keeps them in their places. The heavens, though ancient, remain fresh and strong, thanks to the sway of Duty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wordsworth then calls for Duty, the Awe-inspiring Power, to do a much humbler function. The governor of the stars may please regulate his life too. He puts himself under Duty’s complete guidance. From this moment onwards he will seek her control and guidance. He desires his weakness to have an end and entreats Duty to help him. As he has grown wise through humility, he prays to Duty to infuse in him the spirit of self-sacrifices so that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">he may give up without regret the pleasure of the smoother ways. Let Duty give him the confidence that comes from following reason rather than his own impulses. He wishes to live the rest of his life as the slave of Duty, always finding himself in the light of truth</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ode to Duty</span><span class="font1"> reveals Wordsworth’s great concern with moral values and devotion to duty, integrity and uprightness. Duty according to him is the stern lawgiver who controls human actions</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wordsworth then distinctly reigns himself to the control of duty because, at his time of life, a man can do no better. He regrets that even his faith has been with him, duty has no place, the belief that joy and love can guide man to all good, in Wordsworth’s hope that better days may come, when joy and love reign the world and are in human’s mind.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Abrams, M.H. 1971. A Glossary of Literary Terms. Third Edition. New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Aryawan, Kadek. 2010, Figurative Expression on Song Lyrics of MXPX Band Album. Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Di Yanni, Robert. 1994. Literature Reading Fiction, Poetry, Drama, and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Essay. Pleasant Ville: Pace University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1977. Encyclopedia Americana. Volume 4. International Edition. New York: American Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2005. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary. New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jones, Edward.H. 1968. Outlines of Literature. New York: The Mac Millan Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. How to Analyze Fiction. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Willard H. Reninger. 1963. Interpreting Literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">USA: Holt Renehart and Wilson Inc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McArthur,Tom.1998.FigurativeLanguage,</span><a href="http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1"><span class="font1">http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">O29 -FIGURATIVELANGUAGE.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner, Kathleen and Rausch, Ralph. 1998. NTC’s Dictionary of Literary. USA :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NTC Publishing group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan, Prof. Dr. M. Pd. 2005. Teori Pengkajian Sastra. Yogya:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Smith, Sybille. 1985. Inside Poetry. Pitman Publishing Ltd : London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith A. 2006. Responding to Literature. New York : McGraw-Hill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">kada, Made. 1987.Beberapa Aspek tentang Sastra. Denpasar. Penerbit</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kayumas &amp;&nbsp;Yayasan Ilmu dan Seni Lesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austen Warren. 1963. Theory of Literature. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wesley. 2003. Writing Poetry: “What Makes a Poem a Poem?”. published in Journal of Contemporary Liberian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winatha, Wayan. 2009. “Comparative Study on Poems between After a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Journey” by Thomas Hardy and Annabel Lee by Adgar Allan Poe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar: Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>