---
layout: full_article
title: "CULTURAL TERMS IN THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA AND THEIR TRANSLATIONS IN LELAKI TUA DAN LAUT"
author: "I Putu Eko Suputra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CULTURAL TERMS IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> AND THEIR TRANSLATIONS IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">LELAKI TUA DAN LAUT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I PUTU EKO SUPUTRA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ini berjudul “Cultural Terms In The Old Man and The Sea and Their Translation In Lelaki Tua dan Laut”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menggambarkan dan menjelaskan istilah-istilah Budaya yang ditemukan dalam The Old Man And The Sea.Sumber data dalam tulisan ini diambil dari novel berjudul The Old Man And The Sea yang ditulis oleh Ernest Hemingway, pada tahun 1951 di Kuba dan diterbitkan pada tahun 1952 dan versi Indonesia Lelaki Tua Dan Laut diterjemahkan oleh Yuni Kristianingsih Pramudhaningrat. Data tersebut dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metodedokumentasi.Data ini diklasifikasikan menggunakan jenis Istilah Budaya yang dikemukakan oleh Newmark (1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan hasil penelitian ini, ada lima jenis Istilah Budaya yang dikemukakan oleh Newmark (1988) yang ditemukan dalam novel The Old Man And The Sea, mereka adalah: Ekologi (flora, fauna, bukit, angin, dataran); budaya materi (makanan, pakaian, rumah, dan kota-kota, transportasi), budaya sosial (kerja dan liburan), organisasi Bea Cukai, Kegiatan, Prosedur, Konsep (Politik dan administrasi, agama, seni), gerak tubuh dan kebiasaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: penerjemahan, Ekologi, istilahbudaya</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Translation consists of changing one state or form to another, to turn into one’s own or another’s language (The Merriam-Webster Dictionary 1974). Translation is basically change of form. When we speak of the form of a language, we are referring to the actual words, phrases, clauses, sentences etc. In translations the form of the source language is replaced by the form of the target language. Translation consists of transferring the meaning of the source language into the target language. This is done by going from the form of the first language to the form of a second language by way of semantic structure. It is meaning which is being transferred and must be held constant. Only the form changes. The form from which the translation is made is called the source language and the form into which it is to be changed is called target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">First important issue in translation is Cultural terms. The definition of &quot;culture&quot; as given in the Concise Oxford Dictionary varies from descriptions of the &quot;Arts&quot; to plant and bacteria cultivation and includes a wide range of intermediary aspects. Cultural knowledge and cultural differences have been a major focus of translator training and translation theory for as long as has been in existence. More specifically concerned with language and translation, Newmark defines culture as &quot;the way of life and its manifestations that are peculiar to a community that uses a particular language as its means of expression&quot; (1988:94), thus acknowledging that each language group has its own culturally specific features.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The using of translation technique is unavoidable in any kind of translation. Whatever the languages must have used it in the process of translating. Therefore, it is assumed that some translation techniques are implemented by the translator in transferring the message of the Source Language (SL) into the Target Language (TL).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">What types of cultural termsare found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Old Man and The Sea</span><span class="font1">?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on background and problem mentioned above, the objectives of this writingcan be determined as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To describe and explain cultural terms found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Old Man and The Sea</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research was done by library research which analyzes the data source (novel) by reading, finding the types of Cultural terms, analyzing those data and presenting the analysis by wording.Some theories were used as guidance in analyzing the data found in the translated book</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study used primary data taken from the novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Old Man and The Sea</span><span class="font1"> written by </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Ernest Hemingway</span><span class="font1">, in 1951 in </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Cuba</span><span class="font1"> and published in 1952 and its Indonesian version </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lelaki Tua dan Laut</span><span class="font1">translated by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">YuniKristianingsihPramudhaningrat. This novel provides the material that was analyzed because this novel is old series and absolutely contains cultural elements that are different from our culture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method applied in this study was documentation method.The first stage, the whole novel was read and the words or phrases indicating Cultural Terms were found. After reading the novels, the Cultural Terms words or phrases were listed either in English or Indonesian. After that, those words or phrases were compared in order to find the translation equivalence.The second stages are identification.In the identification step, not only the words or phrase that identified, but also the whole sentence in which the Cultural term occur because Cultural term used cannot be separated from the text for their interpretation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The third, it is followed by taking note down of the important things or the data, in this term, Cultural terms were found within the novel and then classifying them based on their types related to the theory used. The theories that were used are theory of Cultural Terms that state by Newmark (1988).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data analyzed qualitatively using the qualitative method. Cultural terms werefound in the novelCategorizedbased on types of Cultural term proposed by Newmark (1988). For this study, the narrative text method of data presenting was mainly used because the research problems in this study need a kind of description in the analysis rather than being presented in the form of statistics or graphics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">5.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Cultural Terms in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Old Man And The Sea</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> And Their Translations in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">LelakiTua Dan Laut</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Cultural Terms</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark (1988) categorized cultural words into Ecology (flora, fauna, hills, winds, plains); material Culture (food, clothes, houses and towns, transport);</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">social Culture (work and leisure); organizations Customs, Activities, Procedures, Concepts (Political and administrative, religious, artistic); gestures and habits.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ecology </span><span class="font1">(flora, fauna, hills, winds, plains)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Geographical features can be normally distinguished from other cultural terms in that they are usually value-free, politically and commercially.Their diffusion depends on the importance of their country of origin as well as their degree of specifity. Thus ‘plateau’ is not perceived as a cultural word, and has long been adopted in Russian, German and English, but translated in Spanish and usually Italian (mesa, eltipiano). Many countries have ‘local’ words. Their familiarity is a function of the importance and geographical or political proximity of their countries. The same criteria apply to other ecological features, unless they are important commercially.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SOURCE LANGUAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TARGET LANGUAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">The shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm which are called </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">guano </span><span class="font1">(11)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Gubukituterbuatdariserattanamanpalem raja yang kuatdan di tempatitudinamai</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">guana</span><span class="font1">(15)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">guano</span><span class="font1">on the SL sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm which are called </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">guano</span><span class="font1"> which is translated into TL become </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gubukituterbuatdariserattanamanpalem raja yang kuatdan di tempatitudinamai</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">guana</span><span class="font1"> comes from Spanish language and used by the local people or exactly by the local fisherman to call the royal palm that grow stronger because of the feces of sea birds which become compost for them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Material Culture </span><span class="font1">(food, clothes, houses and towns, transport)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">&quot;Food is for many the most sensitive and important expression of national culture; food terms are subject to the widest variety of translation procedures&quot; (Newmark, 1988:97). The terms coming under this category are further complicated due to the &quot;foreign&quot; elements present.Another example of material culture includes an eponym, namely bouteilles de SidiBrahim. In France this low-quality, Algerian wine is widely known and is the traditional drink with North African dishes, therefore widely sold in supermarkets as</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">well as this type of small shop. This example can be seen as corresponding to the new ideal reader as described by Coulthard, having different cultural knowledge (Coulthard, 1992:12) as an English-speaking reader would not necessarily know the name of this wine and even less its associations. By using strictly formal equivalence, all meaning would be lost. It would however be possible to neutralise the original term SidiBrahim by translating as &quot;wine&quot; or else to introduce a form of componential analysis, translating as &quot;cheap, Algerian wine. &quot;&nbsp;SidiBrahim being the area where the wine is produced, it seems appropriate to keep the original term in the TT but it is necessary to add a qualifier, here &quot;wine.&quot;</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SOURCE LANGUAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TARGET LANGUAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">They fed the negro </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">rum </span><span class="font1">and lighted cigarettes for him. (61)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Merekamemberi negro itu</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rum </span><span class="font1">danmenyalakanrokokuntuknya. (76)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The Noun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘Rum’</span><span class="font1"> in the SL sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">They fed the negro </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rum </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and lighted cigarettes for him.</span><span class="font1">which is translated into TL become </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Merekamemberi negro itu</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rum </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">danmenyalakanrokokuntuknya</span><span class="font1"> is a kind of alcoholic beverage made by a process of fermentation and distilation from sugarcane juice which is a side product of Sugar Factory at Cuba. There are many different types of rum that exist in the world, ranging from the clear kind rum which is usually as a cocktail mixing, the golden brown or dark coloured rum that usually used for cooking, made a cake or it could be used for cocktail mixing like the clear one. Only high quality rum that could be directly drunk without any mixed process and just put the ice cubes in it. In the western culture, rum plays an important role, because it is usually called as a pirates drink so that very identic to the fisherman who most of their life they spent on the sea when they go out for fishing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Culture </span><span class="font1">(work and leisure)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In considering social culture one has to distinguish between denotative and connotative problems of translation. There is rarely translation problems, since the words can be transferred, have approximate one-to-one translation or can be functionally defined; ‘pork-butcher’, ‘hardware’, ‘cake’ or ‘hat’. As</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">a translation problem, this contrast with the connotative difficulties of word like: ‘the people’; the common people’. The obvious cultural words that denote leisure activities in Europe are the national games with their lexical sets: cricket, bull-fighting, boule. To these must be added the largely English non-team games: tennis, snooker and a large number of card games and their lexical sets being French in casinos.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SOURCE LANGUAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TARGET LANGUAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">‘There is very much </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">slave work </span><span class="font1">to be done now that the fight is over.’ (85)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“Masihbanyak</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kerjaberat</span><span class="font1">yang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">harusdilakukanwalaupertarungantelahusai.” (105)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The verb phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">slave work</span><span class="font1">in the sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘There is very much </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">slave work </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">to be done now that the fight is over.’</span><span class="font1">Which is translated directly into TL becoming </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Masihbanyak</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kerjaberat</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">yang harusdilakukanwalaupertarungantelahusai.”</span><span class="font1"> In Cuba, people who were categorized as a bottom bracket usually identic with this </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">slave work</span><span class="font1">, because they should fulfill their lives by working hard,whatever their job are, like the local fisherman.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Religious Terms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In religious language, the proselytizing activities of Christianity, particularly the Catholic Church and the Baptists, are reflected in manifold translation (Saint-Siege, PapstlicherStuhl). The language of the other world religions tends to be transferred when it becomes of TL interest, the commonest words being natural-ised (‘Pharisees’).</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SOURCE LANGUAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TARGET LANGUAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">There was a picture in colour of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the Sacred Heart of Jesus </span><span class="font1">(11)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Terdapatgambar</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hati Kudus Jesus </span><span class="font1">(15)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The noun phrase in the sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">There was a picture in colour of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">the Sacred Heart of Jesus</span><span class="font1">which is translated into TL becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terdapatgambar</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hati Kudus Jesus</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Sacred Heart of Jesus</span><span class="font1"> for the Christian especially the Catholic Christian faiths, is a symbol of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">omnipotence of God and God’s love for mankind. Usually, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the Sacred Heat of Jesus</span><span class="font1"> isdescribed as a burning heart shining with bright lights which is believed that light is come from gods light that gaped by stab wounds, surrounded by a crown of thorns, and blood filled by Christian art.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sometimes, that picture placed in front of the body of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jesus</span><span class="font1"> picture with injured hand refers to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Sacred Heart</span><span class="font1">. The Christians especially Catholics likens the wounds and crown of thorns, as a metaphor of what happens when the suffering situation of Jesus to his death, while the fire is symbolized by the Christians as the power of changes by love, the power of God almighty.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gestures and habits</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There is a distinction between description and function which can be made where necessary in ambiguous cases: thus, if people smile a little when someone dies, do a slow hand-clap to express warm appreciation, spit as a blessing, nod to dissent or shake their head to assent, kiss their finger tips to greet or to praise, give a thumbs-up to signal OK, all of which occur in some cultures and not in others.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SOURCE LANGUAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TARGET LANGUAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Bad luck to your mother. </span><span class="font1">(91)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Terkutuklahibumu</span><span class="font1">. (111)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The adjective phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">‘Bad luck to your mother’</span><span class="font1"> that translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Terkutuklahibumu</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.”</span><span class="font1">. The habit of swearing in this kind is something that common in every country but with his trademark, respectively, in Indonesia would normally insert the word animal in European countries and America are more often use vulgar words or insert the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">'Mother'</span><span class="font1">. In fact rarely even God could inspire them to use swear words at each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the analysis above, it can be concluded that there are 26 times cultural terms appeared from 5 classification from the theory proposed by Newmark (1988), those are </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ecology </span><span class="font1">(flora, fauna, hills, winds, plains) with 12</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">times, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Material Culture </span><span class="font1">(food, clothes, houses and towns, transport) with 5 times, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Social Culture </span><span class="font1">(work and leisure) with 3 times, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Organizations Customs, Activities, Procedures, Concepts </span><span class="font1">(Political and administrative, religious, artistic) with 5 times, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Gestures and habits </span><span class="font1">with 1 times. From the data above, shows that </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ecology </span><span class="font1">(flora, fauna, hills, winds, plains) plays an important role in this novel with 12 number in the application of Cultural terms applied in translating </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Old Man and The Sea</span><span class="font1">into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">LelakiTuadanLaut</span><span class="font1">.It is also because the background story of this novel is the fisherman life that most of their life, they spent on the sea.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ghadi, AlirezaSadeghi. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Translation</span><span class="font1">. LLC: Article Snatch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hemingway, Ernest. 1952. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Old Man and The Sea.</span><span class="font1"> Cuba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">James, Kate. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Implications for Translation</span><span class="font1">. United Kingdom: Birmingham University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-based Translation: A Guide To CrossLanguage Equivalence</span><span class="font1">. United States of America: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation.</span><span class="font1">Oxford: Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pucangan, Nugraha, Aditya, Putu. 2006. “The Lexical Equivalence Of Cultural Terms In Balinese Plays “Bali: Adat</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font1">. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pramudhaningrat, Kristianingsih, Yuni. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">LelakiTuadanLaut.</span><span class="font1">Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suarningsih, Era, Gede, Luh. 2008. “The Analysis of Loss and Gain of Idiomatic Expression in Translation with Reference to Nora Roberts Novel Temtation</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1">”Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinaya, Vidya, Devi, Putu. 2011. “The Translation Equivalence of English Prepositions “of” and “from” in The Novel Eat Pray Love by Elizabeth Gilbert</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1">” Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">8</span></p>