---
layout: full_article
title: "LANGUAGE CONTACT BETWEEN TOURISTS AND TRADERS IN KUTA BEACH"
author: "Vergilius Bage Ola Unagolok"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">LANGUAGE CONTACT BETWEEN TOURISTS AND TRADERS IN KUTA</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BEACH</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vergilius Bage Ola Unagolok</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Extension Program Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrac</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul &quot;&nbsp;Kontak Bahasa antara Turis dan Pedagang di Pantai Kuta &quot;&nbsp;. Alasan mengapa judul ini terpilih karena ada hal yang menarik pada fenomena bahasa yang terjadi secara alami dalam keadaan tertentu. Makalah ini ditulis berdasarkan hasil penelitian yang telah dilakukan di Pantai Kuta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori utama dalam digunakan dalam makalah ini diusulkan oleh Muhlhausler , 1986. Data yang dikumpulkan dari pidgin dianalisis berdasarkan teori oleh Holmes ( 1992) , Muhlhauseler ( 1986) , Spolsky ( 1998) , Wardhaugh ( 1986) . Sementara itu, teori Kreol diusulkan oleh Muhlhauser ( 1986:6 ) . Kode Mixing dan Kode Switching dianalisis menggunakan teori Hymes ( 1974) , dan Bokamba ( 1979) dan campur tangan bahasa dianalisis dengan teori Sutjiati Beratha - (1999 ) . Data dianalisis melalui metode kualitatif , analisis data didasarkan pada kegiatan tersebut, mengamati dan memahami dan menilai data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil didasarkan pada analisis menunjukkan bahwa ada beberapa variasi bahasa terjadi di pantai kuta, Bali. Variasi-variasi itu memunculkan fenomena separti pigin, kreol, campur kode, alih kode, dan campurtangan bahasa. Fenomena ini dipengaruhi latar belakang pendidikan, latar belakang sosial budaya , dan bentuk yang berbeda dari bahasa local. Beberapa fenomena di atas juga didukung oleh faktor internal dan eksternal . Semoga penelitian ini fenomena kontak bahasa menjadi referensi penelitian lain ragam bahasa .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Keanekaragaman bahasa, kontak bahasa</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Language contact happens when two different kinds of language meet at the same time. Selling and offering something to the buyers cause language to have contact in Kuta Beach. The traders have their own way to sell the things to the tourists and the ways that the traders use cause some phenomenon. The phenomenon happens with some basic factors, for example, the educational</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">background of the speaker, the vocabulary, the translation system and carelessness in using English as the main tool to communicate with the buyers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The traders create their conversation using their own terms, expressions, words combined with the local dialect which is not standard English. The frequency of contact between traders and the buyers contributes to the existence of language contact phenomenon. Basically the kinds of phenomenon happen in spoken form of English by picking up some expression from the foreigners.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">What kinds of language phenomenon occur in the language contact between traders and buyers at Kuta Beach?, and What factors are contributing to the language contact phenomenon?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">To know the phenomenon that occurred in language contact between traders and buyers at Kuta Beach, and to identify the factors contributing to the language contact phenomenon.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected through observation. Recording and note taking during the traders’ offering the goods to the foreigners were conducted. The writer used interview as second instrument to collect the data. The researcher also used questionnaire to complete the basic data to obtain information, such as the age of the respondents and the educational background. The data from note taking, interview, and observation were transcribed and presented on the data sheet. The data were analyzed using qualitative method. Qualitative method is a technique of data analysis based on such activities like observing, comprehending and judging the data and their relation with the theories of language contact. The data of the research were transferred first into written text, and then comprehended based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the language contact factors and analysis in order to know the kinds of language structures which exist between the traders and the tourists in Kuta Beach.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Pidgin and Creole as Language Contact Phenomenon</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Pidginized English in positive statement used by the traders in kuta beach. For example “this is morning price” should be improved into “this is my lowest price”. As for the repetition of certain words, in statement, such as, “tomorrowtomorrow come back sir”. The statement “tomorrow-tomorrow come back sir”, was used instead of “I wish that you would come back here later” or “please come back in Kuta Beach next time”. Negative sentences such as; “ no can sir”, “no go there you wait here”, “not forget to come here again”, should be improved into “no can sir” (cannot sir), “no go there you wait here” ( do not go there, please wait for a moment), “not forget to come here again” (do not forget to come here again) In this language contact phenomenon pidginized yes/no questions were found used by traders offering goods to the foreigners. For example, “You alone?” should be (Do you come here by your own self?) Wh- questions were found as one type of sentences is related to the Pidgin English. Wh-questions are formed with the use of one of the following interrogative words (or Q-words), who, whom, whose, what, which, when, where, how, why. The following sentences were used by the traders: “What model you want? Should be What kind of model are you looking for?:” The traders left out the Standard English rule in arranging the interrogative sentences. Alternative Question, In this research, language contact phenomenon was also found in the use of alternative questions by the traders in selling and offering things to the foreigners. Such as “You want this or this?”, this question should be “Which one do you want, this one or the one?”, “You want pocari or fanta?” should be “Which kind of soft drink do you want, pocari or fanta?”</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Code Switching and Code Mixing as Language Contact Phenomenon</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Code is a certain way of using the language system which is used by the speaker in order to communicate (Wardhaugh, 1986:86). The speakers, who came from different social backgrounds, educational backgrounds, and the different experiences, had different levels of mastering of foreign language. The speakers would use certain code of language based on their ability or desire in using certain language, for example,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hello what is your name?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hai my name is john, what is your name?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my name is wayan, what is your job in Australia?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;driver</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;taxi-taxi?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;yes</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tamu dari mana yan?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tamu australi dek.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you want swimming now?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;not yet</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The conversation above involves two speakers from different language backgrounds, first trader (Wayan) with the tourist from Australia. In the way to communicate with the tourists, Wayan used English because the respondent spoke English. At the certain point of time, the second trader (Kadek) asked Wayan in Indonesian “tamu dari mana yan” (where are this tourists from) and Wayan rapidly answered with the same language code, it is in Indonesian, “tamu australi dek”, and Wayan shift the language code to English as soon as possible to respect the respondent and make the conversation connected by saying, “you want swimming now?”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The researcher found the form of code mixing between, the traders and the tourist, the traders with other traders, and the traders with the researcher in some conversation. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;how much for this necklace?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5 dollar for this</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it’s too expensive; I bought it 3 dollars yesterday in Sukawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;wah, no can, It’s too low. You up little bit ya for 4 dollar ok?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ok, I take this one</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Trader: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;thank you</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tourist: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sama-sama</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this conversation between the traders and the tourist, the traders insensibly used some Indonesian words in English conversation using words: “wah” and “ya”. The use of Indonesian words in delivering speech counted into language contact phenomenon which is mixing words code. The tourist also changes the code of language from English into Indonesian by saying “sama-sama”.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Interference of Mother Tongue as Language Contact Phenomenon</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Nababan (1984), an error that occurs as a result of the transport habits of speech or dialect native language into a second language or dialect. Similarly, Chaer and Agustina (1995: 168) suggested interference is the norm deviation event of one or more languages. For example; Come here “pree” for looking, (Come here sir, just take a look). “You want “sop” drink sir? (Do you want soft drink sir?). These sentences are influenced by the mother tongue or local language, or local dialect. It is Indonesian or Balinese language. Those sentences are affected by the phonological forms of Balinese language which pronounce “f” or “v” to “p”. the pronunciation of “pree” instead of “free”, “sop” instead of “soft”.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Factors Contributing to the Language Contact Phenomenon</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Thomason (2001: 17-21) mentioned that there are some factors contributing to the existence of language contact phenomenon and can be grouped into five. First, The existence of two groups moving to uninhabited areas and then met there. Second, Migratory of a group to another group’s territory. Third, The practice of forced labor exchange. Fourth, Close cultural relationship between people old neighbor. Fifth, Contact learning or learning process.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Factors Contributing to the Existence of Pidgin</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The dominant factors which are found by the researcher during research in Kuta Beach, divided into two basic factors, internal factors and external factors. Internal factors comes from, the traders themselves, the interference of mother tongue of the local dialect influences the process of existence of pidgin. External factors are such as the basic knowledge of the speakers, low competence of mastery of the target language, and opportunity to learn target language.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Factors contributing to the Existence of Code switching and Code Mixing</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The relation between the speakers with the respondents becomes one of the basic factors. In this case, because of the relation itself, the speaker will change or mix the code. In certain topic of speaking, between the traders with the tourist, the change and the mixture of code make the topic easier to understand. In formal or informal situation the code switching and code mixing are usually used to describe the level of speaker’s education, or the speaker’s prestige. The attendance of the third person makes the language code switch from one code of language to another language for solidarity between the speaker and the respondent.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Factors Contributing to the Existence of Language Interference</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Some factors are contributing to the existence of language interference such as mother tongue, less vocabulary, and previous education of the speakers.Less of vocabulary also becomes the major point in interference of mother tongue. The last factor is that the form of English is difficult to understand in phonological or syntactic ways. Based on those factors, the mother tongue will easily interfere the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the research in Kuta Beach, it could be concluded that language variety presents very interesting language phenomena. This happens when two different kinds of languages meet at the same time, and in the same circumstance. The phenomenon which was found during the research process included varieties as pidgin, code switching, and code mixing, and language interference.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Ayeomoni, M.O.2006. Code-Switching and Code-Mixing: Style of Language Use in Childhood in Yoruba Speech Community. Nordic Journal of African Studies 15(1): &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;90–99 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2006). Available from: </span><a href="http://www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-"><span class="font0">www.njas.helsinki.fi/pdf-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">files/vol15num1/ayeomoni</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bokamba, E. 1989. Are there Syntactic Constraints on Code-mixing. World Englishes 8(3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Codeswitching (pp. 19–41). Exeter, UK: Multilingual matters Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cárdenas-Claros, M.S, Isharyanti Neny. 2009 Code swithing and code mixing in internet chatting between, ‘yes’, ‘ya’, and ‘si’ a case study, jalt call journal vol.5, no.3 pages 67-78. Available from: journal.jaltcall.org/articles/5_3_Cardenas</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Holmes, J. 1992. An introduction to sociolinguistics. New York: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Huang, D. (2004). Code switching and language use in emails. Unpublished PhD thesis, Melbourne, The University of Melbourne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Krashen, Stephen D. 1981. “second language acquisition and second language learning”. California: Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lenneberg, E. 1967. Biological foundations of language. Wiley, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Muhlhauseler, P.1986. Pidgin and creole linguistics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Myers-Scotton, C. 1992. Comparing code switching and borrowing. In C. Eastman (Ed.), Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Primaryantini.2006. Pidginized English spoken by the vendors at Legian beach. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suparwati, Rini.1999. Indonesian Interference In Learning English Vocabulary and English Syntax at BLTCC Denpasar. Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Surya,MersanaPT. Manuaba.2008. English pidgin used by the traders in Guwang Art Market. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sutjiati Beratha, Ni Luh.1999. Variasi Bahasa Inggris pada Kawasan Pariwisata di</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bali (serial Online),sept-des., available from </span><a href="http://jurnal-humaniora.fib.ugm.ac.id/old/karyadetail-new.php?id=345"><span class="font0">http://jurnal-humaniora.fib.ugm.ac.id/old/karyadetail-new.php?id=345</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suwito. 1993. Pengantar Awal Sosiolinguistik, Teori dan Problema. Surakarta: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Sebelas Maret. Available on </span><a href="http://griyawardani.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/kontak-bahasa-dan-kedwibahasaan/"><span class="font0">http://griyawardani.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/kontak-bahasa-dan-kedwibahasaan/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Todd, Loreto. 1984. Modern English: pidgin and creoles. England : Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tosuncouglu, Irfan. 2012. Usage of Mother Tongue in Learning English. Educational Research and Reviews Vol. 7(15), pp. 333-337, 5 May, 2012. Available from at </span><a href="http://www.academicjournals.org/ERR"><span class="font0">http://www.academicjournals.org/ERR</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wardhaugh, R.1986. introduction to socio;inguistics. Oxford:Basil Blackwell.</span></p>