---
layout: full_article
title: "TEXT OF THE MYTH BULU GELES IN THE VILLAGE OF TAMBAKAN, KUBUTAMBAHAN DISTRICT, BULELENG REGENCY"
author: "Luh Puspawati"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14130 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-14130"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14130"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vol. 9. NA.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN: </span><span class="font0">2442-7586</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TEXT OF THE MYTH </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">BULU GELES</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> IN THE VILLAGE OF TAMBAKAN, KUBUTAMBAHAN DISTRICT, BULELENG REGENCY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Luh Putu Puspawati</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">e-mail : </span><a href="mailto:Puspawati1960@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">Puspawati1960@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I Wayan Cika e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:wayancika@yahoo.com"><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">wayancika@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Language and Indonesian Literature, Post Graduate Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Nyoman Kutha Ratna e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:kutha_ratna@yahoo.com"><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">kutha_ratna@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Language and Indonesian Literature, Post Graduate Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I Made Suastika e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:madesuastika@yahoo.com"><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">madesuastika@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Jawa Kuna Literature, Post Graduate Study Program Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Tambakan Village Community, District Kubutambahan, Buleleng believe the tradition of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sampi bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> text contained in that village that vows payment using calf (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4">) as offerings at Pura Dalem. Text tradition believed myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sampi bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> existence for generations. Currently not only Tambakan villagers who professed and offer </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4">, but is also done by people from outside the village of Tambakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> tradition passed down from older generations to younger generation until now. Text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> contain </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles, I dewa </span><span class="font4">offering. This kind of offering appear when troops from Buleleng kingdom and padanguah people lost in battle with Bangli kingdom and hide beneath the forest in Belong area. Belong area is the origin of Tambakan Village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The kind of this research is qualitative with source of primary and secondary data. Data is collected using observation, interview, and literature study technique. Text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> tradition need to reviewed because this text of myth is unique and the review is focused in four matter there are first the structure of text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village? Second text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village function? Third text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village meaning? Fourth the bequeathing system of text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In term of issues reviewed, function, semiotic, and transmission theory are used. The result of the analysis gained that text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village has a narrative structure that is straight plot, primary and secondary figure, contain offering theme with place and time background. The sequence of ceremony in text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village that is cow release ceremony, calling process, catching and ended with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> slaughter in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mungkah wali</span><span class="font4"> ceremony.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The function text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village that connected with context consist of rite function, social function, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4"> function, and education function. The meaning of text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village is religious increasing meaning, prosperity meaning, unity and solidarity meaning, and heritation meaning. The bequeathing system of text of myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in Tambakan Village is done by oral through word from old generation to younger generation hereditary that consist of environtment preservation, culture value preservation, and social preservation</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Key words : </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles, i dewa, mapanauran</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mungkah wali</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Oral tradition is a tradition which has developed in the society through transmission by the words of the mouth from generation to generation. Oral tradition is closely connected with the customs belonging inherently to its society (Okta Adetya, 2010). Oral traditions growing in a region could be in the forms of myths, tales, legends, customs, etc. The majority of those oral traditions carry their respective philosophical contents so trusted by local people that they take them as a kind of belief. From such traditions are derived certain functions and meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bulu Geles</span><span class="font4"> has become so well known, and in its development as text it is still known to a number of people, particularly to the elders; but for the young generation such a myth is barely known. Nowadays, the text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is more prominently expressed in terms of such rituals as the losing of the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and the ritual of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah wali</span><span class="font4"> practiced continuously from generation to generation periodically conducted in the village of Tambakan, precisely on dead </span><span class="font1">90</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">moon days and once every two years on the full moon of the first local calendar month (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Purnama Kasa</span><span class="font4"> Day). In its authentic context that myth is understood as a form of ritual which by the local people of Tambakan village is regarded as a unique tradition upon the fact that a such tradition is found only in that village of Tambakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In this research, four problems under concern in relation to the text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in the village of Tambakan are formulated as follows (1) how is the structure of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in the village of Tambakan? (2) what are the functions of the text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in the village of Tambakan? (3) what meanings are contained in the text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> in the village of Tambakan? (4) what system underlies the inheritance of the text of the myth bulu geles in the village of Tambakan?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research is expected to be a source of inspiration, able to reveal and develop one of the various aspects of the Indonesian culture. This research is aimed at analyzing, understanding, and describing as well as preserving the various myths as the nation’s cultural heritage from an agricultural village in the plateau region, which are of much benefit for the future generation. It is also expected that this research can contribute to the enrichment of our knowledge inventory as well as establish links with researches in the field of mythology as a science.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Theoretically, the result of this research can: (1) enrich our knowledge inventory concerning myth; (2) add to the existing references pertaining to the text of the myth </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> still maintained among the people of Tambakan village, inclusive of such aspects as its structure, functions, meanings, and its inheritance system in the village of Tambakan. Some practical benefits of this research includes the following: (1) For the local people this research gives them access to understanding and practicing various values contained in the myth as well as document it in the form of publication; (2) for the government this research can be used as the basis for preserving and developing the myth to the future; (3) for researchers this documentation can be used as the basis/model for further researches in the future.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theoretical Frame</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function Theory</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Functional theory deals with the function of the text of the myth in relation to its social context. By Teeuw (1984) the function of a text is considered to be that of providing benefit and entertainment, or what come to be termed </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">utile</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dulce</span><span class="font4">, because in a text there could be found certain values which are of benefit for human life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Koentjaraningrat (1987) has developed a theory about the very complex functions of the elements of culture. In principle, this theory concentrates on a series of instinctive needs of human beings in connection to establishing their whole life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semiotic Theory</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Barthes gives a lengthy discussion of the relation between myth and culture (ritual and culture) and on revealing meanings within a culture, in which an entity within a culture is comprehended in terms of double meanings (connotation).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Hoed (2011), semiotics is the science which studies signs in human life. Whatever is present in our life is seen as a sign, i.e. as a thing that should be given a meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transmition Theory</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This theory is based on Robson’s ideas (1994) which was originally used in relation to studies on manuscripts. According to these ideas, in copying the manuscripts from generation to generation there have always happened such things as changes, additions, omissions, substitutions (through the intervention of the copyists). This is particularly true with oral tradition which through its oral transmission from generation to generation since time immemorial has undergone a lot of changes by the time it reaches the young generation at present, namely changes in the forms of missing parts, additions, and omissions. Such is the condition of the tradition inherited now. However, its gist can still be understood as it was originally perceived by the previous generations. Such really is the process of transmission of oral tradition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The design of this research use qualitative method so if reviewed this kind of research is qualitative research.The informant in this research can be divided by two kind that are community figure and community member. The definition of informant from each of group using purposive sampling technique (the respondent that understand the text myth will be choosen).The next step is the definition of informant based on key informant information and then the same pattern used to next informant. This pattern is called snowball technique.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data collection for this research is using several methods such as (1) observation; (2) deep interview; (3) literature study. There are three steps in analysis technique suc as (1) data classification; (2) data reduction that is data selection to keep away double data; (3) data verification that is verificate the data that appropriate for</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the need in this research. The result in this research is presented in descriptive or narration, formally presented in flow chart, table.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure of the Mythological Text </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bulu Geles</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> at Tambakan Village</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> has a narrative structure, made up of plots, characters, theme, and setting. It has straight plots, meaning that the first events are followed by the following ones. It contains six events as follows (1) this plot starts with wars between the Buleleng kingdom and the Bangli kingdom; the troops of the Buleleng kingdom and the people living at Padanguang ran away and many entered the forest. (2) They were afraid that where they hid in the forest was identified by their enemies. They vowed to offer </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> if the enemies could not identify them. (3) The troops of the Buleleng kingdom and the Padanguang society felt safe where they hid; even they lived happily and prosperously; as a result, they offered </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4">. (4) The Padanguah society returned to the village from where they hid; however, they felt unsafe and decided to stay at Belong, which then became Tambakan village where they have lived permanently until now. (5) In its development, those who pay the vow are those who come from Tambakan village and outside the village. However, a shift has taken place. Now many people pay for the vow in order to get jobs, promotions, pass the final examinations, to be accepted at any favorite schools, and have sons. Some also pay for the vow in order to be successful in politics, and businesses. (6) The people living at Tambakan Village also perform a ceremony called </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali </span><span class="font4">once in six months, every </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Purnama Kasa</span><span class="font4"> (the full moon of the first Balinese month). It is performed at </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mrajapati</span><span class="font4"> Temple, Tambakan village. The text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> has the main character and secondary characters. The main character is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i dewa </span><span class="font4">and the secondary characters are the troops of the Buleleng kingdom, the troops of the Bangli kingdom, and the Padanguang society. The theme on which the mythological text is based is the offering to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ida Sanghyang Widi Wasa</span><span class="font4"> (Almighty God), the safety of the nature and human beings. However, the dominant theme is the offering to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ida Sanghyang Widi Wasa</span><span class="font4"> through what is called </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pecaruan i dewa</span><span class="font4">. The mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> also has setting (time and place). The event took place at Padanguang village, Belong village (now it is called Tambakan), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Kahyangan</span><span class="font4"> Temples, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mrajapati</span><span class="font4"> Temple, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Melanting</span><span class="font4"> Temple, the forest where the lost troops hid and the forest where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i dewa</span><span class="font4"> lives now. The society offered </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> on the day when there is the dark moon. The people living at Tambakan perform the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali</span><span class="font4"> ritual once in two years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function of the Mythological Text </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bulu Geles</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> at Tambakan Village</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The functions of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village is related to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4">, ritual, social and educational functions. The </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana </span><span class="font4">function is implemented in the teaching of being balanced between man and Almighty God, between man and his fellow creatures, and between man and his environment. The ritual function in the life of those living at Tambakan village is always accompanied with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sraddha</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bhakti</span><span class="font4">, as reflected by the ritual in which </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is released and the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali</span><span class="font4"> ritual. The social function of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village is that the activities done by the villagers are always based on the mutual assistance system. This can be seen from their religious and traditional activities, their individual and collective activities (helping one another). The educational function of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is actualized when the village head (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jro Mekel</span><span class="font4">) and the traditional village head (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bendesa Adat</span><span class="font4">) implement their leadership democratically. The reason is that every activity is done together and involves the leaders and their people. They are all involved starting from when the ritual is planned, when it is prepared and when it is performed. Such a learning process is done from the old generation to the young generation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings of the Mythological Text </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bulu Geles</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> at Tambakan Village</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The meanings which are related to the understanding of the cultural value of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and the ritual performance are the meaning of enhancement of religiosity, the meaning of prosperity, the meaning of unification and solidarity, and the meaning of conservation. The meaning of enhancement of religiosity is that the Tambakan village offers </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and performs the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali</span><span class="font4"> ritual based on </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">srada bhakti</span><span class="font4">, which is believed to enhance their belief in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ida Sanghyang Widhi Wasa</span><span class="font4"> (God) and His personifications. The villagers believe that they will be peaceful, safe, secured and tranquilized as the objective of this holy sacrificial ceremony is the spiritual and physical purification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The meaning of prosperity of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village is that the villagers believe that they will be prosperous and economically better. They believe that they will be safe, peaceful, comfortable and tranquilized as there will not be any natural disturbance. They also believe that their life will improve by performing this ritual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The meaning of unification and solidarity; most people living at Tambakan village are Hindu worshippers. They believe that any ritual should be performed with mutual assistance, full devotion, sincerity and gratefulness. In understanding the meaning of unification and solidarity, they live peacefully and quietly, appreciating and respecting one another, and keeping the village secured. They believe that if they can do every activity collectively and they are fully responsible for it, they will be peaceful, secured, tranquilized, comfortable and prosperous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The meaning of conservation, in this case, means the meaning of cultural, traditional, religious and environmental conservation. Such a tradition should be maintained at Tambakan Village as the society has understood such values since a long time ago which have been transmitted from generation to generation. Mutual assistance is bequeathed by the old generation to the young generation, as teaching how to prepare rituals will make them prosperous physically and spiritually, peaceful, and appreciate and help one another. .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;System of Bequeathing the Mythological Text </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bulu Geles</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> at Tambakan Village</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is an oral tradition which has been known since a long time ago by Tambakan community. The old generation is still able to tell what the text contains. It has been bequeathed by the old generation to the young generation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It has been bequeathed orally; it has been transformed in the form of a ritual at Tambakan village. Such a ritual is still conserved by the local people, in accordance with what has been accepted from their ancestors, which is stated to be “mula keto” (it should be like that). Such a myth and ritual tradition has been in existence since a long time ago until now from generation to generation, as described in this writing. It has been bequeathed through three systems of conservation; they are (1) the environmental conservation; the local people maintain the environment and what it contains well; the animals can live safely and comfortably; nothing has been exploited, making the plants and animals live safely and able to improve their habitats. The surrounding people become peaceful, tranquilized, safe and prosperous; the environment is conserved and natural. The cultural values which are conserved at Tambakan village are the great ones which need to be conserved. The local people do not dare change what has been inherited from their ancestors. They believe that if they change it a disaster will happen to them. It is necessary to respect and conserve the concepts inherited from their ancestors. They are great, although they have to be adjusted to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">current condition. The values which are bequeathed by their ancestors may be used as guidance to the local people’s behavior; they are all bequeathed from generation to generation. If they are all well inherited, the local people will be happy, peaceful, safe, and prosperous. (3) The social conservation can be observed from the activities done by the local people when, for example, they hold a meeting attended by the village head (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jro Mekel</span><span class="font4">) and the traditional village head (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jro Bendesa Adat</span><span class="font4">) , the priests (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jro Mangku</span><span class="font4">) living around Tambakan Village, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mancegra</span><span class="font4"> and the ladies who are good at making </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bantens</span><span class="font4"> (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">srati</span><span class="font4">) and the community leaders. What they talk about is the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali</span><span class="font4"> ritual and the ritual in which </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is released. They help one another perform such rituals without expecting for any reward. If they are well performed, then the local people will be comfortable and prosperous from generation to generation. .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The first finding is that the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village cannot be separated from text and context; it can give guidance to the local people’s life. It is respected and inherited as a holy tradition, which means giving prosperity. The relationship between the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and the local people and their environment is in harmony, in accordance with the concept </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is used to pay for a vow, indicated by the fact that it is performed at Dalem Temple, where God </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font4"> is believed to reside and the cattle are used as His vehicle. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dalem</span><span class="font4"> Temple and God </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font4"> worshipping reflects the Hindu cosmology the ritual contains. God </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font4"> is believed to be </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga Acala</span><span class="font4"> with His five functions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">What the local people have understood of the mythological text has shifted if viewed from the aspect of worshipping orientation at the temple and the use of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4">. However, the function of God </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font4"> as described above still accommodates the temple’s orientation and those who go there to pray. The temple is still used as the place where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is offered to pay for the vow which may have possibly been made by those living outside Tambakan village. .</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Conclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village has a narrative structure, and contains the process in which </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is released, the process in which a proposal for it is made, the process in which it is caught, and the process in which it is butchered (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkah Wali</span><span class="font4">). The text has straight plots, made up of six events or episodes. It has the main character and the secondary characters. The main</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">character is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i dewa</span><span class="font4"> and the secondary characters are the Padanguang society, the troops of the Buleleng kingdom and the troops of the Bangli kingdom. The theme of the text is about offering. It also contains the setting (the place and time). The places include Padanguah village where the war initially took place, the area of Belong which is now called Tambakan, Tri Kahyangan Temples, Mrajapati Temple, Melanting Temple, the forest where the lost troops hid and the forest where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">i dewa </span><span class="font4">lives. The time when </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is performed is on the day when there is the dark moon (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tilem</span><span class="font4">) and every two years, that is, every the full moon of the first Balinese month (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Purnama Kasa</span><span class="font4">) the Mungkah Wali ritual is performed. In 2013 it was performed on 22<sup>nd</sup> July.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The function of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village in the local people’s life is related to the function of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4">, ritual function, social function, and educational function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The meaning which is related to the understanding of the cultural value of the text and the ritual performance can be divided into the religious meaning, the welfare meaning, the unification and solidarity meaning, and the conservation meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village is bequeathed through: the environmental conservation, the socio-cultural conservation, and the social conservation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The findings of the study are as follows: the tradition of the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> at Tambakan village is closely related to text and context. The text can give guidance to life to the local people. The text is highly respected and is inherited as a sacred tradition which functions to give prosperity. The relationship between the mythological text </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and the local people and environment is in harmony, in accordance with the concept </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bule geles</span><span class="font4"> is used to pay for a vow at Dalem Temple as the Hindu cosmology and God </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font4"> as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lingga Acala</span><span class="font4">. How the local people define the myth of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> and ritual has shifted; however, it still accommodates </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dalem</span><span class="font4"> Temple and its worshippers outside the tradition, namely, the temple is still used as the holy place where </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bulu geles</span><span class="font4"> is offered when the local people and those living outside the village pay for a vow.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>References</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Abdul Rozak. 2012. “Makalah Legenda”. makalahlegenda.blogsport.com</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Abdul Syani. 2009. “Pelestarian Nilai-Nilai Budaya Lokal.</span><a href="http://blog.unila.ac/"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://blog.unila.ac</span><span class="font4"> </span></a><span class="font4">id</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Anita Fahriana. 2013. “Upaya Pemeliharaan Lingkungan Hidup”. Makalah. anitafahriani.blogspot.com diakses 21 Mei 2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah. 1990. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kesusastraan Bali</span><span class="font4">. Singaraja: Lembaga Bahasa dan Kesusastraan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Barthes, Roland. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Membedah Mitos-Mitos Budaya Bangsa. Semiotika atau Sosiologi Tanda, Simbol dan Representasi</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta. Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Christomy,T &amp;&nbsp;Untung Yuwono (Penyunting). 2004. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Budaya</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta. Pusat Penelitian Kemasyarakatan dan Budaya, Direktorat Riset dan Pengabdian Masyarakat Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Duija, I Nengah. 2005. “Tradisi Lisan, Naskah, dan Sejarah”. Wacana. Vol 7, No. 2. Oktober 2005. Hal. 111-124</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Duija, I Nengah. 2011. “Tradisi Lisan Maritim Sebagai Kekuatan Kultural Masyarakat Bali”. Dalam </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ATL</span><span class="font4">. Edisi V April 2011 Hal 29-41</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Emile, Durkheim. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-Dasar Sosiologi Agama: Dalam Analisis dan Interpretasi Sosiologi</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Rajawali Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Emile, Durkheim. 2011. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Elementary Forms Of The Religious Life</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Erisco.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Esten, Mursal. 1990. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kesusastraan, Pengantar, Teori dan Sejarah</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Finnegan Ruth.1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oral Traditions and Verbal Art. A Guide to Research Practices.</span><span class="font4">London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Fokkema, DW dan Ebrud Kunne-IBSDN. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sastra Abad 20. Strukturalisme, Marxisme, Estetika, Resepsi, dan Semiotik</span><span class="font4"> (Terjemahan oleh Praptadiharja dan Kepler Silaban). Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Geriya, I Wayan dkk. 1982. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sistem Kesatuan Hidup Setempat Daerah Bali</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. Proyek Inventarisasi dan Dokumentasi Kebudayaan Daerah Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hamidi, Muhammad. 2003. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mitos-Mitos Dalam Hikayat Abdulkadir Jailani</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Yayasan Naskah Nusantara (Yanasa) dan Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hoed, Beny H. 2011. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotik &amp;&nbsp;Dinamika Sosial Budaya</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Koentjaraningrat. 1987a. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia dan Kebudayaan di Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Jambatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Koentjaraningrat. 1987b. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sejarah Teori Antropologi</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: UI-Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Moleong, L.J. 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Remaja Rosydakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Okta Adetya. 2010. “Tradisi Lisan Yang Ada Di Masayarakat”. my opera.com diakses 15 April 2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Putra, Heddi Sri Ahimsa. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Strukturalisme Levi-Strauss Mitos dan Karya Sastra.</span><span class="font4">Yogyakarta: KEPEL Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha. 2004. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode, dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra. </span><span class="font4">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Robson, S.O. 1994. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-prinsip Filologi Indonesia</span><span class="font4"> (terjemahan). Jakarta: RUL</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Semadi Astra, I Gde. 2008. “Pelestarian Lingkungan Hidup Pada Zaman bali Kuno. Kajian berdasarkan Data Prasasti”. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Peper.</span><span class="font4"> Disajikan Dalam Seminar Nasional Trerkai Dengan HUT ke 50 Fakultas Sastra UNUD Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Suastika, I Made. 2008. “Nilai Agama dan Pendidikan dalam Satua Bali: Kasus di Desa Sekardadi, Kecamatan Kintamani, Kabupaten Bangli”. Dalam </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal Ilmiah Widya Santhi</span><span class="font4">. Vol. 2 No. 3 Januari. Mataram: STAH.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Teeuw, A. 1984. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Ilmu Satra. Pengantar Teori Sastra</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Thank You Note</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Thank you to Udayana University Rector and University Udayana Post Graduate Director for the opportunity and the facilities during Doctoral program in Linguistic Department Udayana University. Thank you for Prof. Dr. I Wayan Cika, M.S., as promotor, Prof. Dr. Nyoman Kutha Ratna, S.U., and Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U., as co promotor. Their guide and advice are very helpful in this dissertation writing process. Finally thank you to all colleague for the help in this dissertation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">3 772442 7ΞBDDS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">100</span></p>