---
layout: full_article
title: "IMPROVING VOCABULARY ABILITY BY USING COMIC"
author: "Randa wijaksana Banigau"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>IMPROVING VOCABULARY ABILITY BY USING COMIC</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Randa Wijaksana banigau</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Masalah dari penelitian ini adalah bagaimana meningkatkan kemampuan berbicara mengunakan gambar berseri, dan bagaimana memotivasi siswa dalam berbicara bahasa inggris. Penelitian ini dilatar belakangi oleh konsep kerangka penting pada penggunaan gambar berseri melalui kelompok belajar untuk meningkatkan motivasi mereka untuk berbicara bahasa inggis selama proses interaksi komunikasi di kelas. Jenis penelitian ini adalah menggunakan penelitian tindakan kelas (Classroon Action Research). Subyek penelitian ini terdiri atas 40 orang siswa pada kelas X-1, SMAN 3 Kediri tahun ajaran 2007-2008. Data penelitian dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan tes vocabulary (tes sesudah perlakuan pertama dan tes sesudah perlakuan kedua), pengamatan untuk mendapatkan data pada motivasi siswa pada peningkatan kemampuan berbicara dengan mengunakan gambar berseri. Data pada kemampuan berbicara menggunakan gambar berseri diananalisa menggunakan urian deskripsi dan statistik untuk melihat peningkatan nilai rata-rata siswa sesudah perlakuan pertama dan perlakuan kedua. Berdasar perlakuan pertama, nilai rata-rata siswa meningkat menjadi 67.8 and pada perlakuan kedia, nilai rata-rata siswa menjadi 78.8. dapatlah disimpulkan bahwa pengajaran berbicara melalui gambar berseri dapat meningkatkan kemampuan berbicara siswa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font0">: Improving, vocabulary ability, using comic, peer work</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Students’ learning outcome, which is still considered as unsuccessful, has always been the focus of criticism towards the failure of teaching of English in Indonesia. As a consequence English teachers are demanded to be responsible for the failure in making the students capable of using English for communication both productively and receptively. To alleviate this ordeal, educators, practitioners, and policy makers quite often pay very much attention to research dealing with the curriculum, methodology and teachers excluding such significant variables as the learner perspective. They have rarely taken the learner perspective into consideration as a very important contribution to the learning process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Does the failure have any relations to these factors? Some English textbooks written for young learners seem to neglect these factors. As a matter of fact, many research findings have shown the powerful role of the students in improving their learning outcome.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Teaching vocabulary in Indonesia is considered to be the most difficult, pronunciation, structure, discourse, and the social context of culture and situation. In short, it needs the mastery of the linguistic and the cultural competence. Besides, as vocabulary is difficult, more effort is required on the part of the students and teachers. It is not enough for the students to listen or to speech only. The teachers need to give the students’ activities to practice the new speech among the four basic skills of language. Bourdons in Nunan (1993) stated that spoken language needs the mastery of vocabulary habit. This means that practice vocabulary needs much time to fulfil the requirements of the mastery of spoken English, either from school or the environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The result of this research is expected to be useful information to: (1) increase the teachers’ knowledge of English and share experiences in improving vocabulary ability using comic; (2) encourage the teachers’ colleagues in doing action research in improving their teaching as the professional practices; (3) give any contribution to the general public in increasing knowledge concerning about classroom action research and get any reflection for being perfection.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research is done by the subject of the students of the third class of SMAN 3 Kediri using comic through peer work to improve their ability to speak English. The researcher focused his research in improving vocabulary ability and the students’ motivation in the process of teaching and learning using comic. The topics or themes used were: (1) Global warming; (2) Daily activity. Comic through peer work were used to attract and encourage the students to improve their ability to construct their understanding and the ability to speak English and help the teacher to present the materials.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Review Of Related Literature</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The researcher found some studies had been conducted using the students’ own picture through peer work in improving their ability to speak English. Some</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">of them: (1) Rahman, Aulia (2007) in his research stated that teaching vocabulary here is how teacher can give a good theme to the students, the theme must make students fill happy so they will give attention all times during the teaching process. The learning and teaching of a second or foreign language is a complex process. Learning is “Acquiring or getting of knowledge of subject or skill by study, experience, or instruction.” Similarly, teaching, which is implied in the first definition of learning, may be defined as. “Showing of helping someone to learn how to do something, giving instructions, guiding in the study of something, providing with knowledge, causing to know or understand.” Teaching cannot be defined apart from learning. (2) Westnood, Peter and Oliver (1975) stated that in improving oral language there are four ways should be considered in which teachers sometimes operate to restrict language development or indeed at times train students not to listen but to speak; (3) Hergenhalm in Elliott (1996) stated that good teaching begins with knowing what you want to teach: the stimuli, you must also identify the responses you want to connect to the stimuli and timing of appropriate satisfiers. (4) Hulse in Elliott (1996) on the effective teaching and effective learning stated that feedback or reinforcement of asking question is very important. It is a powerful tool of controlling behaviour of the students. If you praise students’ correct responses immediately and the students increase correct responses. Vocabulary lesson can follow the usual pattern of preparation, presentation, practice, evaluation, and extension. The teacher can use the preparation step to observe, draw, and establish a context for vocabulary task on certain objects and things (where, when, why, with whom it will occur) and to initiate awareness of vocabulary skill to be targeted. In presentation, the teacher can provide learners with a reproduction model that furthers learner comprehension and help them become more attentive observers of language use. Practice involves learners in reproducing the target structure, usually in controlled or highly supported manner. Evaluation involves directing attention to the skill being examined and asking learners to monitor and assess their own progress. Finally, extension consists of activities that ask learners to use strategy or skill in a different context or authentic communicative situation, or to integrate use of new skill or strategy with previously acquired ones (Brown, 1994).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vocabulary function is the productive and interactive skill. (1) What is productive skill? With reference to usage, it is then perfectly true to say that vocabulary is productive and makes use of the aural medium. Widdowson (2003) described that the act of communication through vocabulary is commonly performed in face-to-face interaction and occurs as part dialogue or other forms of verbal exchange. What is said, therefore, is dependent on an understanding of what else has been said, whether by the speaker or the interlocutor in the interaction; (2) What is an interactive skill? Richards et al. (2000) stated that vocabulary is rarely done in one direction or in the form of monologue. It involves the participation of the listener. In an interactive communication, a speaker, and therefore the speaker also becomes a listener. Why comic? A wise statement says ‘I hear I forget, I see I know, and I do I understand. This means that if we have learning experiences by observing, drawing, doing and also what our eyes see and catch most of the time will stay long in our memory. Therefore, the statement strengthens to improve vocabulary ability by using comic as media to teach English. Pictures as visual aids will attract students’ attention, and motivate them to learn. In addition, using comic means that the students try to connect the plot in the picture to be a link of story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methodology</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The method used in this research was classroom action research (CAR) focused on improving vocabulary ability using comic. The subject of the research consisted of 20 students of the third class of SMAN 3 Kediri Kediri in 2007-2008 academic year.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research had one dependent variable and one independent variable: (1) the independent variable of this research was the teaching device using comic through peer work. Using comic means the pictures belong to the students (e.g. pictures taken from magazines and newspapers) or the pictures that the students had drawn by themselves. Peer work was a teaching technique/activity which allowed students to act in accordance with the assignment; (2) the dependent variable of this research was vocabulary ability. It was empirically by the students’ mastery</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">of using comic which covered fluency, pronunciation, vocabulary, structure, discourse and the social context of vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To collect data, the instruments to be used: (1) test consisted of pre-test, post-test, and formative test; (2) observation. Test after the first treatment and test after the second treatment administered to find out the improvement of the students’ vocabulary ability, the formative test was administered to measure about the improvement of their vocabulary ability from the cycle 1 and cycle 2. The observation was administered to measure the characteristics of the students towards the application of using comic through peer work, and questionnaire was administered to support the data of the students’ improvement in vocabulary English ability.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The activities of the research used the following procedures:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher observed the previous students’ vocabulary average.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher planned the action, constructing the lesson plan for the first cycle using comic.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher implemented the fist action cycle (giving treatment, using comic).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher observed the classroom while implementing the actions in first cycle.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher gave reflection to the results of the observation by using the guide of observation in the form of checklist.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher analyzed the result of series picture and then classified them qualitatively.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher constructed the lesson plan for second cycle.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher implemented the second action cycle.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher observed the classroom while implementing the second action cycle.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher reflected the results of class observation in the second cycle.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analyzing the results of reading test in the second cycle quantitatively and then classified them qualitatively,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In the first treatment, the researcher did some activities related to the using of comic. The topic chosen was Global Warming. The first treatment activities were:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Warm up:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Opening. This activity is as like greeting and asking students’ condition.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Brain storming to the matter. This activity was done to guide students to the matter given.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Distributing the comic.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whilst:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher asked the students to guess the picture and asking the difficult</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">vocabulary related to the picture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher wrote the difficult vocabularies related to the picture on the board.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher drilled the difficult vocabulary related to the pictures.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher asked them to discuss with their partners about the picture and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">the plot of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher asked them to tell the pictures in front one by one.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Closing</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher asked their difficulty and their problem in vocabulary process.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The teacher gave motivation in studying and closing the lesson.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">From the first treatment, the research got the problem as bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The pictures were not so interesting.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The students got difficulty in contracting the sentence, because many new vocabularies for them, so they need long time to memorize.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The researcher needed to pay attention more to the students who were weak in vocabulary in guided them to make the story.</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Before the treatment, students mean in vocabulary was 65.0. Then, researcher prepare Then after the treatments, data on the students’ vocabulary skills were collected in line with the instruments (tests, questionnaires, and observation) and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">were analyzed using the scoring system, tabulating, percentage, classification, calculating the mean score, from the first treatment, the researcher got the mean of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the students reached 74. The data is as follow:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Name</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">First treatment</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Afi Fajriatul Lailatul</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">60</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Astutik Setia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Durratul Afina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">75</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Erma Yunia Rofani</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">60</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Millah Zainab</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">60</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Galouh Maya L</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Ifri Fiqoh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">75</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Gabrilia Nida</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">60</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Lulu Nafisah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Nadia Nazizah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">75</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">AVERAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">67.8</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">After the second treatment, the researcher got the data from their vocabulary performance. The students’ mean increased to be 78.8. The data is as follow;</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Name</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Second Treatment</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Afi Fajriatul Lailatul</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Astutik Setia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">78</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Durratul Afina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">80</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Erma Yunia Rofani</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">65</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Millah Zainab</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Galouh Maya L</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">78</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Ifri Fiqoh</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">85</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Gabrilia Nida</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Lulu Nafisah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">85</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Nadia Nazizah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">85</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">AVERAGE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">78.8</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the observation after the treatments, it indicated that among students had more selves confidences and had more participant in vocabulary. The rating scale (band) used for measuring the improvement of the students’ vocabulary skill was taken from Sujiono (1992: 47):</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">First treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Second treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Interval</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Number of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Percentages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Number of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Percentages</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Criteria</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">80-100</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">55.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Very Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">70-79</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">60.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">40.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">56-69</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">40.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">5.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Fair</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">45-55</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Less</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0-44</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">0.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Poor</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">100</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">100</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion And Suggestion</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the findings and discussion in the previous parts, the following conclusions are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The implementation of teaching English in this action research using comic through peer work as teaching strategy could improve the students’ motivation in improving their ability to speak English at both the first cycle and second cycle. It can be shown from the students’ increasing average in vocabulary score. In the first treatment, the students’ average was 67.8, then, on the second treatment, the students’ average increase to be 78.8; (2) the use of comic through peer work as teaching strategy could improve vocabulary ability significantly. This led to the conclusion that using of comic through peer work as a teaching strategy is a need in English language teaching and learning in improving their ability to speak English in the term of vocabulary, grammar, and their performance based on the context of situation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The first is addressed to the third class of SMAN 3 Kediri Kediri dealing with the classroom implementation of the findings. The second one is addressed to the foreign language teaching researchers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The classroom implementation of the findings</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Since the implementation of using comic has been proven to be successful in improving their ability to speak English, it is strongly suggested that such teaching strategy “improving vocabulary ability using comic” could be continually implemented in teaching vocabulary. Assistance and giving motivation to the students is much needed, besides choosing interesting pictures.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Further researchers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The emphasis of conducting this research was the improving vocabulary ability using comic. The result of this research showed that vocabulary ability could get significantly improvement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Arikunto, Suharsimi, 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Prosedur Penelitian Suatu Pendekatan Praktek</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jakarta : PT. Renika Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bangs, C. (1988). The use of cartoons in the learning of a second language. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of the Australian Modern Language Teachers' Association, 23(</span><span class="font0">3), 10-14.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Blundell, J, Higgens, J, and Middlemiss, N. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Function in English</span><span class="font0">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Brown, J. (1977). Comics in the foreign language classroom: Pedagogical perspectives. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Foreign Language Annuals, 5,</span><span class="font0"> 18-25.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Brown, R. S, and Nation, P. 1997. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching Vocabulary: Suggestion for the Classroom</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Online.</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://langue.hyper.chubu.ac.jp./jalt/pub/tlt/97/Ap/vocabulary.html;Last </span><span class="font0">modified: April 11, 2007.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Conrad, D. J. (1993). Calvin and Hobbes and other icons of Americana. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">TESOL Journal, 2</span><span class="font0">(3), 34.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Depdiknass. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Teknis Pelaksanaan Classroom Action Research</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">IKIP PGRI Madiun. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dharma Pendidikan: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Pembelajaran</span><span class="font0">. Nganjuk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nazir, Mohammad. 1983. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta Timur: Balai Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nunan, David P. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Learning Teaching Methodology: A Textbook for Teacher</span><span class="font0">. New York. Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nurhadi. 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Contextual Teaching and Learning (CTL)</span><span class="font0">. Malang: Universitas Negeri Malang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Richie, J. (1979). The funnies aren't just funny . . . using cartoons and comics to teach. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Clearing House, 53</span><span class="font0">, 125-128.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rivers, Wilga M. 1968. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teaching Foreign Language Skills.</span><span class="font0"> New York: The University of Chicago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Schodt, F. L. (1993). The manga kingdom. In </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Japan: An illustrated Encyclopedia </span><span class="font0">(pp. 216-217). Tokyo: Kodansha. Schodt, F. L. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manga! Manga!: The world of Japanese comics.</span><span class="font0"> Tokyo: Kodansha.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stemerding, A. H. S. 1973. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teknik Rapat dan Diskusi Kelompok</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Balai Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wright, A. 1989. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pictures for Language Learning</span><span class="font0">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Zaini, Hisyam, Bernaudy Munthe, Sekar Ayu Aryani. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Strategi Pembelajaran Aktif di Perguruan Tinggi.</span></p>