---
layout: full_article
title: "Semiotic Study Of Apple Inc. Phone Advertisement Video  Edition: Iphone 5 – Facetime Every Day"
author: "I Wayan Agus Pranata"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 15.2 Mei 2016: </span><span class="font0">69</span><span class="font1">-</span><span class="font0">74</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Semiotic Study Of Apple Inc. Phone Advertisement Video</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Edition: Iphone 5 – Facetime Every Day</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Wayan Agus Pranata email: </span><a href="mailto:iwayanaguspranata@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">iwayanaguspranata@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Judul studi ini adalah Semiotic Study of Apple Inc. Phone Advertisement Video Edition: “Iphone 5 – Facetime Everyday”. Studi ini membahas tentang makna dari elemen konseptual lisan maupun tulisan dan mengidentifikasikan tanda visual dalam video iklan dari Perusahaan Apple. Data yang digunakan adalah percakapan, tulisan, dan bentuk visual dalam sebuah video iklan yang berjudul Iphone 5 – facetime everyday. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori dari Geoffrey Leech tentang makna konseptua luntuk menganalisis makna konseptual dari sebuah kata atau kalimat,Dyer tentang visual dan verbal untuk menganalisis tanda-tanda visual maupun verbal yang muncul dalam iklan video, dan Ferdinand de Saussure tentang Semiotics untuk menganalisis signifier (petanda) dan signified (penanda)dari logo perusahaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil studi menunjukkan bahwa makna konseptual lisan dan tulisan mengarah untuk mengetahui makna dari pesan yang terkandung dalam video iklan. Disamping itu, dalamiklan video efek visual juga memiliki peranan penting untuk mempengaruhi pemirsa dan memperjelas makna dari iklan. Tanda visual yang muncul di Apple Inc. Iklan video edisi: iPhone 5 facetime -everyday menunjukkan orang-orang dari seluruh benua menggunakan iPhone 5untuk berkomunikasi dan terhubung dengan tatap muka yang menunjukkan kemampuan baru berkomunikasi di era ini yang tidak hanya bisa mendengar suara saja, tetapi bisa melihat wajah dan kondisi sekitar ketika terhubung dengan teknologi facetime di iPhone 5. Kolaborasi yang baik antara unsur-unsur lisan dan tulisan dengan tanda visual yang muncul dalam iklan dapat mempengaruhi daya jual produk , visualisasi yang ditampilkan dalam video iklan memiliki karakteristik yang membuat pemirsa tertarik untuk membeli.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : semiotik, maknakonseptual, tandavisual,penanda dan petanda.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Advertisement is a part the indrustrialinovation, advertisement has a part to increase the selling point of products. Besides, advertisment become important part of selling product because in this era the product without advertisement makes human not interested in buy that product. To communicate with the consumers, advertisment become an important part for companies or organisations. Advertisement divided into two types; Commercial and non-commercial. Every advrtisment has its own style and way to delevering their product that they present. Those type of advertismentsare: brochure, pamflet, banner, job vacancy, booklet, (for the printed media) and video advertisement (for the television media).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Understanding the meaning contained in an advertisement can be analyzed using a semiotic theory. By analyzing the language of semiotics, it can be determined what the hidden meaning in an advertisement. By Analyzing the conceptual meaning of words and the visual and verbal sign advertisement video of Apple Inc. Edition: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Iphone 5 – Facetime Everyday”</span><span class="font2"> we can find more deeply what the messages that every advertisement show instead of product itself. Advertisement shows the different perspective in this era not just only to sell the product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the study, there are two problems discussed in this study. The problems are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the conceptual meaning of spoken and written elements in the apple.inc advertisement video edition: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Iphone 5 - Facetime Everyday”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What arethevisual sign used in the Apple Inc. Phone advertisement video edition: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Iphone 5 - Facetime Every day”</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In response to the problems, the aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out and analyze the conceptual meaning of the spoken and written elements in the video advertisement of apple.inc edition: “iPhone 5 facetime everyday”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Identify the visual sign in the Apple Inc. Phone advertisement video edition: “Iphone 5 - Facetime Every day”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data used in this study were taken from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Apple Inc. Advertisement video </span><span class="font2">edition: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Iphone 5 – Facetime Everyday”.</span><span class="font2">They were collected by applying documentation method and analyzed descriptively using qualitative method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Spoken Elements</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The advertisement video of apple inc. edition: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“iphone 5 facetime everyday”</span><span class="font2">contained several words that said by the actors or the narrator. The words are including the following:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Hallo!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “hallo” that contained in the video advertisement shows a condition that used as greeting in the telephone communication. This word is used in the beginning of the advertisement video because when we connected or calling someone with phone we use this word for begin the communication.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Written elements</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of written elements in the advertisement video of apple. inc edition “iPhone 5 :Facetime everyday” can be seen through the table below:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Sign</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Signifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Signified</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The word “iPhone” that appear at the end of the advertisement video.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The word “iphone” represent the apple.inc product itself.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Discussion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the advertisement video, there are appears two verbal signs at the end of the advertisement the first one is the word “iPhone” and the second one is the sentence “Usage varies by device &amp;&nbsp;plan”. iPhoneis a smartphone that combines an iPod, a tablet PC, a digital camera and a cellular phone. The device includes Internet browsing and networking capabilities. The iphone is the name of the phone product from apple.inc. Every product from the apple.inc corporation there is always use the word “i” in the front of the common name of the items such as iphone stand for the phone or ipad which means the tablet computer that shaped like a pad. According to the apple.inc website the word “i” in their product means independent or intelligent.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual Sign</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of Visual sign of advertisement video “iPhone 5 - Facetime every day” can be presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) . Age</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The identification of the age in this advertisement video is done based on the characters represented by the actresses. It is supported by the identification of the overall appearance starts from the face and the body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The actresses or actor age related to this video advertisement start from the 7 years old child until an adult which is 60 years old. Therefore the age can be classified start from 7-60 years old for the actors in the advertisement video.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gender</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The classification of the gender in this advertisement video can be classified into male and female. The identification of gender in this advertisement is identified from the overall appearance of each the actors such as their hair and also their looks.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Logo Sign</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of signifier and signified signs of logo apple inc. in the advertisement video </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“iPhone 5 :Facetime everyday”</span><span class="font2"> can be seen through the table below:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Signs</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Signifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Signified</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The Apple inc. Logo that apple with biting. The Apple Inc. logo appears at the end of the advertisement, there is looks clearly the picture of Apple Inc. logo.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The bite from the apple inc. logo represented as the (bite/byte). It is terms or unit from the computer and the apple from the logo represented as uncover mythical and religious story about Adam and Eve.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Discussion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A logo or icon is a picture, graphic mark, symbol, emblem that commonly used by commercial enterprise, individual or group to create the identity by the Logo or icon itself. Logo or icon is very important for knowing the public about the company or a group that offered the product. The bite in the apple. inc logo represented as the term in the computer and the apple fruit itself is represented the mythical and religious story from Adam and Eve. From semiotic perspective, Adam and Eve eating the forbidden apple resonates with Apple’s early brand positioning strategy as a rebellious young company, in opposition to the computer giant of the day, such as IBM.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that the conceptual meaning of spoken and written elements leads to find out the meaning of messages that contained in the advertisement in the form of video. Therefore every spoken that said by the actors in the advertisement video have the different meaning of each actors, it contained the structural message to lead the viewers and answering why we should buy the Apple Inc. product especially in this case to buy iPhone 5. The written element that appears in the advertisement video also strengthens the product where the iPhone 5 has its own name than the others of cellular products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the advertisement video, the visual effect has an important role to affect the viewers and clarify the meaning of advertisement. The visual sign that appears in the Apple Inc. advertisement video edition: iPhone 5 facetime everyday show the people from the all over the continent using the iPhone 5 itself to communicated and connected with face-to-face that show the new ability of communication with facetime in the iPhone 5. The good relations between spoken and written elements with the visual sign that appear in the advertisement can affect the marketability of product, the visualization that shown in the advertisement video has the characteristic that makes the viewers interested to buy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Chandler, D. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics for Beginners</span><span class="font2">.Retrieved on 2 August 2012 from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/sem01.html"><span class="font2">http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/sem01.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chandler, D. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics, the basics</span><span class="font2">. Retrieved on 1 August 2012 from</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chandler, Daniel &amp;Merris Griffiths (2000) 'Gender-differentiated production</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">features in toy commercials', </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Broadcasting &amp;&nbsp;Electronic Media</span><span class="font2">44(3): 503-520;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dolnik&amp;Bajzikova. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">3 Theory of Verbal Communication.</span><span class="font2"> Cited on</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.pulib.sk/elpub2/FF/Ferencik/03.pdf"><span class="font2">www.pulib.sk/elpub2/FF/Ferencik/03.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, G. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font2">.London: Methuen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, G. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as communication</span><span class="font2">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">London: Jonathan Cape.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, Richard. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">White</span><span class="font2">. London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English in Advertising: Linguistic Study of Advertising In Great Britain</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. 1974.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">. London: Penguin, pp.xii + 386 (2nd edition, entitled</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: the Study of Meaning</span><span class="font2">, 1981).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saussure, Ferdinand de. 1983: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Course in General Linguistics</span><span class="font2"> (trans. Roy Harris). London: Duckworth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">74</span></p>