---
layout: full_article
title: "ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN MOVIE SCRIPT OF CHRONICLES OF NARNIA: THE LION, THE WITCH, AND THE WARDROBE BY STUART C."
author: "Emy Hidayatul Amanah"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN MOVIE SCRIPT OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">CHRONICLES OF NARNIA: THE LION, THE WITCH, AND THE WARDROBE</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> BY STUART C.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EMY HIDAYATUL AMANAH</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tindakil okusi adalah jenis kedua dari tindak tutur berdasarkan klasifikasi Austin (1962).Ini merupakan tindak tutur dari seorang pembicara yang mengandung sebuah makna tersirat. Ada seorang pembicara berkata, ”Panas sekali di dalam ruangan ini”, maka pendengar dari ujaran tersebut akan segera menghidukan kipas angin atau penyejuk ruangan. Ujaran tersebut merupakan contoh tindak ilokusi yang memiliki makna permintaan. Fenomena tersebut sering terjadi, namun banyak yang tidak menyadari. Sumber data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini yang mengenai jenis tindak ilokusi dan makna tersiratnya adalah naskah film The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe oleh Stuart C. (2004). Ada dua tujuan dalam penelitian, yaitu untuk mengetahui tipe tindak ilokusi dan untuk menganalisa makna tersirat dari naskah film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Ujaran, JenisTindak Ilokusi dan MaknaTersirat.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Illocutionary act is the second act type based on the Austin categorized the speech act (1962). It is the utterance that the speaker says to hearer in the context. This utterance has a certain or convention force; performing act in saying something. For example, a speaker says, “I feel hot in this room”, then, the hearer will turn on the fan or the AC. It has the implicit meaning of requesting. This phenomenon is often found in our daily life. In addition, what the speaker intends to perform is known as illocutionary force and sometimes it seems to be complicated because it is something different from what the speaker says orally and it relies on the context of situation. Regarding the complexity of illocutionary forces, this research was focused on the illocutionary act types and illocutionary forces in the movie script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> by Stuart C. (2004).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background, these are the problems:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of illocutionary acts are found in the movie script of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> by Stuart C.?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What illocutionary forces are found in the movie script of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> by Stuart C.?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems above, the aims of the study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To recognize the types of the illocutionary acts types found in the movie script of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> by Stuart C.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the illocutionary forces in the movie script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> by Stuart C.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study were not be taken from the informant and respondent; however from the dialogues of the movie script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> which was used as the data source because it was an interesting fantasy movie which contained many illocutionary acts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method to collect the data was library research in which there were no any informants and respondents. The data were in form of movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data of this study were analyzed using qualitative method based on to theory of classification of illocutionary acts proposed by Austin (1962) and Searle (1969 and 1979). It was used as main the theory and supported by other theories of speech acts. And the data were analyzed descriptively to explain the illocutionary force of each data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Movie Script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis the of Illocutionary Act Types and Forces in Train Station Scene</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Announcer : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Attention, would all parents ensure that their parents have the appropriate identification papers.</span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Directive </span><span class="font1">- </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ordering</span><span class="font1">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs.Pevensie : You warm enough? </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Now honey you have to keep this on you. Be sure and keep this on.</span><span class="font1"> (</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Directive - Ordering</span><span class="font1">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Edmund : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">If Dad were here, the war would be over, and we wouldn't have to go.</span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Directive - Praying</span><span class="font1">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peter : If dad wasn't fighting and the war was over we wouldn't have to go.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs.Pevensie : You will listen to your brother, won't you Edmund? Promise me you look after the others.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peter : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I will mum</span><span class="font1">. (</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Commissive - Promising</span><span class="font1">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs.Pevensie : Good man. Susan, be a big girl</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font1">All right... off you go.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Edmund : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hey, get off. I know how to get on a train. Get off me.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Assertive - Complaining</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Susan :Peter! (Susan Snatches papers)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Peter : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Come on Lucy, we've got to stay together now. Everything's going to be alright. It’s gonna be fine</span><span class="font1">.Bye Mom, we'll miss you. (</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Directive - Praying</span><span class="font1">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mrs.Pevensie : Good-Bye my darlings</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The train station scene was the representative data of this undergraduate thesis. The dialogues of this scene were among the three main characters; Peter, Susan, and Edmund and two support characters; Mrs.Pevensie, their mother, and announcer. The setting of this scene was in a crowded train station of London in the morning. The train station was full of children and their own parents. All of them would go to their families or relatives because they should be evacuated from London where the war was happening. This scene contained various illocutionary act types; assertive, directive, and commissive, and illocutionary forces; ordering, praying, promising, and complaining.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterances of 1.Announcer and 2.Mrs.Pevensiewere the ordering illocutionary forces. Ordering is the asking expression of someone who has an authority to others to do something to him and it is a must. Ordering is the illocutionary forces of directive illocutionary act types. Directive is speech act that is to cause the hearer to take a particular action, e.g. requests, commands and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">advice. Both of those utterances were intended to deliver the important information for the hearers and the hearers should do those utterances. Announcer delivered the information about the important of identification papers to the passengers in order they would arrive in their right destination. The announcer had the authority to order all the passengers and their parents to re-check the passengers’ identification card before leaving the train station. And this was the task of announcer in that train station; therefore, it was suitable as the example of ordering illocutionary force.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Whereas, 2. Mrs.Pevensie’s utterance was also the example of ordering illocutionary force in this scene since Mrs.Pevensie had an authority to her own children to order them checking their identification card before leaving the train station. In addition, she wanted to make sure that all her children had kept those identification papers well as the announcement which was delivered by the announcer few minutes ago. Moreover, she wanted her children were always together. Therefore, those utterances were suitable as the examples of directive illocutionary act type and ordering illocutionary forces.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">While the utterances of 3. Edmund and 10. Peter were the examples of praying illocutionary forces. Praying is the expression of speaking to God in order to thank or to ask help. It is similar with saying a wish or hope to God. And praying is one of the forces of directive illocutionary act type. Based on the praying definition, 3. Edmund’s utterance was the expression of his hope that there was not a war in his country, therefore he and his family should not evacuate to the safe place and separate with his parents. However, it was impossible to be true that time. Since the war was happening and they were in unsafe situation. Hence, it was only Edmund’s wish. This conversation was between Edmund and his brother, Peter, and both of them were main characters in this movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Whereas 10. Peter’s utterance also was the expression of a wish that everything was going to be alright soon. This conversation was between two main characters, Lucy and Peter. In addition, Peter was the oldest brother and he had a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">responsible to keep their little sister and brother well. He did want their family felt sad or uncomfortable of anything. He wanted to be a kind oldest brother. In this case, that utterance was delivered to his little sister; Lucy, in order she felt more comfortable since she should go to another place without mother. And Peter tried to make his little sister was sincere with that condition. Therefore, those utterances were suitable as directive illocutionary act type and praying illocutionary act forces.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance of 6. Peter was the illocutionary act types of commissive and promising illocutionary force. Commissive is a speech act that commits a speaker to some future action, e.g. promises and oaths. And promising is the expression of saying definitely that the speaker will do or not do something or that something will happen. This conversation was between Peter and his mother, Mrs.Pevensie. It was the response of Mrs.Pevensie’s utterance that he would do his mother’s utterance before. As the first children, Peter wanted to be a good brother for his family and he wanted to keep his family as his ability. Therefore, that utterance was suitable as the expression of promising illocutionary act force.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last of illocutionary act types and forces in this scene was assertive illocutionary act type and complaining illocutionary force. And the utterance of it was 8. Edmund. It was the assertive illocutionary act type since it was the utterance which committed a speaker to the truth of the expressed proposition and it was the expression of complaining because Edmund did not interest with his older brother in that situation. In case, it was in the crowded train station and the conversation between two main characters; Edmund and Peter. In this case, Edmund was helped by Peter in getting on the train. Peter tried to keep Edmund well, however, Edmund disagreed with it and he thought that it was seemed as a little weak boy who could not do anything well. He wanted to show that he could do it by himself. Therefore, it was the complaining expression in this scene.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.2 The Analysis of Illocutionary Act Types and Illocutionary Forces InCair</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Paravel Scene</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Then you see CairParavel, and horns blowing. The coronation of the Pevensies began. They walk up the aisle happily, and stand next to their cool chairs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aslan : Bring forth the crowns! (Tumnus and Mr. Beaver bring out the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">crowns)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aslan : (As they put on her crown) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">To the glistening eastern sea, I</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">give you Queen Lucy the Valiant. To the great western woods, (puts his crown on) King Edmund the Just. To the radiant southern sun, (puts crown on) Queen Susan the Gentle. (crown put on) And to the clear northern skies, King Peter the Magnificent. Once a king or Queen of Narnia, always a king or queen.</span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Declaration - Declaring</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Everyone : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Long live King Peter! Long live Queen Susan! Long live King</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Edmund! And long live Queen Lucy! </span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Expressive – Congratulating)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Aslan walking on the beach in the sunset Lucy runs out to the balcony and sees him walking away</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tumnus &nbsp;&nbsp;: We'll see him again.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lucy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: When?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tumnus : In time...you mustn't press him; He isn't a tame lion...</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lucy : No, but he's good...</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tumnus : Here (pulling a hankie from his person) I think you need this</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">more than I do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She takes it and sees that Aslan has disappeared and begins to cry softly, her and Tumnus hold hands as she looks into the sunset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It was the scene where the result of those children’s struggle in defeating the Witch and also the important event for Narnia people who had waited the peace life in Narnia. For more than one hundred Narnia was in White Witch’s control; the wonderful life was gone and one by one of Narnian people was chased, jailed and changed into a stone statue by her magic stick. Therefore, all of them were very glad and thanked to those children, because of their struggle in defeating the Witch, they could be safe for doing anything in Narnia. And it was the great event which those children would receive their own crowns as the kings and queens of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Narnia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This scene was also contained the illocutionary acts. The utterance of 13.Aslan was the illocutionary acts. The type of it was declaration. Declaration is a speech act that changes the reality in accord with the proposition of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">declaration, e.g. baptisms, pronouncing someone guilty or pronouncing someone husband and wife. That Aslan’s utterance was changing the reality in Narnia after the battle to defeat the Witch. He declared the new kings and queens of Narnia. And that utterance was the declaring illocutionary force. Declaring is the expression to state something publicly and officially or to make something known in a firm, clear way. In addition, Aslan did this declaration in front of all Narnian people in firm and clear way because it was the result of the battle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Another illocutionary act in this movie was expressive. Expressive is a speech act that speech act that expresses on the speaker's attitudes and emotions towards the proposition, e.g. congratulations, excuses and thanks. It was the utterance of 14. Everyone in that castle. That utterance had the illocutionary force; congratulating. Congratulating is the expression of to tell somebody that others pleased about something have done. It was suitable as the congratulating illocutionary force since those children had tried bravely and sincerely in defeating the Witch and they also retreat the peace, safe and wealth life forever.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data analysis and discussion previously presented, there were two points to be concluding relating to the problem of this research; first, there were five illocutionary act types found in this movie script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe</span><span class="font1"> based on the theory of Austin (1962) and Searle (1979). And the second conclusion wasthe forces of illocutionary acts which were found in this movie script as follows: ordering, praying, promising, complaining</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font1">declaring, and congratulating. Those illocutionary forces were in different scenes of this movie script. The scenes were Train Station, and CairParavel. Those scenes were selected as the representative data of this electronic journal. The illocutionary forces were in Train Station scene were ordering, praying, promising, and complaining.And the illocutionary forces of CairParavel scene were declaring and congratulating. Both scenes were selected as the representative data since they had the important part of the movie script; Train Station scene was the beginning of those children’s experience in Narnia. They entered that world through the big wardrobe in Professor</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kirke’s house where they stayed during the war in London. And the CairParavel was the last scene in this movie script that those children got the award for their struggling in defeating the White Witch in the battle.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Anonim.2012e. Definition of Illocutionary Act. </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia"><span class="font1">http://en.wikipedia</span></a><span class="font1">. org/wiki/Illocutionary).act.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Austin, J. L. 1962. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Do Things with Words</span><span class="font1">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Levinson, C. Stephen. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle, J.R. 1969.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Act: An Essay in the Philosophy of Languages</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle, J.R. 1979.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Expression and Meaning: Studies in Theory of Speech Acts</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>