---
layout: full_article
title: "Address Terms Use In  Manuscript Of the Movie “Final Destination Two”"
author: "Kadek Andriana Dersen, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 18.2 Pebruari 2017: 193-201</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Address Terms Use In Manuscript Of the Movie “Final Destination Two”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kadek Andriana Dersen<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>2</sup>, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:Dersen1988@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[Dersen1988@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:Made_rajeg@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">[Made_rajeg@unud.ac.id]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:Isnu.maharani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">[Isnu.maharani@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Address Terms Use In Manuscript Of Movie “ Final Destination Two ‘’</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi dan mengklasifikasikan jenis-jenis penyebutan untuk seseorang yang di temukan di dalam film serta menjelaskan penggunaan pemanggilan tersebut pada film tersebut. Sumber data diambil dari film horror asal Amerika yang dirilis tahun 2003 yang berjudul Final Destinaton 2. Film ini disutradarai oleh </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">David R. Ellis dan dibintangi oleh Ali Carter da A.J. Cook</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Teori utama yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diadopsi dari teori politeness yang dikemukakkan oleh</span><span class="font1"> Brown and Levinson (1987)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode kualitatif. Diawali dengan menonton film tersebut. Kemudian membaca skrip film dari Final destination 2. Setelah membaca, beberapa penggunaan pemanggilan untuk seseorang dipilih secara intensif. Setelah itu, mencatat data yang terkait. Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa terdapat lima macam variasi penggunaan pemanggilan seseorang yang ditemukan. Sedangkan tujuan pemanggilan seseorang yang ditunjukkan melalui film ini mempunyai banyak tujuan seperti cara seseorang untuk saling perduli antara satu sama lain, untuk menunjukkan kasih saying, dan sebagaginya</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Final Destination 2, Film, Bahasa Pemanggilan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Every day people use language to communicate with each other. As members of society, people have their own behavior toward language. Every language shows the social characters of the speaker or addressee. Furthermore, it shows the relation between them. Addressing term is one of the important means of communication used in society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Types of basic rules determining the addressing terms used are social class, age, sex, profession, marital status, politeness and other related aspects. The speaker uses addressing terms to call the person who are involved in the conversation. The use of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">addressing terms depends on the speaker and addressee relationship, the social status or individuals involved in the conversation, the situation and purpose of the conversation. The aim of addressing is to maintain the social relationship between speaker and addressee in society (Artika, 2008 ). One of movies that contain Address Terms is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Final Destination Two</span><span class="font2"> directed by David R. Ellis</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> which was written by Jeffrey Reddick, Eric Bress and J. Mackey Gruber.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background of the study, the research problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of addressing terms are used in the Manuscript of the Movie “Final Destination Two”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the reasons of using addressing terms used in Manuscript of the Movie “Final Destination Two“?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem of study, the aims of study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the variations of addressing terms used in the manuscript of the movie “ Final Destination Two”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the reasons of using addressing terms used in the manuscript of the movie “ Final Destination Two “.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this research, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Final Destination 2</span><span class="font2"> by David R. Ellis is used as the data source. The film was released in 2003. It is an American Supernatural horror and as a part of the sequel from the first movie “Final Destination (2000)”. The movies contain many examples of Address Terms, So the films </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Final Destination Two</span><span class="font2"> is relevant to the topic of the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study were collected using the method of documentation. The data were collected through the following steps. First, watching the movie; second, making the general review including reading the Final Destination 2 movie manuscript and observing the data. Third, classifying the data which are included in the variation of address terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analysed qualitatively based the theory of Politeness proposed by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown and Levinson (1987). In this study, a contrastive analysis of address terms regarding politeness theory of Brown and Levinson (1987) was used. The movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Final Destination Two</span><span class="font2"> as the main source of data in the research was analyzed using the sociolinguistic approach.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and discussion of the analysis of the types of addressing terms taken from Final Destination 2 movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Addressing Terms Use In Movie “ Final Destination Two “</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data source, the analysis shows that there are five kinds of addressing terms found in the movie “Final Destination 2”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressing Terms Using Name</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this type of addressing term, the speakers address the others by calling their names. Usually, the speakers use the first name, last name, nickname or family name. Example: in this conversation, Mr. Burrough as Kimberly’s Father. They are very closely related as a father and a daughter. When Kimberly will go far away from her home, Mr Burroughs is very afraid of his daughter so that he reminds of her needs such as credit cards, cell phone, AAA card, etc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Thanks, Dad. I'll call you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You have everything, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kimberly </span><span class="font1">? Credit card, cell phone, AAA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Card?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the dialogue above, Mr Burroughs, addresses his daughter using her first name. He just called “Kimberly” without her last name.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressing Terms Using Kinship</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this type of addressing terms, the speaker uses the kinship terms to address the others. The form of kinship terms is Title without Last Name (TLN). Example: In this conversation, When Kimberly says goodbye to go to Daytona, his father, Mr Burroughs is very worried because he will be deserted by his beloved daughter. Both of them have very close relationship because so far they only stay alone at home. Kimberly tries to make him relaxed when she would leave. And the setting is high way on ramp.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">: Thanks</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, dad</span><span class="font1">. I'll call you.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: You have everything, Kimberly? Credit card, cell phone, AAA card?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: Relax, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">dad. </span><span class="font1">It's Daytona, not Mongolia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">EXT. HIGHWAY ON RAMP – DAY (Then Kimberly's CELL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PHONE RINGS. She hits the speaker button.)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: Kimberly? It's Dad.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">: Hey, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">dad. </span><span class="font1">What's up?</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">In the dialogues, Kimberly addresses her father by pronouncing “Dad”. “Dad” is substandard addressing terms of “Daddy” and the synonym of “Father”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.3</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressing Terms Using Intimacy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To call someone, people can use several ways, such as honey and sweetie. These kinds of words are used to express intimacy. These words are called addressing terms using intimacy because they fulfil its characteristics: short word which is uncommon in formal setting. If a speaker has a close relationship with the hearer, his or her words of speech can be intimate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For example, as it is described before, Mr Burroughs and Kimberly are the father and daughter who have deep relationship. Both Kimberly and her father love each other. The conversation above is taking place while Kimberly will go to Daytona and his father is very afraid to let her go.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I know this is the first time we've been apart since. But</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">everything's gonna be okay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">I know, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">honey</span><span class="font1">. I just (Kimberly hugs him tighter. Cutting him off)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the dialogue above, the word “Honey” is used by the father to his daughter as the addressee. It is used by people who have close relationship to increase intimacy and to give respect by not calling someone’s name.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.4</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressing Terms Using Respect</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this type of addressing term, the speakers address the others using title and first name (TFN), title and last name (TLN) and sometimes just title (T) without name. Example: Shaina is one of Kimberly’s friends who will go along with her to Daytona. When she comes to Kimberly’s house, he meets Mr Burroughs who is Kimberly’s father and they have a conversation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shaina : Just kidding, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. B </span><span class="font1">don’t worry, I'll keep an eye on her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (sarcastic) Oh, that makes me feel a lot better.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shaina addresses Kimberly’s father using the combination of title and abbreviation of name, that is, “Mr B” for “Mr Burroughs. Shaina wants to give respect to Mr Burroughs as Kimberly’s father.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.5</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressing Terms Using Mockery</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Addressing terms can be used by swearing or mocking. Terms like fool, idiot, and shit are usually employed to mock someone. Example, Frankie is one of Kimberly’s who go along with her to Daytona. On the way to Daytona, Kimberly drives her car slowly and carefully. It triggers Frankie’s anger. He thinks that she should drive quickly because they do have 1200 miles to go. Frankie asks Kimberly angrily and loudly to increase her speed. Inside Nissan Suv</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frankie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Gas it around these </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">idiots. </span><span class="font1">We do have 1200 miles to go, you know. (Kimberly</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">tires to enter the passing lane, but she's blocked by a suburu wagon)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the dialogue above, Frankie also addresses Kimberly by pronouncing “idiot”. In this situation, Frankie is angry to Kimberly because she drove slowly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reasons of Using Addressing Term</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reasons of Using Addressing Term Using Name</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">To show care</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly’s Neighbourhood – Day</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Thanks, Dad. I'll call you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You have everything, Kimberly? </span><span class="font1">Credit card, cell phone, AAA card?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">They are very closely related as a father and a daughter. When Kimberly will go far away from her home, Mr Burroughs is very afraid of his daughter so he reminds of her needs such as credit cards, cell phone, AAA card, etc. Mr Burroughs addresses Kimberly directly by calling her name. When Mr Burroughs addresses her daughter using the first name of Kimberly, it means that Mr Burroughs wants to show his attention and intimacy to her daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Show Power / Authority</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reason of Using Addressing Terms Using Kinship</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">To Show Politeness</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the room</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nora &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You're all certifiable, you know that? I can't believe I've been listening to this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">crap. Come on, Tim, let's go outside.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tim &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Jeez, Mom, stop tripping'</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nora and Tim are a mother and a son. They are both involved as witnesses in a major accident on the highway. When they are in an interrogation in a room at the police station, Nora can‟ be calm and he keeps pacing back and forth. Tim sees his mother's attitude and feels a little distracted. Although Tim dislikes his mother’s attitude, Tim still calls her mother with the word &quot;mom&quot; calmly and politely. However, Nora is his mother, so Tim still shows that he gives respect to his mother when addressing her. By mentioning the word “mom”, it means that Tom wants to show a sense of decency and gives respect to his parents although he dislikes her mother’s attitude.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.3</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reason of Using Addressing Term Using Intimacy</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark15"></a>A.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Show Intimacy’</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ext. Kimberly’s Neighbourhood in the afternoon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I know this is the first time we've been apart since. But everything's</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">gonna be okay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Burrough : I know, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">honey</span><span class="font1">. I just (Kimberly hugs him tighter. Cutting him off)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As it is described before, Mr Burroughs and Kimberly are the father and daughter who have deep relationship. Both Kimberly and her father love each other. The conversation above is taking place while Kimberly will go to Daytona and his father is very afraid of letting her go. Seen from the circumstances occuring at that time, the word “Honey” uttered by Mr Burroughs to Kimberly is intended to show his affection and intimacy between a father and his daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">B.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To Warm Someone</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reason of Using Addressing Term Using Respect</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. To Show Politeness</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">On Highway on ramp in the afternoon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kimberly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (Incoherent, through tears) There's going to be a pile up. Logs. Bodies</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">everywhere. I saw it happen. It happened. (Thomas looks to the guys in back who shrug, &quot;we don't know her.&quot;)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thomas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Miss, </span><span class="font1">please step out of the vehicle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">On the way to Daytona, Kimberly has a bad premonition that a huge accident will happen in that highway. Kimberly is confused and afraid. To avoid that accident, Kimberly pulls her car forward, turning it sideways to block all the traffic. The action of Kimberly causes a traffic jam, so a police officer, Thomas Burke, exits from his car and approaches Kimberly’s car.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thomas and Kimberly have never met before; in other words, they are strangers. When Thomas asks Kimberly to step out of the vehicle, he addresses Kimberly politely by mentioning the word “miss”. It means that Thomas want to show his politeness to a person who he has just met.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Reason of Using Addressing Term Using Mockery</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>A. To Show Anger</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Inside Nissan SUV</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frankie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Gas it around these </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">idiots</span><span class="font1">. We do have 1200 miles to go, you know. Kimberly</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">tires to enter the passing lane, but she's blocked by a suburu wagon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frankie is one of Kimberly’s who goes along with her to Daytona. On the way to Daytona, Kimberly drives her car slowly and carefully. It triggers Frankie’s anger. He thinks that she should drive quickly because they do have 1200 miles to go. Frankie asks Kimberly angrily and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">loudly to increase her speed. By using the word “idiot” to address Kimberly, it means that Frankie wants to show her anger to Kimberly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that there are </span><span class="font1">five Variations of addressing terms used in the manuscript of the movie “ Final Destination Two ” ; they are addressing terms using name, using kinship, intimacy, respect and also mockery. There are some reasons of employing addressing terms used in the manuscript of the movie “ Final Destination Two. They are to show intimacy, care, empathy, worry, power/authority, politeness, calming someone, warning someone, and showing anger/dislike.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Brown P, Levinson SC, 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Some universal in language usage</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge: Cambridge University Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hymes, Theory.1972 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“ The Background of respondent Book”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardaugh, Ronald. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">201</span></p>