---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Sexist Language in Movie’s script ‘The Vow’ by Michael Sucsy"
author: "Ni Komang Ayu Widayanti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Sexist Language in Movie’s script </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">‘The Vow’</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Michael Sucsy</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Ni Komang Ayu Widayanti</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Extension Program Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Study tentang sexist ini bertujuan untuk menemukan dan menganalisa karakteristik bahasa dan hubungannya dengan gender, persamaan dan perbedaan karakteristik bahasa laki-laki dan perempuan, gaya bahasa laki-laki dan perempuan serta faktor yang yang mempengaruhi persamaan dan perbedaan karakteristik bahasa laki-laki dan perempuan. Data dalam penelitian diambil dari naskah film ‘The Vow’ yang disutradarai oleh Michael Sucsy, juga menonton film sembari membaca naskah. Dianalisa secara kualitatif dengan penyajian yang deskriptif, bertujuan untuk memberikan penjelasan dan analisa yang jelas. Jurnal ini menggunakan teori karakteristik bahasa perempuan beserta fungsinya yang dikemukakan oleh Lakoff (1975) dan teori yang dibuat oleh Coates (1986) tentang gaya bahasa laki-laki dan perempuan. Sebagai teori pendukung digunakan teori gender performativity yang dikemukakan oleh Butler (1990). Analisa jurnal ini menunjukan karakteristik bahasa laki-laki dalam naskah film ‘The Vow’ bahwa bahasa laki-laki lebih tegas, matang, dan laki-laki suka berbicara terang-terangan dengan kosakata yang tepat. Namun, bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan tidak tegas, tidak secara terang-terangan (menggunakan kata-kata kiasan), dan berhati-hati ketika mengungkapkan sesuatu, serta kerap menggunakan kata yang lebih halus dan sopan atau melalui isyarat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : karakteristik bahasa perempuan, karakteristik bahasa laki-laki, gaya bahasa laki-laki dan perempuan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Advances in technology make western movies now being expanded entertainment industry in our country. Many western movies consist of various types such as: action, drama, colossal, and mystery. Especially the western movie which is present the goal of entertaining, science and reality of life. Western moviegoers are various circles, adults, teens, even kids,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">they love the comedy from European countries. Cartoons and animations are also very popular.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Language also has a relationship with gender, as a means of communication of two or more persons, means of communication between male and female, male and male, and also female and female. As well as in the movie which tells the story like in the real life where there are many roles of male and female and their communication with each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Xiaolan Lei (2006) in her article entitled Sexism in language shows that sexist language is language that expresses bias in favor of one sex and thus treats the other sex in a discriminatory manner. The existence of sexist language is due to sexism in society. As a social phenomenon, language is closely related to social attitudes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The problems of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the linguistic features in terms of gender found in The Vow movie’s script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the similarities and differences between male and female linguistic style found in The Vow movie’s script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors influence the difference of language styles on males’ and females’ conversation in this movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the linguistic features which differentiate males’ from females’ speech in The Vow movie’s script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate what kind of linguistic features that usually occur in the conversation in The Vow movie’s script.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the factors that influence the difference in language styles on males’ and females’ conversation in The Vow movie’s script.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were taken from the movie script of ‘The Vow’ by Michael Sucsy. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Vow</span><span class="font0"> is a 2012 romantic drama film directed by Michael Sucsy, stared by Rachel McAdams and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Channing Tatum. The data were collected by means of documentation method. In this method the data were collected in order to find the linguistic features found in The Vow movie’s script. The data were analyzed qualitatively and descriptively in order to give a clear description through some theories and perspective proposed by Lakoff (1975) combined with theory by Holmes (1992) and Coates (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The males and females’s linguistic features analyzed from the conversation taken directly from the utterance of the main and supporting characters in the movie’s script. It is also supported by watching the movie in order to get clear description about the setting and pronounciation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The females’ utterances analyzed in this study were taken from the utterances of the main character, Paige, and some of the supporting characters, such as Gwen, Lily and Paige’s mother. Females’s linguistic features were analyzed based on the features proposed by Lakoff (1975) and the features found in this movie were </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lexical hedges or fillers, tag questions, ‘empty’ adjectives, intensifier (just and so), ‘hypercorrect grammar (standard verb forms), ‘superpolite forms, and avoidance of strong swear words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Example: Tag Questions (female)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEO: I’m done. It’s over. I give up.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LILY: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span><span class="font0">, you never give up, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">don’t you</span><span class="font0">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEO: No, if were meant to be together, we would be together.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Analysis:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">A tag question, then, might be thought of as a declarative statement without the assumsption that the statement is to be believed by the addressee: one has an out, as with a question. A tag gives the adressee leeway, not forcing him to go along with the views of the speaker (Lakoff, 1975:16).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A tag in its usage as well as syntactic shape (in English) is midway between an outright statement and yes-no question; it is less assertive than the former, but more confident than the latter. Therefore it usable under certain contextual situations; not those in which a statement would be appropriate, nor those in which a yes-no question is generally used, but in situations intermediate between this. A tag question may be functioned to express uncertainty</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">or to ask for agreement. Female is uncertain about something, and indicates this with a tag which signals doubt about what she is asserting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Here, the tag question used by Lily to express her uncertainty. Actually Lily was certain that there was not over between Leo and Paige. She asked Leo to agree with what she said, she know that Leo and Paige will be together again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Example: Tag Question (male)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEO: I know a lot about your family, Paige.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">PAIGE: Right, yeah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">LEO: We’re married. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">You know?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Analysis:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0">If we compare the tag question of males and females in this movie, it can be said that the tag question from both sides are have the same function and meaning. Both tag question used by females and males can be categorized as speaker-oriented tag since they were used to ask for addressee’s confirmation about speaker’s proporsition. As we could see in the analysis above, we find that Lakoff’s point of view which states that females use more tag question than males is proven in this movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Male’s linguistic features analyzed from the utterances spoken by the main character, Leo Collin, and also the supporting characters. There were some male’s linguistic features found in this movie such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">the use of multiple negation, in terms of pronounciation they also use – in form rather than –ing form, the use of ungrammatical form, and the use of impolite form like swearing taboo language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Males and females particularly employed different linguistic style. According to Coates, the differences between male and female language style is shown </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">by verbosity, tag question, questions, command and directives, and swearing and taboo language</span><span class="font0"> (Coates, 1986:103). Based on the analysis of linguistic style on males and females, the differences between male and female linguistic style in The Vow movie’s script can be seen in the form of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">the use of Tag question, question from female to male, question from male to female, the use of verbosity, command and directives, the use of impolite form like swearing and taboo language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The participants of the conversation are one of the crucial factors which influenced the differences in the use of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">swear words</span><span class="font0"> between males and females. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Swear word</span><span class="font0"> is a common feature of speech in conversation of males and females.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Context of situation is the factor which influences the difference between male and female in using the swearing and taboo words. In terms of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">command and directives</span><span class="font0">, context of situation also influenced the male and female in using the command and directives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">There are some points that can be presented as conclusions of the research. There are some linguistic features of males and females found in the movie’s script: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lexical hedges or fillers, tag question, the use of rising or question intonation on declaratives, the use of ‘empty’ adjectives, intensifier (just and so), hypercorrect grammar, superpolite forms, and avoidance of strong swear words.</span><span class="font0"> The features </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">emphatic stress</span><span class="font0"> are not found in this movie. The linguistic features of male found in this movie are: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">the use of lexical hedges, the use of ungrammatical form, the use of impolite form like swearing and taboo language.</span><span class="font0"> Most of the linguistic features propose by Lakoff and Holmes are showed in this movie. However, there are no features in females’ linguistic features use only by females, because males also use </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">lexical hedges, tag question, and intensifier.</span><span class="font0"> In terms of linguistic styles there are found some areas of differences between males and females in this movie. The linguistic styles covered </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">verbosity, tag questions, questions, command and directives, and also swearing and taboo language</span><span class="font0">. In the area of tag questions, Lakoff’s view point that females used more tag questions than males are showed in this movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There are some components of context of situation which influenced males and females use different linguistic styles. In terms of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tag question</span><span class="font0">, females were used </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tag questions</span><span class="font0"> more than males, this is because females are lack of confidence. In the area of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">questions</span><span class="font0">, the topic, purpose and participants are the factor which influences the difference between males and females in asking question. In the area of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">verbosity</span><span class="font0">, the topic is the most crucial factor which influences females to speak in verbose. The speaker and the situation are the factors which influences the difference between males and females in using swearing and taboo words. In terms of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">commands and directives</span><span class="font0">, the speakers and the situation also influences the males and females in using commands and directives. The males use more forceful directives or direct order to the males rather than to the females.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Ariyantini, Diah. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gender and Its Influences on Computer Mediated Communication</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Benokraitis, Nijole V. and Joe R. Feagin. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Modern Sexism</span><span class="font0">. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Coates, Jennifer. 1986</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Women, Men and Language : A Sosiolinguistic account of sex differences in Language.</span><span class="font0"> New York: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Coley, T. (2006). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Students and Cyber Communities</span><span class="font0">. University of South Carolina.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lakoff, Robin. 1975. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman’s Place</span><span class="font0">. New York: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lei, Xiaolan.2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sexism in Language</span><span class="font0">. Northwest Polytechnic University, Xi’an, China. available from: Journal of language and Linguistic volume 5 number 1 2006. ISSN 1475-8989</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Monaghan, Leila and Goodman, Jane E. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Cultural Approach to Interpersonal Communication: Essentials Readings</span><span class="font0">. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nazir, Barirah. 2012. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gender Patterns on Facebook : A Sociolinguistic Perspective.</span><span class="font0"> available from: </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">URL : </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.5296/ijl.V413.1899"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.5296/ijl.V413.1899</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rahmawati, Ni Luh Gede Yenni. 2007</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Language Functions and Sexism used in the Short Story “The Snows of Kilimanjaro”.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Susandi, Ni Kadek Ary. 2005</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. The Analysis of Sexist Language in the “Titanic”.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.macrothink.org/ijl"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.macrothink.org/ijl</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.pdf.org/ijl"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.pdf.org/ijl</span></a></p>