---
layout: full_article
title: "A Proposed Partnership Scheme of Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) and MICE Corporations: Passenger Satisfaction and Tourism Transport Policy Approach"
author: "Pem Dechen, Sittichai Sanyost, Ahmad Mujafar Syah"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-74318 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-74318"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-74318"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.8. No.2. (2021): 215-228</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>A Proposed Partnership Scheme of Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) and MICE Corporations: Passenger Satisfaction and Tourism Transport Policy Approach</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Pem Dechen, Sittichai Sanyost, Ahmad Mujafar Syah*</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Naresuan University International College, Thailand</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">*Corresponding Author: </span><a href="mailto:ahmadmu@nu.ac.th"><span class="font3">ahmadmu@nu.ac.th</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v8i2.74318"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v8i2.74318</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Article Info</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Submitted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">June 17<sup>th</sup> 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Accepted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">September 19<sup>th</sup> 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Published:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">September 30<sup>th</sup> 2021</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This research examined and proposed a partnership scheme between Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) and MICE corporations (MICE: meetings, incentives, conventions &amp;&nbsp;exhibitions) where one representative from BTS and six respondents from six different MICE corporations volunteered in the study. The research was conducted by two different sequences and undertaken by a mixed methodology. Out of 400 ridership satisfaction questionnaires, 300 were validated to have ridership experiences to MICE venues with BTS. Post-passenger satisfaction study, the results were used to inform BTS and MICE corporations to navigate in-depth interviews. SPSS runs to quantify travel frequencies, demographic profiles, and passenger satisfaction while thematic analysis framed the interview results. The finding underscored the two major significances as they correspond to the objective of the study: (1) The overarching governance proposal of BTS’s short-term partnership scenario with MICE corporations - where an informed policy benchmark from “England Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020” robustly examined; (2) the novelty over the deficient study of integrated transport-MICE strategic planning within the Southeast Asian region.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: Partnership scheme, Passenger satisfaction, Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS), MICE corporations</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Revisiting the growth of the travel and tourism economy in Thailand, prior to the pandemic, the Kingdom’s tourism has been progressing from 8 million visitors to 39.92 million by the end of 2019 – the great and remarkable improvement over the past 2 decades (Ministry of Tourism and Sport, 2021). The tourism revenue generated as of 2019 was recorded at 2 trillion Baht with</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">industry job absorbance at 7 million workforce or up to 20% of the total employment (Bank of Thailand, 2021). These tourism receipts have contributed a solid industry growth at 11% of the total country’s GDP (Bank of Thailand, 2021). Additionally, with regard to TCEB (2019) and Meet in Thailand (2020), the growth of the MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conventions &amp;&nbsp;Exhibitions) industry has been contributing an impressive international exchange reve-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">nue since 2010, marked by the numbers of MICE travelers were constantly skyrocketing from 679,585 to 1,280,000 per 2017. As reported in the tourism &amp;&nbsp;travel competitiveness index 2017, distributed by the World Economic Forum, among the 136 countries worldwide, Thailand has been ranked 34<sup>th</sup> and is ranked 3<sup>rd</sup> among southeast Asian members and standing below Singapore and Malaysia (Meet in Thailand, 2020). In 2018, Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau (TCEB) has planned the actual number of 1,340,231 international MICE individuals to Thailand, generating revenue of 3.4 billion US dollars alone – equal to 109 billion baht. Thailand’s MICE industry is indeed progressing its operational service capabilities. With a clear mission of Bangkok Metropolitan Region (BMR), and TCEB as a public body for MICE business administrators in Thailand, their core mission is to create and improve the competitive MICE industry environment. As TCEB (2019) mentioned, the 4 key objectives of MICE capability are concisely communicated as extending the knowledge to new generations of future leaders; elevating capabilities through knowledge, content sharing, networking, promotion, and marketing activities; expanding support for domestic and international trade alliances; as well as enhancing service and operational quality to international standards.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">With the same critical degree, over the surge of domestic and international visitation for Thailand’s MICE, the transport system has been serving fundamental logistics and its integrations cannot be left trivial. According to Celiński and Sierpiński (2014), the transport system strongly influences other businesses, especially those around the areas nearby. When it is managed in a manner that all transport infrastructures, residents, and visitors are well integrated upon, the positive externalities of this travel economy system could pay out the overall establishment and re-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">gulatory expenditures (Albalate &amp;&nbsp;Bel, 2009). It drives positive externalities where inevitably, urban people depend heavily on their socioeconomic benefits (Celiński &amp;&nbsp;Sierpiński, 2014). Through that holistic socioeconomic expectation, Bangkok, as the capital city, has to be very sensitive in adapting to the needs of urban mobility – including its major source of economy, the tourists. With so many existing benchmark studies on logistics in response to tourism growth, Bangkok needs to enable a keen outlook on the mutual linkages between business sectors, which in this case, includes a partnership of BTS with MICE venues.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Bangkok Skytrain or best known as the Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) has been operating since 1999. It is the first electric mass transit railway system to begin operations in Thailand and endeavors to increase the paths in the suburbs of Bangkok so that it can transport more residents and tourists to a wider area of Bangkok (BTS, 2019). The BTS trains have offered the right direction in solving the public transport issue within a packed metropolitan area. The sky train consists of a 36.92 kilometers elevated railway system that operates above the street system in Bangkok. BTS has two lines that it operates, the Sukhumvit Line and the Silom line. There are today 35 stations along two routes (BTS, 2019).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">With the fact that BTS has rapidly served the ridership; through the support of transit facilities such as safe and convenient pedestrians, well-joined road links around the transit terminals, rooms for disabling access both in and out of the BTS transit terminals, clear and safe circulation lines of passengers within the terminal, and good rush hour management (Noichan &amp;&nbsp;De-wancker, 2018), BTS still has many problems posed by inconvenient transit trips from several transfers such as packed connection areas, frequency and punctuality issues, and difficult access for disabled riders</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Noichan &amp;&nbsp;Dewancker, 2018). In addition, BTS has not yet achieved the main goals to reduce the number of private vehicles and attract more ridership (Noichan &amp;&nbsp;De-wancker, 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Despite the critiques, BTS has proven to be one of the fast-growing logistics infrastructures and the largest leading service industries in Thailand. It satisfied many passengers’ means of transportation, and its rapid economic growth has been constantly progressing. Passengers from so many different backgrounds, including MICE travelers, rely on this mode of transportation. Nevertheless, the satisfaction study from BTS’ passengers’ point of view has not yet been explored. Likewise, resonating to previous research in mass transportation for a city and its support toward the development of MICE industries, especially within the context of Thailand, the researchers found that in addition to infrastructure, service, congestion, and transit issues in BTS, there are insufficient studies recommending the contemporary of partnership strategy on how mass transportation within a city like Bangkok being governed benefiting all the stakeholders including the passengers, MICE corporations, and tourism businesses as a whole. Thus, the research on how the governance within the Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) being adapted to reach out to the MICE tourists commuting with BTS and how the integrated collaboration between BTS and MICE venues being strategically proposed and implemented is becoming an important study to explore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">LITERATURE REVIEW</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Passenger Satisfaction on Integrated System of Public Transport</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">On the basis of a customer satisfaction study, Shiau and Luo, 2012 argued that meeting customer satisfaction is pivotal for a corporation’s long-term credibility. This also would stimulate a continuous mutual</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">relationship between the market and the brand (Shiau &amp;&nbsp;Luo, 2012). From customers’ demand perspectives, sustainable and integrated modes of transport will soon transform the travel demand’s behaviors. Customers would tend to progress to a more efficient pick up on modes of public transportations that are not only committed to green technology but also more integrated and safer, punctual, and reliable (Replogle &amp;&nbsp;Fultorn, 2014). Afrer all, as Replogle and Fultorn (2014) extended, the passenger satisfaction understanding among the public transport id framed as where the passenger has a default service delivery expectation, the concept of actual ridership experience, as well as perceived specific satisfaction indicators of a certain public transport for a certain group of individuals. Depending on what public service’s indicators a researcher would exercise for the purpose of his/ her satisfaction study, most commonly, the study would lead to the literature review of service quality in transit systems from which diversified factors of passenger’s satisfaction are based (de Ona, et al., 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The nature of the mass transportation system in the city that is owned by the public enterprise and/or semi-private ownership is generally monopolistic where the competitions are extremely rare (Pavlina, 2015). Extending to the mentioned fact, while the other private companies are grasping the principles of a solid company culture towards customer priority, the public enterprises are hypothetically seen with less focus of customers’ satisfactions, and hence, putting aside a customer’s input is not unusual (Pavlina, 2015). “Therefore, in public and/or semi-private firms, the view of the customer is often omitted whereas in economics and marketing, this kind of view is widely studied (Mouwen, 2015). Having said that, in order to receive the overall rating of service quality within the mass public transport system in the city, regardless of the measurement of which service being</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">tested, the passenger satisfaction is vital (Pavlina, 2015). As much as we understand that either private companies, or public enterprises, or the combination of both are praising the service excellent principles to maintain their values and overall portfolios. And without undermining the respective nature of the company’s capitals, the voices from the customers should never have been left trivial. Especially, when we want to rebuild or seek another strategy on customer engagement and service quality excellence through mutual business partnerships (Pavlina, 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Antonucci, et.al. (2014), the factors to studying customer satisfaction toward public transport are divided into two categories, from each of the subcategories entitled with significant details. There are: Observed variables that include service organization, safety, reliability, human resources, comfort, and cleanliness. De Ona, et al., (2013) resonated the indicators of observed variables that lie within a service indicator ranging from speed, frequency, and punctuality of transport, and information whereby these indicators may navigate the level of passenger satisfaction at its highest rate. Meanwhile, the second category is latent variable. This variable included the perceived service quality and delivery, and logistics parameters (Antonucci, et.al., 2014 &amp;&nbsp;Pavlina, 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">To support aforementioned passenger attributes for a benchmark’s research framework purpose, research by Mouwen (2015) further explained that based on the case study in the Netherlands, the customer opinion on public transport may range from service attributes on-time performances, travel speed, service frequency, driver behavior, and the cleanliness of the vehicles. However, to compare it fairly, the passenger satisfaction study in the Netherlands may differ from any other countries due to its exceptional logistics systems on bicycles and high fare of public transports</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">are inevitably affecting special satisfaction attributes (Pavlina, 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As this study extends the study from Pavlina (2015) albeit with more emphasis on observed variables, the association between BTS’s current operations and Pavlina (2015) is considered more cohesive as the satisfaction indicators presented adhere to what BTS is currently lacking in customercentered study. Pavlina (2015) has done the study within the Czech Republic’s city transport condition. Pavlina (2015) furthered the indicators of passenger satisfaction on public transport, based on different buying behavior, travel motive, the demographic structure of passenger, the statistics of tourist in the targeted research city, through the satisfaction framework of “optimal model” as shown in table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">A Proposed Strategic Partnership Scheme from England’s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Transport is acknowledged as one of the most significant factors to have contributed to the international development of tourism” (Page, 2005, p. 3). The tourism economics may rely heavily on integrated transport systems as people are moving within a destination by predominant full factors of urban centers attractiveness and in integrated public transports (Page, 2005). This is, therefore, as Page (2005) added, prioritizing a system approach of traveling through advanced connections of the public transport systems is an integral part to supporting travelers’ decision-making processes prior to their visit to the destination. “These elements are linked, in the first instance, by the flow of information followed by visitors traveling between originating and receiving destinations” (Page, 2005 p. 14). In order for all these processes to happen, the integral intermediaries are public transport systems (Page, 2005; Lumsdon, 2004; Mill &amp;&nbsp;Morrison, 1992).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lumsdon and Page (2004b, p. 1)</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1</span><span class="font4">. Satisfaction with Public City Transport – The Optimal Model</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Latent variable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Observed variable</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Service</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Timetable clarity (timetables on the public transport stations are clear) Station proximity (the public transport stations are accessible without any problem)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vehicles cleanliness (insides of vehicles are clean and maintained)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Information (information in the public transport vehicles such as maps, station signal, is sufficient</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Transport comfort (traveling in the public transport is comfortable regardless of season; summer or winter)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Safety (travelling in the public transport is safety)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Transport speed (transport speed is satisfactory with regard to the traffic situation)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Punctuality (punctuality of public transport is precise and unfailing)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Logistic parameter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Transport comfort (traveling in the public transport is comfortable regardless of season; summer or winter)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Punctuality (punctuality of public transport is precise and unfailing)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Service continuity (service continuity is time and space manageable; it means that transport changes are not complicated)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Frequency (frequency of public transport is sufficient with regard to the number of passenger)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Transport speed (transport speed is satisfactory with regard to the traffic situation)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fare (fare including price and validity is affordable)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Source: Pavlina (2015)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">deepened the theoretical understanding of integrated public transportation systems through the perspectives of tourists as the end users: “the development of a theoretical framework of analysis has focused on a systems approach. The tourist system is defined by McIntosh, et al. (1995, P. 21) as a “set of interrelated groups coordinated to form a unified whole and organized to accomplish a set of goals”. Likewise, according to Mill and Morrison (1992), the tourism system is a cycle of exchange processes where the market, the travel supports (e.g. transport, hotel), the destination, and marketing schemes are integrated in a mutual manner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the economics perspective, the endeavors of a state toward the traveler using public transport must be unyieldingly</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">supported by the cooperation of public and shareholders due to the nature of transport economist of transport in leading and examining the different types of transport modes and their competitiveness such as the relation to price, speed, convenience, and reliability (Page, 2005). Page (2005 p. 37) “economists attempt to understand what affects people’s travel behaviors and the choices they make in relation to transport (i.e. travel choice modeling) is something that is rarely consumed for its own sake”. It generally means, as Page (2005) added, the consumption of services as a whole package (i.e. traveling to work and leisure by public transport). According to Mill (1992 p. 83) “the demand for transport in alignment to tourism is also characterized by (1) instantaneous and unpredictable na-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">ture of demand where the operators are imposed to manage the overcrowded supplies mechanism to avoid travelers’ dissatisfaction; (2) derived demand where a traveler is using public transport for business purposes - and primary demand where the travelers fulfill the pursuit of their vacation purposes; (3) lastly, non-prices items (e.g. service quality, reliability, and punctuality).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">At this point, even though this economic theory was not exclusively written for the purpose of passenger satisfaction, Or-tujzar, and Willumsen (1991) argued that economic factors influencing the demands of travelers to decide which destination is appropriate. Thus, the economic fulfillment and/or value of money can be assessed by looking at socioeconomic factors (e.g. age, income, profession, and family status). And thus, this research elaborates the combination of those factors from Pavlina (2005) and Ortujzar and Willumsen (1991) in the demographic variables.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As a descriptive analysis, rather than adopting the transportation</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">tourism theory, this research would enable the informed policy on public transport in the UK and whenever applicable, would emphasize the existing policy with BTS</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s strategy on partnering with MICE corporations in Bangkok</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">In this case of England, the tourism sector has been the major contributor where public transport adaptability toward inclusive service delivery is imperative</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">Moreover, policy study on transport and tourism provides a vast array of examinations on indicators by which a certain developing state may be able to utilize (Page, 2005). With a thriving service industry in the UK of 79.2% based on the Central Intelligence Agency report in 2017 and its commitment toward the environment and pollution control, policy interventions as well as global co-operation (OECD Report, 2017), the UK has been a global lab for sustainable public transport, environmental commitment research and tourism econo-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">mics studies. In a sequence manner, benchmarking a policy tool from England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020 (Short-Term Action) is the right decision. It is able to navigate the action</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">plan mapping between the public transport management in the city, region, or a country and related supporting industry within the policy action of three years (short term) shown in table 2. The decision to exercise the “short-Term Action’’ solely because of the partnership scheme study between BTS and MICE corporations is found to be new for Thailand context, the policies of England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020 on three to five years (medium-term), and ten years (long term) are not examined.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">After all, this research has been merely employing the passenger satisfaction’ theory from Pavlina (2015) and a policy tool from England’s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020. The study was not constructed by any theoretical framework for a specific research area of Bangkok. Thus, both satisfaction and partnership proposals in the result section are purely a product of benchmarking contests.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This research implemented mixed methodology</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">A quantitative method was conducted for the first phase of this research by enabling the data collection whereby 400 samplings on travel frequency of BTS’s ridership to MICE venues was distributed. 300 validated samplings with prior travel experiences with BTS to MICE venues were proceeded, as to find ridership satisfaction rates in that matter. While the preliminary survey on travel frequency to MICE venue with BTS was modified by the authors, the demographic data (gender, age group, education &amp;&nbsp;nationality) was gained from a previous study by Pavlina (2015) and Ortujzar and Willumsen (1991) and the satisfaction questionnaires for</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 2</span><span class="font4">. Short-Term Action (3 years)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">LEAD PARTNERS</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">OUTCOME OR SUCCESS MEASURE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">ACTION</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">(where appropriate)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">i. Identify ways to minimize weekend and Bank Holiday rail closures and other such events through investigating alternative maintenance solutions and/or scheduling</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Association of Train Operating Companies (ATOC)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Department for Transport (DfT); Local Authorities; Greater London Authority (GLA); Transport for London (TfL); Network Rail; Campaign for Better Transport; academic partners; Destination Organizations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Number of complete line closures over weekends reduced through local agreements; evidence of partnership working between DMOs and Train Operating Companies to reduce visitor disruption; evidence from destination organizations to demonstrate improvements.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">ii. Identify examples of best practice in the coordination of public transport services between transport modes and destinations.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Academic partners;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">VisitEngland</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Destination Organizations; transport operators</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Case studies to be published (including updates on work in progress); promote best practice examples e.g. development of public transport leisure services (leisure routes); leisure traffic management; integrated transport schemes (e.g. York).</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">iii. Work with operators to achieve greater coordination in terms of information provision, communication and timetabling.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">ATOC</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">DfT; Network Rail; Local Authorities; transport operators; Campaign for Better Transport; Destination Organizations; Vis-itEngland; academic partners;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">VisitEngland</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Campaign for better transport information for tourists; simplified ticketing and access to market; seek sustainable transport solutions including use of local public transport by visitors and alternatives to use of the car at destinations; recognized improvement in information provision with cited examples; better web-based integrated travel information and access to apps; case studies to be published.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">iv. Promote use of travel plans for tourism businesses, destination organizations and local authorities delivering tourism services.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Sustainable</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Transport – British Cycling Organization (SUSTRANS);</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Good Journey</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Local Government Association (LGA); Local Authorities; motoring organizations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Publish examples of tourism businesses promoting best practice and features through VE corporate resources.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">v. Simplify and improve rail pricing, ticketing restrictions and packages for leisure users e.g. development of smart cards for leisure users.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">ATOC</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Destination Organizations; tourism businesses; Visitor Attractions Group</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Examples of improved provision for leisure travellers; integrated ‘tourist’ ticket offers</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">vi. Work with the DfT to influence leisure journey times and minimize peak period holiday disruption.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">DfT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Network Rail; transport operators; Highways Agency</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Set up Intergovernmental Working Group/Task Force to oversee improvements to service.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Encourage coordination between the transport sector and major events through identifying and sharing case studies on the benefits of working together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Demonstrate that transport, tourism and wise growth can work together and offer solutions to transport problems for visitors, employees and residents alike.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Destination Management Offices</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">ATOC; motorists organizations; academic partners</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">National Park Authorities; SUS-TRANS; academic partners;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Visit England</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Case studies to be published and disseminated; better use of transport sector collateral (opportunities to advertise or to promote) and to inspire travel by public transport using mixed media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dissemination of best practice that can be adopted throughout destinations, especially in more remote or rural areas or parts of England poorly served by public transport.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Source: Adapted from England - A Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">MICE travel purposes were modified from Pavlina (2015). Then, purposive sampling was chosen, due to the classification of travel intention that was targeted merely to the passenger with Bangkok</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s MICE travel experience with BTS</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">300 purposive samplings were considered representative as it represents the total of BTS</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s population from the actual average ridership report in 2018 from Krungsri (2019) at 723,851.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For the qualitative method, 1 public relation &amp;&nbsp;marketing manager from BTS, and 6 different senior managers of MICE corporations, with extensive MICE event leads within the greater Bangkok metropolitan areas, volunteered for in-depth interviews</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">The selected respondents justified the sample size towards data “saturation point”, which when sufficient, generates no newer content (Goulding, 2017; Shaw, 1999).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">While the respondent data managerial position for BTS is not classified as per prior respondent’s consent, personal profile of passengers, BTS, and MICE corporations’ personal profiles, as well as MICE corporation portfolios, were not at all disclosed. A pilot study of 30 pre-ques-tionnaires and 1 pilot interview was conducted prior to the actual data collection. All pilot, actual surveys distributions, and interviews were collected from September 2019 to March 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As this research is intended to provide an extensive descriptive analysis from the data of passenger satisfaction on BTS accessing to MICE venues, and led to the result of in</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">depth interviews from BTS managers and MICE corporations on the strategic partnership scheme that benefit both passengers and participating organizations, the hypothesis is not run. Nevertheless, the passenger satisfaction survey results were used to supplement the information sharing to both BTS and MICE corporations on the current passengers’ issues. The satisfaction result would also build constructive study</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">recommendations on what effects do the highest, moderate, and lowest responses on passenger satisfaction influence the strategic actions of a better partnership between BTS and MICE corporations and within Thailand context. In addition, for in</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">depth interview purposes, a policy benchmark on tourism and transport schemes from a report of England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020 was benchmarked to navigate the framework on the partnership schemes between BTS and MICE corporations</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The quantitative data were analyzed by SPSS software in order to gain the frequency of demographic data, and the percentage of satisfaction responses. Both travel frequencies and satisfaction rates were measured by employing five</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">point Likert scales. The Likert scales ranging from 5 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font4">Always) to 1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font4">Never), and 5 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font4">Strongly Satisfied) to 1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font4">Strongly Dissatisfied) respectively</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font4">The interview transcripts were coded using the thematic analysis where the responses from BTS and MICE corporations were coded and then framed respectively reflecting the policy tool of England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020 (Short-Term Actions). The policy benchmark utilized for navigating the partnership proposal map of BTS and MICE corporations</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Passenger Satisfaction in Accessing MICE Venues with Bangkok Mass Transit Systems</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The collected data was analyzed and presented as follows: The respondents, passengers using the BTS, (N=400), were asked to answer a pre-constructed statement based on their experiences to access the MICE venues in greater Bangkok metropolitan areas by BTS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">With 300 surveys validated for having experiences traveling to MICE venues</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">with BTS, the surveys progressed by collecting 10 factors of passenger satisfaction in accessing MICE venues with BTS. Prior to that, the demographic data based on Pavlina (2015) and Ortujzar and Willumsen (1991) explored gender, age group, education, and nationality of the respondents were also sought out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 3</span><span class="font4">. Preliminary Survey on Travel Frequency to MICE Venues with BTS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Preliminary Survey</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Likert Scale</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Always</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">16%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Travel Frequency</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Most of the time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">34%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">to MICE with</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">About half the time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">19%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">BTS (N=400)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Once in a while</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">6%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Never &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;25%</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Total &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100%</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Simulation of England’s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020 on Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) and MICE Corporations</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Post-passenger satisfaction results on the BTS adaptability to support trips to MICE venues, in-depth interviews proceeded to targeted respondents of BTS and MICE corporations. Due to time constraints</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">in this research, and the fact that both BTS and MICE corporations are new to this proposed partnership idea, the examination of the approach on a policy tool of England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 20102020 would only be focused on Short-Term Action (3 years) as the guiding term actions according to the short-term policy emphasized. The short-term England’s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020 would mean the assessment of maximum achievement of the partnership can be utilized by solely implementing the least amount of project and</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/</span><span class="font4">or partnering costs, “especially where different sectors</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/</span><span class="font4">sub</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">sectors fail to work together or fail to engage with destination managers, event organizers, DMOs and local authorities” (England’s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010-2020, p.8). It sets the pilot partnership guidelines with a collaborative outcome projection of three years. In other words, the approach of this </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">“</span><span class="font4">Short</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">Term Actions (3 years)” would fit the most when only two parties (BTS &amp;&nbsp;MICE corporations) first attempt to manage the partnership scheme despite the variety of delivery partners as highlighted in this policy.</span></p>
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="6" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 4</span><span class="font4">. Demographic Profile of Respondent (Validated N=300)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Item</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Nationalities</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">N</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Gender</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Thai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">139</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">46%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Male</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">129</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">43%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Chinese</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">48</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">16%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Female</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">171</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">57%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Singaporean</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">2%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">American</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">5%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Age Group</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Australian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">4%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">21-25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">189</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">63%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Russian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">25+</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">111</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">37%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Czech</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Education</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">French</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">No higher degree</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">48</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">16%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">German</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">3%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Bachelor’s degree</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">186</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">62%</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Indian</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">26</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">9%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">&gt; Bachelor’s degree</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">66</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">22%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Indonesian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Japanese</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">300</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">100%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 5</span><span class="font2">. Passenger Satisfaction in Accessing MICE Venues with BTS (Validated N=300)</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Indicated otherwise%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Factor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Agreed and strongly agreed %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1. The BTS stations and transits are accessible to MICE venues without</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">70%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">30%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">any problem</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2. Punctuality of BTS trains to MICE venues is precise and unfailing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">69%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">31%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">3. Frequency of BTS trains is sufficient with regard to the number of pas-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">38%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">62%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">sengers in MICE venues</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">4. BTS service continuity is time and space manageable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">68%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">32%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">5. BTS trains speed is satisfactory with regard to the traffic situation in</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">72%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">28%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">MICE venue areas</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">6. Traveling to MICE venues by BTS is comfortable regardless of seasons</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">52%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">48%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">7. Information about MICE venues and/or event schedules is sufficient in</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">18%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">82%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">the BTS stations or trains</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">8. Timetables on the BTS stations and transits reflect the MICE events</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">22%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">78%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">9. Overall passenger satisfaction with BTS to access MICE venues in</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">66%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">34%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Bangkok</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">10. BTS fare to MICE venues is affordable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">55%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">45%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Source: Author. Adapted and modified from Pavlina (2015)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">The rationale behind this partnership scheme between the Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) and MICE corporations are based by several studies in integrated public transport system with tourism destinations. The study also has attempted to explore and recommend the current phenomenon where responsive governance and initiative on public transport and travel providers in Bangkok are still insignificant. Looking back to the United Kingdom, the research on tourists and/or passenger satisfactions toward the availability and suitability of public transportation systems have been long embedded within a framework of public policy (Page, 1994). Despite the evolving process, the development of the UK’s public transport has always deemed the necessity of decision making on “service encounter and travel experience” (Page, 1999, p. 129). Page (1999) highlighted the policy framework from which the planning measures must indicate the implementations of tourist congestion in large urban areas. At this stage. Government support lies firmly on an extended management of tourist traffic in the outer cities, collaborati-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">on and/or integrative promotion (both public and destination management) during the low-season, navigation of the actual forecast of traffic and direct promotion to the tourists, well-established and networked public transports, and the implementation of the integrations both within the public transport providers, and public-private partnerships (Page, 1999), which in this case, the MICE corporations. Of general travel and tourism support, Hall (1999, p 181) explained the variety of roles in tourist transport: (1) Linking the origin market with the tourist destination; (2) Providing access and mobility within a wide destination area (region or country); (3) Offering access and mobility within a tourist attraction; (4) Providing travel along a recreational route.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The vitality of progressing the collaborative initiative between the mass transport systems and the travel and tourism industry also premised based on previous transport-tourism economic research. Al-balate and Bell (2009) emphasized the role of public transport within a global flow of tourists - whereby the collaboration with the city administrators, including busines-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 6</span><span class="font4">. In</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">depth interview </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">– </span><span class="font4">Partnership simulation of Bangkok Mass Transit System </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font4">BTS</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">) </span><span class="font4">and MICE corporations as adapted from England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Identify ways to minimize weekend and Thailand public Bangkok Mass Transit System (BTS) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ministry of Transport (MoT); Thailand Department of Land Transholidays rail closures and other such events through investi- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;port; Local Authorities/Bangkok Metropolitan Region (BMR);</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">gating alternative maintenance solutions and/or scheduling &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau; MICE venues; desti</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">nation organizations, Tourism Authority of Thailand (TAT)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Currently, we do not have any agreement/cooperation with MICE corporations to address the possibilities of alternative maintenance solutions during the weekends or Thailand public holiday. The agreement of continuous services of BTS is, however, being oversight closely by local authorities and it is strictly a one-way process between BTS and Bangkok’s authorities (e.g. MoT, BMR). Meanwhile, TAT would only come after with its support (e.g. tourism promotion, possibly MICE, etc.) once city administration confirmed.” BTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Identify examples of best practice in the coordination of BTS and MICE Corporations &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BMR, Destination Organizations; transport operators; Thailand</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">public transport services between BTS and MICE corpora- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Convention and Exhibition Bureau; MICE venues</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">tions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“We have not initiated any kind business agreement in the current time on BTS leisure services to MICE venues, leisure traffic management specified only to MICE destinations and the works are normally done by either Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau or Bangkok’s city tourism.” BTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Meanwhile, integrated transport infrastructures, for example, directions and transits from the airport to major international venues, are clearly established by Bangkok’s authorities despite no exclusive business agreement between us (BTS &amp;&nbsp;MICE corporations).” BTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Due to the inexistence of business agreement, the information sharing options to all travelers on public transport prior to the events, have always been initiated by MICE corporations alone. BTS provides advertising channels for this purpose. And so far, we have worked with Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau or Thailand Authority of Thailand on an event basis, allowing access to event ticket deals. Meanwhile with BTS, so far only for “on-board” marketing deals” MICE corporation 1</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">6</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">ACTION</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">iii. BTS and MICE corporations work with operators to achieve greater coordination in terms of information provision, communication and timetabling.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">BTS and MICE Corporations</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau; MICE venues; Tourism Authority of Thailand (TAT); Destination Organizations; Accommodation and airport services</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“In terms of information support, BTS marketing team are very welcoming to support the channels for advertisements, either inside the train or inside BTS’s station/ transit areas.” MICE corporation 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“With prior communications/agreement, BTS would have actual records of events/activities which will be held around BTS areas. If that event is big enough, we will consider the offer of promotion on a case by case basis. Then BTS will provide a 1-day ticket deal to MICE organizers and the condition of this ticket has to be used within 1 year after the date of purchase. This also includes the recommendation of selective hotels/accommodation partners or transport to the airports. However, an official, binding long-term, specific BTS-MICE corporations’ agreement is yet to be available.” BTS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“So the business agreement between BTS and MICE businesses is not tightened by clear partnership agreement, not is it advised by either Tourism Authority of Thailand, destination offices, or Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau.” MICE corporation 2 &amp;&nbsp;3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“For example, during the preparation of the events, the organizers will intentionally approach BTS for the purpose of promotional tickets and advertisement (whenever necessary).” MICE corporation 4 &amp;&nbsp;5</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“As we always try our best to hold the events near BTS stations, for a better crowd purpose, we thought that we are better off with a fixed business agreement with BTS so the work can be done more efficiently. And local authority can help this happens by enabling industry discussions/networking - especially Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau.” MICE corporation 1</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">-</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">iv. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Promote use of travel plans for MICE travel purpose, BTS &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau; MICE venues</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">BTS delivering tourism services.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“As much as we focus on tourists’ travel experiences, our main target is broad to all tourists, not specific only for MICE travelers. Thus, the action plan on supporting MICE business from the external MICE tourist demands, other than promotional ticket and advertisement, has not yet existed. Later in the future, we may have the opportunity to collaborate with your proposed partners, MICE corporations or TCEB.” BTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">v. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simplify and improve rail pricing, ticketing restrictions BTS &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Local Authorities/BMR; Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bu-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">and packages for leisure users e.g. development of smart &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;reau; MICE venues; destination organizations, Tourism Authority</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">cards for leisure users. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of Thailand (TAT)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Integrated tourist tickets and MICE events tickets are available on the basis of agreement – normally organizers will reach out to us.” BTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">vi. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Work with MICE Corporations to influence leisure jour- &nbsp;&nbsp;BTS and MICE Corporations &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Local Authorities/BMR; Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bu-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">ney times and minimize peak period and holiday disruption. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;reau</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“As we are hands off of this policy process, we would hope Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau or Bangkok’s local authority could advocate on this corporation with BTS. For example, prioritizing or providing special passenger lines of MICE events during peak periods and/or clear event boards in their stations/transits.” MICE corporation 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACTION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LEAD PARTNER (S) SCHEME &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROPOSED DELIVERY PARTNERS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">vii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Encourage coordination between the transport sector &nbsp;BTS and MICE Corporations &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau; MICE venues; Tour-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">and major events through identifying and sharing case stud- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ism Authority of Thailand (TAT); Destination Organizations; Ac-</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ies on the benefits of working together. Demonstrate that &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;commodation and airport services</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">transport, tourism and wise growth can work together and offer solutions to transport problems for visitors, employees and residents alike.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Calling for a public meeting between BTS, MICE corporations and other public transportation modes in the greater Bangkok area for addressing/promoting and setting chapters of this integrated cooperation.” MICE corporation 5 &amp;&nbsp;6</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“In addition to the BTS passenger satisfaction study, with a good satisfaction rate from the study, a special partnership scenario should be created between BTS and MICE Corporations as the MICE business in Bangkok is growing exponentially. The efforts could also promote the overall tourist infrastructure of Thailand leading to continuous good tourist experience.” MICE corporation 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">ses are imperative. And as Sarma (2003) resonated in his study within Northeast India’s destination, that the tourists’ decision-making process also considers heavily on the availability of integrated, and sufficient public transports. Thus, unfulfilled integrations would hinder the travel decisions to a destination, leaving a city/region with less economic competitiveness (Khadaroo &amp;&nbsp;Seetenah, 2008).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This research has a clear yet arguable conclusion on the lack of strategic policy guidance on partnership between the mass public transport and private travel and tourism enterprises like MICE corporations. The findings have strongly indicated that the independence and business confidence of BTS as a huge transport enterprise is mostly influenced by a stagnant government policy support. It has been hindering the outreaches of MICE corporations to BTS’s initiatives, leaving these two, what was supposed to be an interchangeable partner in Thailand’s travel and tourism sectors, less acquainted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">When putting the BTS and MICE corporation’s partnership scheme in the context of England</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">’</span><span class="font4">s Strategic Action Plan for Tourism 2010</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">-</span><span class="font4">2020, the novelty of this study underpins critical arguments (both reflected from satisfaction surveys &amp;&nbsp;interviews): (1) the frequency of BTS trains and regulated transits system should be addressed to avoid unsecured and packed readership environment, (2) when official, long-term, and regulated partnership is endorsed by Bangkok authorities, MoT, TAT, and TCEB, the availability of information about MICE venues and/or event schedules, the actual timetables on the BTS stations and transits that reflect the MICE events, as well as more affordable BTS’s tickets to MICE events would cater to the needs of BTS riders during their trips to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">MICE venues, enabling more ridership’s service satisfaction and trust. After all, as the Thailand government has clearly divided the authorized bodies for respective MICE, transport, and public-private destination management, an enforced integration between BTS and MICE corporations should likewise be deemed critically. That would eventually help encourage the creation of a smart travel systems for Bangkok and Thailand as a whole.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Abeyratne, R. (1993). Air transport tax and its consequences on tourism. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research,</span><span class="font4"> 20(3), 450-460.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Albalate, D., &amp;&nbsp;Bel, G. (2009). Tourism and urban public transport: Holding demand pressure under supply chain constraints. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Management, </span><span class="font4">31(2010), 425-433.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Antonucci, L., Crocetta, C., FD d’Ovidio., &amp;&nbsp;Toma, E. (2014). Passenger satisfaction: A multi-group analysis. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Quality and Quantity</span><span class="font4">, 48(1), 337-345.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bangkok Mass Transit System (2019). Company profile and business. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www.bts.co.th/"><span class="font4">https://www.bts.co.th/</span></a><span class="font4"> eng/info/info-history.html on December 10, 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bank of Thailand (2021). White paper: Revitalising Thailand’s tourism sector. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www.bot.or.th/"><span class="font4">https://www.bot.or.th/</span></a><span class="font4"> Thai/MonetaryPolicy/EconomicCon-ditions/AAA/250624_WhitepaperVI-SA.pdf on September 15, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Celiński, I., &amp;&nbsp;Sierpiński, G. (2014). Real time model for public transport management. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Scientific Journal of Logistics,</span><span class="font4"> 10(1), 31-41.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chew. J. (1987). Transport and tourism in the year of 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Management,</span><span class="font4"> 8(2), 83-85.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">de Ona, J., de Ona, R., &amp;&nbsp;Calvo, F. J. (2012). A classification tree approach to identify key factors of transit service quality. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Expert Systems with Applications</span><span class="font4">, 39(12), 11164-11171.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">England Strategic Action Plan (20102020). Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www"><span class="font4">https://www</span></a><span class="font4">. nationalparksengland.org.uk/__data/ assets/pdf_file/0029/26597/Visit-Eng-land-Transport-and-Tourism-Action-Plan-ENPAA-response-March-2012. pdf on August 1, 2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Goulding, C. (2017). Navigating the complexities of grounded research in advertising. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Advertising, 46</span><span class="font4">(1), 61-70.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Gronau, W., &amp;&nbsp;Kagermeier, A. (2007). Key factors for successful leisure and tourism public transport provision. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Transport Geography,</span><span class="font4"> doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2006.12.008</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hall, D. R. (1999). Conceptualising tourism transport: Inequality and externality issues. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Transport Geography,</span><span class="font4"> 7(3), 181-188.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kaul, R. (1985). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dynamics of tourism: A trilogy, 111.</span><span class="font4"> New Delhi: Transportation and Marketing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Khadaroo, J., &amp;&nbsp;Seetenah, B. (2007). Transport infrastructure and tourism development. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Annals of Tourism Research, </span><span class="font4">34(4), 1021-1032.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Krungsri (2019). Mass rapid transit operators: Thailand industry outlook 2019-21. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www.krungsri.com/bank/"><span class="font4">https://www.krungsri.com/bank/</span></a><span class="font4"> getmedia/71e66d1b-5790-44f2-82dc-4c1e8509f193/IO_Mass_Tran-sit_190513_EN_EX.aspx on January 12, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lumdson, L., &amp;&nbsp;Page, S. J. (2004). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and transport: Issues and agenda for the new millenium</span><span class="font4">. Oxford: Elsivier.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">McIntosh, R. W., Goeldner, C. R., and Ritchie, J. R. B. (1995). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism: Principles, practices, philosophies</span><span class="font4">. New York: John Wiley and Sons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Meet in Thailand (2020). Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www.meetinthailand.com/busi-ness-event"><span class="font4">https://www.meetinthailand.com/busi-ness-event</span></a><span class="font4"> on July 20, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mill, R. C., &amp;&nbsp;Morrison, A. M. (1992). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The tourism system: An introductory text</span><span class="font4">. Englewood Cliff New Jersey: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ministry of Tourism and Sport (2021). International Tourist Arrival. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www.mots.go.th/mots_"><span class="font4">https://www.mots.go.th/mots_</span></a><span class="font4"> en/more_news_new.php?cid=330 on September 15, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mouwen, A. (2015). Drivers of customer satisfaction with public transport services. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transportation research: Part A: Policy and Practice [serial online]</span><span class="font4">, 78, 1-20.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Noichan, R., &amp;&nbsp;Dewancker, B. (2018). Analysis of accessibility in urban masss transit node: A case study in Bangkok transit station. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainability, </span><span class="font4">10(4891); doi:10.3390/su10124819.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">OECD. (2017). OECD economic surveys United Kingdom. Retrieved from </span><a href="http://www.oecd.org/economy/sur-veys/United-Kingdom-2017-OECD-economic-survey-overview.pdf"><span class="font4">http://www.oecd.org/economy/sur-veys/United-Kingdom-2017-OECD-economic-survey-overview.pdf</span></a><span class="font4"> on August 5, 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ortujzar, J. D., &amp;&nbsp;Willumsen, L. G. (1991). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Flexible long range planning using low cost information</span><span class="font4">. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Page, S.J. (1994). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Transport and tourism global perspectives (2nd edn.).</span><span class="font4"> Harlow: Pearson/Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Page, S. J. (2005). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and transport: Global perspective (2nd edn.)</span><span class="font4">. Harlow: Pearson/Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pavlina, P. (2015). The factors influencing satisfaction with public city transport: A structural equation modelling approach. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Competitiveness</span><span class="font4">, 7(4), 18-32.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Prideaux, B. (2000). The role of the transport system in destination development. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Management,</span><span class="font4"> 21(1), 53-63.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Replogle, M. A.., &amp;&nbsp;Fulton, L. (2014). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A global high shift scenario: Impact and potential for more public transport, walking, and cycling with lower car use</span><span class="font4">. New York: Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP). Retrieved from: </span><a href="http://www.itdp.org/"><span class="font4">http://www.itdp.org/</span></a><span class="font4"> wp-content/uploads/2014/09/A-Glob-al-High-Shift-Scenario_WEB1.pdf on August 5, 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sarma, M. K. (2003). Towards positioning a tourist destination: A study of Northeast India. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ASEAN Journal on Hospitality and Tourism, 2</span><span class="font4">(2), 104-119.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Shaw, E. (1999). A guide to the qualitative research process: Evidence from a small firm study. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Qualitative Marketing Research: An International Journal, 2</span><span class="font4">(2), 59-70</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Shiau, W., &amp;&nbsp;Luo, M. M. (2012). Factors affecting online group buying intention and satisfaction: A social exchange theory perspective. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Computer in Human Behaviour</span><span class="font4">, 28(6), 2431-2444.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TCEB (2019). MICE: Promising key industry. Retrieved from </span><a href="https://www"><span class="font4">https://www</span></a><span class="font4">. businesseventsthailand.com/en/key-industries on December 10, 2019.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">228</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>