---
layout: full_article
title: "SOCIO-POLITICAL DYNAMICS TAKING PLACE AT KUTA TRADITIONAL VILLAGE, BALI: FROM DESA ADAT (TRADITIONAL VILLAGE) TO DESA PEKRAMAN (ANOTHER TYPE OF TRADITIONAL VILLAGE) IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES"
author: "I Wayan Wesna Astara, I Gde Parimartha, I Nyoman Sirtha, Emiliana Mariyah"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3605 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3605"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3605"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SOCIO-POLITICAL DYNAMICS TAKING PLACE AT KUTA TRADITIONAL VILLAGE, BALI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">FROM </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DESA ADAT</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> (TRADITIONAL VILLAGE) TO </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DESA PEKRAMAN </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">(ANOTHER TYPE OF TRADITIONAL VILLAGE) IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Wayan Wesna Astara<sup>1</sup>, I Gde Parimartha<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Sirtha<sup>3</sup>, Emiliana Mariyah<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>Postgraduate Program, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University <sup>3</sup>Faculty of Law, Udayana University Email: </span><a href="mailto:wesna_astara@yahoo.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">wesna_astara@yahoo.com</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This research explores the socio-political dynamics taking place at Kuta Traditional Village, Bali: from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> (traditional village) to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> (another type of traditional village) in the perspective of cultural studies. There are three problems formulated in this research. The first problem is how the socio-political dynamics from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> (traditional village) to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> (another type of traditional village) took place at Kuta? The next problem is how the traditional village interacted with the administrative village at Kuta? And the last problem, which is the third, is what were the impacts and meanings of the change from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0">? In this study qualitative method was employed. And the data needed was obtained by employing the technique of in-depth interview, the technique of participatory observation, and documentation study. To give responses to the problems mentioned above, the theory of hegemony, the theory of deconstruction, the theory of conflict, the theory of power and knowledge and the theory of eclectically symbolic interaction were applied.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The findings show that the socio-political dynamics taking place Kuta Traditional Village resulted in turbulence among the villagers. This is indicated by the Local Rules and Regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0">) issued by Desa </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001. This could be responsible for the factors of pro’s and con’s in various aspects. Clause (6) of Article 3 of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001 was reversed by the leaders of Kuta Traditional Village. They did not agree that non-Hindu people were included as the traditional village members.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As far as the interaction between the traditional village and the administrative village is concerned, the governmental hegemony took place. The government applied hegemony to the traditional village through the administrative village in the form of rules and regulations. The local rules and regulations issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0">, as a legal product in Bali, are left crystallized sociologically, philosophically, and juridically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">However, the dynamism of the traditional villagers in Bali will “justify” to what extent such rules and regulations are justified and to what extent they are protective. The change of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> into that issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> was not followed by Kuta Traditional Village by replacing the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0"> (rules and regulations) issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> or making loose agreements to adapt to the higher rules and regulations in addition to anticipating the migrants through the change in rules and regulations applicable at Kuta Traditional Village. Basically, the socio-political dynamics taking place at Kuta Traditional Village as a consequence of the change made from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> resulted in no important things. However, from the “substance” point of view, the change can be seen in the formation of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> (the Assembly of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0">) (Article 14), which is formed from below, and in the appearance of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pecalang</span><span class="font0"> (traditional security) which is responsible for the security and orderliness of the village area especially when traditional and religious activities are performed. Actually, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pecalang</span><span class="font0"> is an “old product” which is newly packaged with “new enthusiasm” and is included in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001 issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> . The meanings created by the change made from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> are transformational, dialogic and dynamic. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> is in the ongoing process (which will never come to an end) of being integrated into the administrative village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The findings show that there were multiple interpretations given by the leaders of Kuta Traditional Village, as far as the articles in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> issued by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman </span><span class="font0">are concerned, governmental hegemony which was in the form of Rules and Regulations as the social transformation of the State by which villages are organized.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Key words</span><span class="font0">: socio-political dynamics, traditional village, administrative village, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0"> (locally -made rules and regulations) of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Background</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This dissertation, which investigates the relationship among the elements in the village government, is entitled “the Socio-Political Dynamics Taking Place at Kuta Traditional Village, Bali: from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> (Traditional Village) to </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman </span><span class="font0">(another type of traditional village): in the Perspective of Cultural Studies. The term “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0">” has been in existence since the Dutch Colonial Era. It refers to a traditional community system which is traditionally organized with traditional or local leaders. The term “Desa Dinas” (Administrative Village) has also been in existence since the Dutch Colonial Era. It refers to an administrative village formally established by the government.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Then, these two governmental systems were equally applied until the Indonesian government was obtained and led to no problems. In the New Order Period, when the Rules and Regulations of Number 5 of Year 1979 concerning Village Government was issued, the administrative village established by the government seemed to dominate the traditional village government. Various matters which should have been handled by the traditional village were taken over by the administrative village, although they were not its responsibilities. The traditional village felt marginalized and had no authorities, being dominated by the administrative village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To overcome the conflicts possibly arising during the New Order Era, the government of Bali Province issued the Rules and Regulations of Number 06 of Year 1986 which were supposed to link the traditional village and the administrative village. This served as the reference which placed the traditional system and the administrative system in an equal position to jointly develop the village. These rules and regulations allowed the village government in Bali could be harmoniously run by paying attention to the two elements which played important roles in developing the village. This seemed to be in accordance with the 1945 Constitution (Article 18B, clause 2). This article supports and acknowledges the existence of the traditional system. It acknowledges and respects the units under the traditional village with their traditional rights as long as they are still applicable and are in accordance with the societal development and the principles of the Republic of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Reformation Era, during which the governmental system changed dynamically, slightly changed the village government in Bali. There was turbulence between the administrative village and traditional village. The reason was that the former considered the latter had marginalized its authorities and system. A reaction appeared that the existence of the administrative village should be evaluated. Then the Balinese politicians, especially those who were elected the legislative assembly members at the provincial level, agreed that a </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> (locally-made rules and regulations) should be made which could support the strength of the traditional village and marginalize the administrative village. As a result, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001 was issued. Then, since it was applicable, the term “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0">” was changed into “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0">” to which the village government in Bali has referred to.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Its applicability was responsible for the pro’s and con’s resulting from how the system of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> was implemented in Bali in general and in Kuta in particular. The term is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> but what has been carried out by the Kuta community still refers to what was included in the system carried out by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0">. This has been one of the problems created by the Reformation Era.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on what has been described above, a study on Kuta traditional community in the context of its current power, law and dynamism is essentially conducted. The area of Kuta Traditional Village is very strategic with its tourism activities. In addition to being a traditional village with its traditional and cultural activities, it is also an administrative and international (global) village. It is this which has provided it with the opportunity either to adapt to and/or to resist against the political policies included in a legal product. It is very clear that the reformation taking place at Kuta Traditional Village shows local dynamism in which the local rules and regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">) are employed for organizing the traditional village members (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama adat</span><span class="font0">), and the state’s legal system and traditional agreements in the form of “social movements” are used for organizing the migrants. How the area (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan)</span><span class="font0"> and those occupying the area belonging to the traditional village (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font0">) are organized follows the development of tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The socio political turbulence, as the dynamic aspect of the community, cannot be separated from the hegemony applied by the “government” to organize the community with its various activities. Its social, political and economic activities are relevant for</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">exploration in the perspective of cultural studies. The reason is that historically Kuta Traditional Village has contributed a lot with its socio- political dynamics to the development of tourism in Bali. The change in political product from the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> issued for </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> to that issued for </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> has affected the local community (traditional community of Kuta).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based the background above, this research is focused on the following three problems: 1) what socio-political dynamics took place when the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> was changed into the term </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> at Kuta?; 2) what interaction took place between the Traditional Village and the Administrative Village?; 3) what were the effects and meanings of the change from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0">? Qualitative method was employed in this study with interdisciplinary approach (social, political, legal, economic and anthropological) characterizing a study of cultural studies. To reveal the sociopolitical dynamics taking place at Kuta Traditional Village, the theory of hegemony, the theory of deconstruction, the theory of relationship between power and knowledge, the theory of conflict and the theory of symbolic interaction were employed. They were all used to reveal the socio-legal and socio-political dynamics eclectically.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>The Results</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">It was found that Kuta Traditional Village was made to be marginalized by the Rules and Regulations of Number 5 of Year 1979 issued by the New Order. The uniformity created, which was against the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bhineka Tunggal Ika</span><span class="font0"> (Diversity in Unity)was responsible for this. However, the Governor of Bali (as the executive) and the Bali Legislative Assembly) responded to this problem by issuing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of Number 06 of Year 1986. It, as cultural and legal politics, functioned to protect and to save the traditional villagers of Bali (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama desa)</span><span class="font0">. With reference to it, the traditional village rules and regulations, termed as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">, were produced and one of its consequences was the establishment of the Village Credit Union (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lembaga Perkreditan Rakyat</span><span class="font0"> abbreviated as LPD).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kuta Traditional Village, as the State’s ideological apparatus, has indigenous autonomy which cannot be interfered with by the State. During the New Order area, the hegemony of the government was performed by issuing the Perda of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Number 06 of Year 1986, as far as Article 12, Clause (1), Clause (1) and Clause (3) and Article 12, Clause (1) are concerned, in which it was stated that the traditional village was supervised by the Governor of Bali. In addition, in Article 12, Clause (1), it was stated that the Governor of Bali, when performing this responsibility, was assisted by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis Pembina Lembaga Adat (</span><span class="font0">Traditional Institutions Supervising Committee) and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Badan Pelaksana Pembina Lembaga Adat</span><span class="font0"> (Traditional Institutions Organizing Committee). In Article 12, Clause (3) and Clause (2) it was stated that the Structures and Organizations of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pelaksana Lembaga Adat</span><span class="font0"> were determined by the Governor. This illustrates the hegemony applied by the government as their formations were determined from above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The New Order came to an end and the Reformation Era appeared. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda of Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> mentioned above was replaced by the Bali Province Legislative Assembly) with the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001. It is this which led to pro’s and con’s in various aspects. The Kuta Traditional Village leaders did not accept the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0">, especially Article 3 Clause (6), which included non-Hindu people as the traditional village members (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama desa</span><span class="font0">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the interaction between the traditional village and administrative village, the hegemony applied by the government took place. The government applied hegemony to the traditional village through the administrative village in the form of rules and regulations. The rules and regulations, as a legal product in Bali, were left crystallized sociologically, philosophically and juridically without any problem. However, the traditional villagers (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama Bali</span><span class="font0">) will “justify” to what extent they can be justified and to what extent they side with them. The change from the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> to the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda </span><span class="font0">of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> applied at Kuta Traditional Village was not followed by replacing the rules and regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">) issued by the traditional village by creating loose agreements to adapt to the higher rules and regulations, in addition to anticipating the migrants through the change of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0"> applied at Kuta traditional village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Basically, the effects of the socio-political dynamics taking place at Kuta traditional village resulting from the change of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> were nothing, except the change with regard to name from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0">. However, from the “substance” point of view, the change can be seen from the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">appearance of some institutions such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> (an Assembly), as included in Article 14, which is formed from “below” and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pecalang</span><span class="font0"> (traditional security), which is responsible for the security and orderliness all over the village, especially when religious and traditional activities are performed. It is an “old product” but is “newly packaged” in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Yeaer 2001. The meanings of the change from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> are transformational, dialogic and dynamic. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> is still in the process, which will never come to an end, of being integrated into the administrative village.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Findings</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The findings are as follows; the articles included in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman </span><span class="font0">were multiply interpreted by the traditional village leaders, as far as what is included in its articles; the hegemony applied by the government was in the form of rules and regulations as a social transformation; the socio-political dynamics taking place at Kuta Traditional Village was influenced by the state’s legal system, the indigenous autonomy was based on </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa mawacara</span><span class="font0"> (place, time and condition), Hinduism, the existing traditions or the agreements made; and the concept of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font0"> (residence) was badly organized resulting from the mobility of population and tourism. Sociologically, Kuta traditional village still refers to the term “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0">” instead of the term “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0">”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Furthermore, the establishment of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis Alit Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> (a Minor Assembly) all over Kuta Sub District was not procedural for the reason that it should have been formed from “below” instead of from “above”, which was not in accordance with the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0">. In addition, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Majelis Alit Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> should have recruited 25% of those who were familiar to Customary Law, Religion and Balinese culture and as its members. Its current members turned out to be dominated by the heads of the traditional villages (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bendesa adat</span><span class="font0">) and their staff (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">prajuru adat</span><span class="font0">). However, when election for the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bendesa adat</span><span class="font0"> was carried out at Kuta traditional village in 2008, innovation was already made. What is meant is that the model of election adopted referred to the model when election for the regent or governor was conducted and that the candidate should not have been any political leader of any level. Moreover, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pecalang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(Traditional Security) of Kuta traditional village, which was included in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> and had been previously included in the local rules and regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">) of Kuta traditional village was “juridically” formed in 1984.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Conclusions</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The interaction between the traditional village and the administrative village, as included in Article 3, Clause (6) of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001, was assumed as the “suicide” article for the Kuta traditional community if not properly implemented in the social reality. Unlike this article, which was so extreme, the provisions concerning the residence (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font0">) and the traditional village autonomy were not. The area of Kuta traditional village is next to Tuban traditional village, Legian traditional village and to Pemogan traditional village. The residence of the Kuta traditional villagers was not well organized, based on the residing principle and proposals made by those who would like to stay there, as stated in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001, Article 3, Clause (2) that those would like to be the village members (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama desa</span><span class="font0">) are those who have fulfilled the terms and conditions arranged in the village rules and regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">). This means that those who are the village members (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">krama desa</span><span class="font0">) are not only based on where they reside but also on the proposals made for that (by those who are already married). In other words, those who are the village members do not have to reside in that area, but they can also reside outside the area and vice versa. The provisions concerning the autonomy of a traditional village should be in accordance with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa mawacara</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa, kala, patra</span><span class="font0"> (place, time and condition) and the enthusiasm of human rights and nationality within the Republic of Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As a Tourist Village, Kuta traditional village has a long history with Chinese migrants. There has been a positive interaction between them which can be seen from mutual understanding and multiculturalism in the forms of religious and traditional rituals and cross marriages between them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The socio-legal aspects of the application of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perda</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman</span><span class="font0"> of Number 3 of Year 2001 were that Kuta traditional village and Tuban traditional village “claimed each other over the borderline” and that there was a concept of “badly</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">organized residence” (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">saling seluk</span><span class="font0">). The commercial effect, as far as Kuta traditional village is concerned, is that it is a promising business area; therefore, a legal product should be created in such a way that the government does not only side with the bigscale entrepreneurs or “investors” (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tebang pilih</span><span class="font0">) but the local ones as well. The management of the beach, the local credit union (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Lembaga Perkreditan Rakyat </span><span class="font0">abbreviated as LPD) and the arts market, which have contributed a lot to the development carried out all over Kuta traditional village, should be provided to the local entrepreneurs. When election was performed for the Kuta traditional village head in 2008, the committee was inspired by the legal product which is in the form of Rules and Regulations of Number 34 of Year 2004 concerning the village government. As a consequence, the election was directly made by creating one voting place (Tempat Pemungutan Surata abbreviated as TPS) in every </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">banjar</span><span class="font0"> (the smallest neighborhood under the village) all over Kuta traditional village as reflection of direct democracy at Kuta traditional village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The socio-political effect, as far as the traditional village autonomy is concerned, is that the traditional village has indigenous autonomy instead of the “autonomy provided by the State “ and this is referred to as the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ideological apparatus of the State</span><span class="font0"> by Althusser. What is meant by the indigenous autonomy is that the village has its rights and authorities to organize itself without being interfered with by the government, which is in accordance with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Mawacara</span><span class="font0"> (place, time and condition) and agreements made at the village. From leadership point of view, as far as Kuta traditional village is concerned, those appointed leaders are not necessarily the elders (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tetua</span><span class="font0">). They should fulfill some terms and conditions. In the last election for the village head, a new value appeared in that the candidates should not have been members of any political parties in any level. A committee was also formally formed and several requirements were decided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As far as the change from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa adat</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0"> is concerned, pro’s and con’s took place. The reason is that there was an assumption that the “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">desa pekraman</span><span class="font0">” would be integrated into the “administrative village”. However, Kuta traditional village still keeps the idea that a traditional village is different from an administrative village and that they cannot be integrated (the traditional village cannot be changed into the administrative village).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With regard to the socio-political dynamics taking place at Kuta traditional village, it has given dialogic meaning in that attempts were made to make the village dynamic in accordance with the local rules and regulations (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font0">) and agreements made provided that the applicable rules and regulations were not broken.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Abdulsyani, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiologi Skematika, Teori dan Terapan</span><span class="font0">. Bandar Lampung: Bumi Aksana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Alfian, (ed.), 1985. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Persepsi Masyarakat Tentang Kebudayaan</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Adam Poggorechi, 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pendekatan Sosiologis Terhadap Hukum</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Bina Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ardika, I Wayan and Darma Putra (ed.), 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Kebudayaan dan Identitas Etnik</span><span class="font0">, Yogyakarta: Fakultas Sastra UNUD and Balimangsi Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Asmadi Alsa, 2003. Pendekatan Kuantitatif &amp;&nbsp;Kualitatif Serta Kombinasinya dalam Penelitian Psikhologi. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Amsal Bakhsiar, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Ilmu</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: PT Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah, 1975. ”Sanur dan Kuta: Masalah Perubahan Sosial di Daerah Pariwisata”, dalam I GN. Bagus (ed), Bali dalam Sentuhan Pariwisata, Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra UNUD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bappeda Kabupaten Badung, 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kecamatan Kuta Dalam Angka 2008</span><span class="font0">. Badung: BPS, 2008.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">---------------------------, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Strategi Manajemen Perkotaan Kuta</span><span class="font0">, Laporan Akhir Volume 1 February 2002. Badung: Bappeda.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker Chris, 2000</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Cultural Studies, Toeri &amp;&nbsp;Praktik</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta, Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bernard Arief Sidharta, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Refleksi tentang Struktur Ilmu Hukum, sebuah penelitian tentang fundasi kefilsafatan dan sifat keilmuan Ilmu Hukum sebagai landasan pengembangan Ilmu Hukum Nasional Indonesia</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Mandar Maju.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Burhan Magenda, 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Asfek Keadilan Sosial dalam Kebudayaan Politik di Indonesia</span><span class="font0">, dalam Ismed Hadad (ed.), Kebudayaan Politik dan Keadilan Sosial. Jakarta: LP3ES.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Blumer Herbert, 1969. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Symbolic Interctionism</span><span class="font0">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perspetive and Method</span><span class="font0">. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Charles F. Andrian, 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kehidupan Politik dan Perubahaan Sosial</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Tiara Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Covarrubias, M., 1937. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Island of Bali, The Village – The Community</span><span class="font0">, VI. Oxford University Press, Petaling Jaya: Selangor Malaysia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">David Kaplan, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Budaya</span><span class="font0">, Yogyakarta, Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fadillah Putra, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Partai Politik &amp;&nbsp;Kebijakan Publik, Analisa terhadap Kongruensi Janji Politik dengan Realisasi Produk Kebijakan Politik Publik di Indonesia 1999-2003</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gaftar Afan, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Indonesia Transisi Menuju Demokrasi</span><span class="font0">, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">----------------, 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam Alfian &amp;&nbsp;Nazaruddin Sjamsudin, Profil Budaya Politik Indonesia</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Grafiti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gorda, I Gusti Ngurah, 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen dan Kepemimpinan Desa Adat di Propinsi Bali</span><span class="font0">, dalam Perspektif Globalisasi. Denpasar: Widya Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Geetz, Clifford, 1980. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Negara, the Theater State in Nineteenth Century</span><span class="font0">. New Jersy: Princeton University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">George Ritzer, 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiologi Ilmu Pengetahuan Berparadigma Ganda</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Rajawali Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Giddens, Anthony, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Constitution of Society, Teori Strukturisasi untuk Analisis Sosial</span><span class="font0">, Malang: Pedati.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">John Naisbitt, 1994. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Global Paradok, Semakin Besar Ekonomi Dunia, Semakin Kuat Perusahaan Kecil</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">John B. Thompson, 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kritik Ideologi Global, Teori Sosial Kritis tentang Realisasi Ideologi dan Komunikasi Massa</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta, IRCISod.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Joseph Losco Leonard Williams, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Political Theory, Kajian Klasik dan Kontemporer</span><span class="font0">, Edisi II. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kalakan Alit, I.G.N., 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Pekraman dalam Konteks Otonomi dan Nasionalisme, </span><span class="font0">Denpasar: Seminar Otonomi Daerah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Korn, V.E., 1932. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hukum Adat Bali</span><span class="font0">, Cetakan Kedua Yang Diperbaiki, Terjemahan Proyek Pembinaan Hukum Biro Hukum &amp;&nbsp;Ortal. Denpasar: Kantor Gubernur, KDH., Tk I Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lauer, H. Robert, 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perspektif Tentang Perubahaan Sosial</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Renika Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lili Rasjidi, 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-Dasar Filsafat dan Teori Hukum</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: P.T. Citra Aditya Bakti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lubis Akhyar Yusuf, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Setelah Kebenaran &amp;&nbsp;Kepastian Dihancurkan, MASIH ADAKAH TEMPAT BERPIJAK BAGI ILMUWAN</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah Uraian Filsafat Ilmu Pengetahun Kaum Posmodernis</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Percetakan BYRU.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Richard Harker, Cheelen Mahar, Chris Wilkes, (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Habitus x Modal + Ranah = Praktik), </span><span class="font0">Badung, Jalasutra, 2003)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Richard Jenkins, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Membaca Pikiran Pierre Bourdieu</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Richard E. Palmer, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutika Teori Baru Mengenal Interpretasi</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar Offset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rijkschroeff, 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiologi, Hukum dan Sosiologi Hukum</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Mandar Maju.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ritzer, George, 2003. Teori Sosial Posmodern. Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Robert Michels, 1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Political Parties</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociological Study of the Oligarchical Tendencies of Modern Democracy</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: CV Rajawali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mahfud MD, 1998. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Hukum di Indonesia</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: LP3ES.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mertha, I Ketut, 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Relevansi Transformasi Pacalang Terhadap Tugas dan Fungsi Polri dalam Mencegah dan Menanggulangi Kejahatan</span><span class="font0">.Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Moleong, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Remaja Resdokarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Munir Fuady, 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat dan Hukum Teori Hukum Posmodern</span><span class="font0">, Badung: PT. Citra Aditya Bakti.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Raharjo Satjipto, 2007</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Biarkan Hukum Mengalir, Catatan Kritis Tentang Pergaulan Manusia dan Hukum</span><span class="font0">.Jakarta: Kompas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">-------------------, 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Membedah Hukum Progresif</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Buku Kompas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">-------------------, 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hukum dalam Jagad Ketertiban</span><span class="font0">, Jakarta: Kompas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ritzer George, 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Contemporary Sociological Theory</span><span class="font0">, Third Edition. (New York: McGraw-Hill Inc).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Soemadiningrat Otje Salman, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Rekonseptualisasi Hukum Adat Kontemporer</span><span class="font0">. Bandung, Alumni Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">------------------------, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Hukum, Mengingat, Mengumpulkan dan Membuka Kembali</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: PT. Refika Aditama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Samuel P. Huntington, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">TERTIB POLITK Pada Masyarakat Yang Sedang Berubah</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: PT. RajaGrafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Surpha, I Wayan,. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Eksestensi Desa Adat di Bali</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Upada Sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">-------------------------, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Seputar Desa Pekraman dan Adat Bali</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar, Bali Post.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suasthawa, D., 2001</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. Desa Adat Kesatuan Masyarakat Hukum Adat di Propinsi Bali. </span><span class="font0">Denpasar: Upada Sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">-------------------------, 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kedudukan Desa Pekraman Dalam Undang-Undang Pemerintah Daerah</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: FISIP UNWAR.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">------------------------, 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Status dan Fungsi Tanah Adat Bali Setelah Berlakunya UUPA.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: CV. Kayu Mas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suasta (Ed.). 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Otonomi Daerah dan Kebijakan Publik, (Konsep dan Pelaksanaannya</span><span class="font0"> di Bali). Denpasar: Wijaya Words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sujaya, I Made. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sepotong Nurani Kuta, Catatan Seputar Sikap Warga Kuta Dalam Tragedi 12 Oktober 2002</span><span class="font0">. Kuta: LPM Kuta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sulistiyono Adi, 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Negara Hukum, Kekuasaan, Konsep, dan Paradigma Moral</span><span class="font0">. Surakarta: LPP UNS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sirtha I Nyoman, 2002. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Strategi Pemberdayaan Desa Adat dengan Pembentukan Forum Komunikasi</span><span class="font0">”, dalam Desa Pekraman (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sejarah, Eksistensi dan Strategi Pemberdayaan</span><span class="font0">). Denpasar: Yayasan Tri Hita Karana Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">------------------------, 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makna Sosial Hukum Dalam Aksi dan Interaksi Kelompok Masyarakat di Tengah Perubahan Sosial: Studi Kasus Kelompok Masyarakat Petani Subak di Daerah Irigasi Panaraga Giri Bali,</span><span class="font0"> (Disertasi Belum Diterbitkan). Surabaya: Program Pasca Sarjana Universitas Airlangga).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tilar, H.A.R. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Multikulturalisme, Tantangan-Tantangan Global Masa Depan dan Transformasi Pendidikan Nasional</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Widiasarana Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nezar Patria &amp;&nbsp;Andi Arief, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Antonio Gramsci Negara &amp;&nbsp;Hegemoni</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nurhadiantomo, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Konflik-Konflik Sosial PRI-Non PRI Hukum Keadilan Sosial</span><span class="font0">. Surakarta: Muhammadiah University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Parimarta, I Gede, 2002. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat Dalam Perspektif Sejarah</span><span class="font0">” </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dalam Desa Pekraman (Sejarah, Eksestensi dan Strategi Pemberdayaan</span><span class="font0">), Denpasar: Yayasan Tri Hita Karana Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">---------------------, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">”Memahami Desa Adat, Desa Dinas dan Desa Pekraman (Suatu Tinjauan Historis, Kritis), dalam Pidato Pengukuhan Jabatan Guru Besar Tetap Dalam Bidang Ilmu Sejarah</span><span class="font0">). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">---------------------, 1997. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Desa Adat Dalam Perspektif Sejarah</span><span class="font0">”. Denpasar: kertas kerja dalam Seminar Nasional Fakultas Sastra Universitas Warmadewa 24 Oktober 1997.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Piotr Sztompka, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiologi Perubahan Sosial</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Prenada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pilliang Yasraf A., 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">TRANSPOLITIKA Dinamika Politik di Dalam Era Virtualitas</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">---------------------, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">POSREALITAS, Realitas Kebudayaan Dalam Era Posmetafisika.</span><span class="font0"> Yogyakarta:Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pramudya, 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hukum Iitu Kepentingan</span><span class="font0">. Salatiga: Sanggar Mitra Sabda.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Windia, Wayan P., 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Mawacara, Gagasan Satu Hukum Adat (Awig-Awig) dan Pemerintahan di Bali</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Pusat Penelitian Hukum Adat Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Warre, Carol, A. 1990. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Adat and Dinas: Village and Stage in Contemporary Bali</span><span class="font0">”. Disertasi Yang Tidak Dipublikasikan. Australia: University of Western Australia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ziauddin Sardar dan Borin Van Loon. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mengenal Cultural Studies for Beginner</span><span class="font0">. Badung: Mizan.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, the writer would like to thank the Rector of Udayana University and the Director of Postgraduate Program of Udayana University for the opportunity provided to attend the Doctorate Program at Udayana University. The writer would also like to highly appreciate Prof. Dr. I Gde Parimartha, M.A., as the Promoter, Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Sirtha, SH., MH., and Prof. Dr. Emiliana Mariyah,M.S., as Co-promoter I and Copromoter II for their advices and guidance provided during the completion of this dissertation. Finally, high appreciation is also extended to all the parties who have been helpful in the process of completing this dissertation.</span></p>