---
layout: full_article
title: "THE EFFECTIVENESS OF HIGH INTENSITY INTERVAL TRAINING WITH BLOOD FLOW RESTRICTION TRAINING ON ANAEROBIC THRESHOLD IN RUNNERS"
author: "A A I Ayesa Febrinia Adyasputri, I Dewa Gede Alit Kamayoga, Ni Luh Ayu Srianti Dewi"
categories: sport
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-77555 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/id-77555"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-77555"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Sport and Fitness Journal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Volume 9, No.3, September 2021: 188-193</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">E-ISSN: 2654-9182</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE EFFECTIVENESS OF HIGH INTENSITY INTERVAL TRAINING WITH BLOOD FLOW RESTRICTION TRAINING ON ANAEROBIC THRESHOLD IN RUNNERS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">A A I Ayesa Febrinia Adyasputri<sup>1</sup>, I Dewa Gede Alit Kamayoga<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Ayu Srianti Dewi<sup>2 1</sup>Sports Physiology Department Medical Faculty Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali <sup>2</sup>Physiotherapy Department, Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Email:</span><a href="mailto:istri.ayesa@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> istri.ayesa@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The overall performance of runners is associated with the anaerobic threshold level. Anaerobic threshold plays an critical function in runner’s endurance. Anaerobic threshold value is likewise closely related to the level of runner’s fatigue when doing physical exercise or when competing for a long time. If the body’s endurance level cannot face up to the activities carried out, it will give a negative effect on their performance. There are exercises that intention to growth the anaerobic threshold value, particularly high intensity interval training and blood flow restriction training. High intensity interval training can increase the anaerobic value through the mechanism of provide a high stimulus to anaerobic glycolytic and carbonic anhydrase reaction with formation (H<sup>+</sup>) that improved buffering capacity. Addition of blood flood restriction training by using limb occlusion pressure causes local hypoxia, so it will increase muscle metabolic demand. It will induce metabolic acidosis with improved hydrogen ions and lactate production.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key Words: High Intesity Interval Training; Blood Flow Restriction; Anaerobic Threshold; Anaerobic Capacity; Runners</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Anaerobic threshold is one of the components that performs an critical function in endurance while doing aggressive sports activities. Anaerobic threshold is the level of oxygen fed on in the presence of an increase in the concentration of lactate in the blood<sup>1</sup>. Among the most aggressive sports activities that calls for the role of the anaerobic threshold is running. The overall performance of athlete can be prognosticated by way of understanding the anaerobic threshold level of the athlete. There are precise exercise that can be implemented to growth the anaerobic threshold wherein the body can adapat to the buildup of lactate inside the blood so that athletes do not revel in fast fatigue, ensuing within the achievement of performance enhancements in athletes<sup>2</sup>. Going for running is a sport that is quite famous in numerous walks of existence. Whilst doing running sport competition for a long term and tandem with an increasing pace, the body’s program will use the anaerobic mechanism to keep body homeostasis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anaerobic system serve as a supply of energy in muscle group when contracting for a long time with the aid of forming ATP through the glycolysis process<sup>3</sup>. Inside the procedure, the ATP produced much less compared to the aerobic system, ensuing in an enlarge in the producing of lactic acid and metabolic acidosis. The point factor of the transition is said to be the anaerobic threshold<sup>4</sup>. The value of anaerobic threshold is intently related to the extent of fatigue in athletes when appearing physical and technical training over an extended time period and accompanied through an growth in the exertion given. If the staying power of the body isn’t always able to face up the given exercises, fatigue will arise which can have a bad</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">impact on athletes performance<sup>5</sup>. Physical performance in competitive sport activities athletes relies upon on the body’s included physiological mechanism, which is the body’s ability to provide physiological response to fullfill the demanding situations offered. The optimum consequences to be finished are obtained from the improvement of the response thru training<sup>6</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The effects of fatigue can be reduced by increasing endurance through anaerobic threshold<sup>7</sup>.There are several exercises that serve to increase the value of the anaerobic threshold. The exercises that can be given are high intensity interval training and blood flow restriction training. High intensity interval training is a repetitive exercise with high intensity but interspersed with a recovery period. A few literature states that high intensity interval training has been proven to improve aerobic and anaerobic performance in quick length of time<sup>8</sup>. Meanwhile, blood flow restriction training is an exercise that works by reducing arterial blood flow in the muscles that work while also blocking off the flow returned of the veins<sup>9</sup>. Based on this background, this study aims to examine more deeply the effectiveness of high intensity interval training with blood flow restriction training on the anaerobic threshold in runners.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The method in this study use a literature review or study literature articles which using secondary statistics studies end result from several numerous studies related to the effectiveness of high intensity interval training and blood flow restriction training on anaerobic threshold in runners. The literatures were had been thru electronic database such as Pubmed, Pedro, and Google Scholar. They were had been discussed approximately high intensity interval training, blood flow restriction and runners, high intensity interval training and blood flow restriction affects anaerobic threshold, and high intensity interval training and blood flow restriction affects anaerobic capacity. The studies were included in this study if they are: 1. in English, 2. mentioned the correlation runners and anaerobic threshold, 3. reported about high intensity and blood flow restriction for anaerobic threshold, 4. study clinical trial, experimelntal study, systemic review and metaanalysis, review article and randomized controlled trial. The studies have been excluded from this study if they are not mentioned about the exercise for anaerobic threshold and endurance performance.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">High Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) has been demonstrating good effect which is increasing aerobic and anaerobic capacity. Those can improved training time efficiency<sup>10</sup>. HIIT is one of the best exercise as well advised for improving endurance performance and the physical performance of athletes. This effect can be achieved through anaerobic threshold. Commonly, HIIT formed with repetitive short to long session of high intensity exercise. The session consist of aerobic exercises with 100% oxygen consumption (VO</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">max), periods of rest, and low or moderate intensity exercise<sup>11</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Studies conducted with the aid of Herrod et al in 2020 aims to appraise the impact of either shorthening or lengthening high intensity interval training on cardiorespiratory fitness adjusments. This adjusments via anaerobic threshold become measure in a single experimental study showed that after two weeks, HIIT seems to be inadequate to improve anaerobic threshold, however this end result achieveable with 4 or 6 weeks training. The study concluded that time route of cardiorespiratory transformations to a single, protocol of HIIT that 5 via 1 minute completed 3 times/week can bring out widespread significant tolerance of exercise, despite the fact that vast enhancements in cardiorespiratory fitness can guide by doing this training for 4 weeks<sup>12</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Research by Belfry et al in 2020 showed that to be able to refine ventilatory threshold and VO</span><span class="font1">2 </span><span class="font3">peak by giving repeated high intensity with 10s work/5s recovery intermittent cycles for 30 minutes and carried out as 12 sessions. It shows this training led to the contribution a huge of anaerobic glycolytic phosphorylation or ventilatory buffering. Results in intermittent training effective to stimulate anaerobic and aerobic that will be improved performances and post intermittent training on the 60s test result showed that there is an increase VCO</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">. Training with excessive intensity also has related responses to enlarge carbonic anhydrase activity<sup>13</sup>. This training provide a high stimulate to anaerobic glycolytic and carbonic anhydrase reaction with formation (H<sup>+</sup>) that improved buffering capacity<sup>14</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Research by Batra et al (2017) resulted by 8 week interval training will be enhance anaerobic performance via glycolytic energy system and adaptations phosphagen system. The adaptation is obtained through the phosphocreatine (PCr) energy pathway which causes changes in the increase adenosine triphosphate (ATP) which will eventually improving peak power (Pmax). This way are important for runners to keep their performance during exercise and competition<sup>15</sup>. HIIT frequently from anaerobic metabolism, that energy assist the training with distinctive proportions and specific time intervals. Anaerobic glycolysis give a supply of ATP to maintaining required power output capacity<sup>16</sup>. A research was conducted showed 10 second high intensity work and 20 seconds of rest periods will keep anaerobic glycolysis contribution to metabolic pattern<sup>17</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Training program in anaerobic threshold level is suitable for endurance athletes. It can be resulting a change in muscle ultrastructure, oxidative capacity, capilarization, and substrate utilization<sup>18</sup>. These changes will have an impact on physiological diversifications together with lower O</span><span class="font1">2 </span><span class="font3">for air flow, lactate accumulation, and the usage of glycogen for power output. Anaerobic threshold level will be upgrade if training which given at 80% VO</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">max for nine weeks or a bit over anaerobic threshold level<sup>19</sup>. They are increase lactate removal inside the blood by increasing monocarboxylate transporter, reduce the need for carbohydrate metabolism and reduce lactate formation by increasing the oxidation of enzym, reduce lactate formation by lowering ratio and concentration of phosphofruktokinase-1 with citrate synthases and increase percentage of pyruvate to the krebs cycle which reduce lactate formation through the LDH reaction by enzyme concentration and mithocondrial density in skeletal muscle<sup>20</sup>. This training can increase nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide by reducing NADH form shuttle enzyme levels. This enzymatic system take part with LA dehydrogenase for NADH<sup>21</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Another research conducted by Monks et al (2017) the effect of HITT on anaerobic threshold significantly higher in the high intensity interval training group than high intensity continous training group. This thing coming up because development of intermediate and fast twitch muscle during the interval training<sup>22</sup>. Research was done by Abe et al (2015) showed that HIIT will also improve the protein levels of Hif- 1α attend by increase gene expression of glycolytic and glycogenesis enzymes. This protein can be used as regulators in the body’s adaptation of anaerobic metabolism to HIIT<sup>23</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">High intensity interval training (HIIT) can be combined with blood flow restriction training to attain anaerobic threshold. Blood flow restriction (BFR) training is training that uses a compressive cuff wrapped on the limb which leads to a lowering arterial flow and the return of venous<sup>24</sup>. Addition of blood flow restriction (BFR) training to HIIT has been proven increasing anaerobic capacity<sup>25</sup>. Jessee et al (2018) found that impact of BFR training significantly growing endurance muscle from pre to post training<sup>26</sup>. BFR training influence the activation of type II muscle fiber and upregulates growth hormone which is for protein synthesis<sup>27</sup>. Research by Franz et al in 2020 showed that the provision using 50% of arterial</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">limb occlusion pressure (LOP) can set off cardiovascular response inclusive of heart rate (HR) and intravascular pressure considerably expanded during the training. BFR training also induce metabolic acidosis with increasing the hydrogen ion and lactate production. Elevated the hydrogen ion cause the occurrence of inhibition displacement and reuptake of concentration potassium<sup>28</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The systemic review studies carried out by Silva et al in 2019 confirmed that addition BFR training to exercise offer an acute and chronic metabolic variable and neuromuscular changes. At some stage in BFR training, metabolic adjustments arises with an growth in EPOC, VO</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">, heart rate, and lactate production. In training, it stimulates group III dan IV afferent pathways, resulting in inhibition of alpha motorneuron in order that metabolic accumulation is completed. To prevent conduction failure, that is accomplished via developing muscle activity and recruitment of muscle fibers. There are neural adaptations and myogenic elements that increase in muscle hypertrophy is caused by an upgrade the level of phosphorylation and protein synthesis<sup>29</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Research by Nitzsche et al (2018) showed that outcomes exercise with BFR training growing lactate concentration throughout and after training due to reduced the supply of arterial oxygen to the muscle than without blood flow restriction<sup>30</sup>. Local hypoxia ensuing modified in cardiorespiratory response, accelerated metabolic demands of muscle and multiplied in energy expenditure<sup>31</sup>. When high intensity interval training combined with blood flow restriction training, it will likely be reducing in the availability of the substrate inside the blood so the local substrate will atone for the unavailability which includes glycogen and phosphocreatine for ATP production<sup>32</sup>. Hypoxia due to BFR training is associated with an increase in anaerobic metabolism and it is necessary to monitor VO</span><span class="font1">2 </span><span class="font3">at the end of the training session<sup>33</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">An offers of high intensity interval training combined with blood flow restriction training can assist to enhance the anaerobic threshold level in runners. HIIT can increase the anaerobic threshold through a mechanism to stimulate carbonic anhydrase reaction with formation (H<sup>+</sup>) and anaerobic glycolytic, contributed of glycolytic energy system and adaptations phosphagen system. Addition of BFR training while the usage of a compressive cuff wrapped on the limb which leads to a reduction of arterial flow and venous return will reduce the deliver of arterial oxygen to the muscles and it is demanding anaerobic glycolysis or lactate production. BFR also can increase recruitment of muscle fibers resulting of metabolic accumulation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONFLICT OF INTEREST</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The authors declare no conflict of interest.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Patel H, Alkhawam H, Madanieh R, Shah N, Kosmas CE, Vittorio TJ. Aerobic vs anaerobic exercise training effects on cardiovascular system. World Journal of Cardiology. 2017; 9(2): 134-138.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alavi SY, Mirdar S. The effect of eight weeks high intensity intermittent training and blood flow restricted on angiogenic markers of muscle in male runners. Ann Appl Sport Sci. 2020; 8(s1): e840.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buchheit M, Laursen PB. High Intensity Interval Training, Solutions to the programming puzzle. Sports Med. 2013; 43: 927-954.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Roy GS, Paul A, Bandopadhyyay D. Effect of extensive interval training on lactate threshold level. American Journal of Sport Science and Medicine. 2014; 2(5A): 6-9.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stöggl TL and Björklund G. High Intensity Interval Training Leads to Greater Improvements in Acute Heart Rate Recovery and Anaerobic Power as High Volume Low Intensity Training. Front. Physiol. 2017; 8:562.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rossi FE, de Freitas MC, Zanchi NE, Lira FS, Cholewa JM. The role of inflammation and immune cells in blood flow restriction training adaptation: a review. Front. Physiol. 2018; 9:1376.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conceicão MS, Ga´spari AF, Ramkrapes APB, Junior EMM, Bertuzzi R, Cavaglieri CR, et al. (2018) Anaerobic metabolism induces greater total energy expenditure during exercise with blood flow restriction. PLoS ONE 13(3): e0194776.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fennell CRJ, Hopker JG. The acute physiological and perceptual effects of recovery interval intensity during cycling based high intensity interval training. 2021; 121:425-434.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shalamzari SA, Rajabi S, Rajabi H, Gahreman DE, Paton C, Bayati M, Rosemann T, Nikolaidis PT, Knechtle B. Effects of blood flow restriction and exercise intensity on aerobic, anaerobic, and muscle strength adaptations in physically active collegiate women. Frontiers in Physiology. 2019; 10: 810.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mallol M, Norton L, Bentley DJ, Mejuto G, Norton K, Yanci J. Physiological response differences between run and cycle high intensity interval training program in recreational middle age female runners. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine. 2020; 19:508-516.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pinillos FG, Perez JC, Hermoso VMS, Roman PAL. A high intensity interval training (hiit) based running plan improves athletic performance by improving muscle power. 2016; 31(1):146-153.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Herrod PJJ, Blackwell JEM, Boereboom CL, et al. The time course of physiological adaptations to high-intensity interval training in older adults. Aging Med. 2020;3:245– 251.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belfry, GR, Paterson, DH, Thomas, SG. High intensity 10-s work: 5-s recovery intermittent training improves anaerobic and aerobic performances. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, DOI:10.1080/02701367.2019.1696928.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belfry Belfry, G. R., Raymer, G. R., Marsh, G. D., Paterson, D. H., Thompson, R. T., &amp;&nbsp;Thomas, S. G. (2012). Muscle metabolic status and acid-base balance during 10 s work: 5 s recovery intermittent and continuous exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology, 113(3), 410–417.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Batra A and Zaton, M. Effect oh high intensity interval training on anaerobic capacity in ITF taekwondo practitioners. Journal of Combat Sports and Martial Arts. 2017; 1(2); Vol.8, 61-66.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wang J, Qiu J, Yi L, Hou Z, Benardot D, Cao W. Effect of sodium bicarbonate ingestion during 6 weeks of HIIT on anaerobic performance of college students. Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition. 2019.16:18.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wallner, D, Simi H, Tschakert G, Hofmann P. Acute physiological response to aerobic short interval training in trained runners. International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance. 2014; 9:661-666.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Foster C, Farlan CV, Guidotti F, Harbin M, Roberts B, Schuette JS, Tuuri A, Doberstein ST, Porcari JP. The effects of high intensity interval training vs steady state training on aerobic and anaerobic capacity. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine. 2015;14: 747755.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ghosh AK. Anaerobic threshold: its concept and role in endurance sport. Malaysian Journal of Medical Sciences. 2004; 11(1): 24-36.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Midgley AW, McNaughton LR, Jones AM. Training to enhance the physiological determinants of long-distance running performance. 2007; 37(10): 857-880.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ziemann E, Grzywacs T, Luszczyk M, Laskowski R, Olek RA, Gibson AL. 2011. Aerobic and anaerobic changes with high intensity interval training in active college aged men. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research. 2011; 25(4): 1104-1112.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">22. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Monks L, Seo MW, Kim, HB, Jung, HC, Song JK. High intensity interval training and athletic performance in taekwondo athletes. The Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness. 2017; 57(10): 1252-1260.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abe T, Kitaoka Y, Kikuchi DM, Takeda K, Numata O, Takemasa T. High intensity interval training induced metabolic adaptation coupled with an increase in Hif-1α and glycolytic protein expression. J Appl Physiol. 2015; 119:1297-1302.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">24. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rolnick N, Schoenfeld BJ. Blood flow restriction training and the physique athlete: a practical research-based guide to maximizing muscle size. National Strength and Conditioning Association. 2020; 42(5): 22-36.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Park S, Kim JK, Choi HM, Kim HG, Beekley MD, Nho H. Increase in maximal oxygen uptake following 2-week walk training with blood flow occlusion in athletes. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010; 109: 591-600.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jessee MB, Buckner SL, Mouser JG, Mattocks KT, Dankel SJ, Abe T, Bell ZW, Bentley JP, Loenneke JP. Muscle adaptations to high-load training and very low-load training with and without blood flow restriction. Frontiers in Physiology. 2018; 9: 1448.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loenneke JP, Wilson GJ, Wilson JM. A mechanistic approach to blood flow restriction. Int J Sports Med. 2010; 31: 1-4.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Franz A, Berndt F, Raabe J, Harmsen JF, Zilkens C, Behringer M. Invasive assessment of hemodynamic, metabolic and ionic consequences during blood flow restriction training. Frontiers in Physiology. 2020; 11: 617668.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Silva JCG, Neto EAP, Pfeiffer PAS, Neto GR, Rodrigues AS, Bemben MG, Patterson SD, Batista GR, Sousa MSC. Acute and chronic responses of aerobic exercise with blood flow restriction: a systemic review. Frontiers in Physiology. 2019; 10: 1239.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nitzsche N, Schulze R, Weigand F, Hummer N, Schulz H. Comparison of an acute resistance training on the lactate concentration with and without blood flow restriction at different loads. Dtsch Z Sportmed. 2018; 69: 337-343.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conceic¸ão MS, Ga´spari AF, Ramkrapes APB, Junior EMM, Bertuzzi R, Cavaglieri CR, et al. Anaerobic metabolism induces greater total energy expenditure during exercise with blood flow restriction. PLoS ONE. 2018; 13(3): e0194776.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pignanelli C, Christiansen D, Burr JF. Blood flow restriction training and the high-performance athlete: science to application. J Appl Physiol. 2021; 130: 1163-1170.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">33. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thomas HJ, Scott BR, Peiffer JJ. Acute physiological responses to low-intensity blood flow restriction cycling. Journal of Science and Medicine Sport. 2018.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">193</span></p>