---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF TRANSLATION TECHNIQUES IN TRANSLATING ENGLISH EXPRESSIONS IN COCKTAILS FOR THREE INTO INDONESIAN KLUB KOKTAIL"
author: "Devi Pradnya Putri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF TRANSLATION TECHNIQUES IN TRANSLATING ENGLISH EXPRESSIONS IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">COCKTAILS FOR THREE</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> INTO INDONESIAN KLUB KOKTAIL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Devi Pradnya Putri</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ilmiah yang berjudul “Translation Techniques in Translating English Expressions in Cocktails for Three into Indonesian Klub Koktail” bertujuan untuk menganalisis teknik penerjemahan ungkapan dalam novel Cocktails for Three yang diterjemahkan ke bahasa Indonesia berjudul Klub Koktail dan mengetahui hilang dan bertambahnya informasi dalam penerjemahan. Hasil yang didapat dari penelitian ini adalah teknik yang digunakan dalam penerjemahan dan beberapa contoh hilang dan bertambahnya informasi yang terdapat di hasil terjemahan. Teknik yang digunakan ada delapan teknik, yaitu borrowing, literal, calque, modulation, transposition, adaptation, amplification dan generalization. Penelitian ini juga menemukan beberapa informasi yang hilang dalam penerjemahan ungkapan dari Inggris ke Indonesia. Begitu juga sebaliknya, ada beberapa penambahan informasi yang digunakan dalam penerjemahan. Hal ini disebabkan oleh perbedaan budaya antara dua negara yang memiliki perbedaan bahasa. Maka dari itu, penerjemah harus menghilangkan atau menambahkan beberapa informasi untuk mendapatkan terjemahan yang paling sesuai dan pesan yang dimaksud oleh penulis dapat tersampaikan dengan baik kepada pembaca.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: translation, expressions, translation techniques, loss and gain of information</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In today’s world, communication among different nations using different languages is feasible through translation. A translator should have knowledge of both source and target language and a competence with the subject of which be translates. It means that the result of translation is not like a translation, so the readers feel that they are reading an original book. A translator should rich in the vocabularies of both source and target language. One of the ways of enriching English vocabulary is studying expressions in order to get the result of translation that looks natural because not all words can be translated word by word. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">translation equivalent of English expressions into Indonesia was analyzed in this study. Because of translation is not easy work, the translators should be careful of such expressions because they have to be translated accurately. It is not only matter of transferring meaning into another language. In the process of translating English into Indonesian, finding the right expression in the receptor language (RL) can be complicated. The translator often finds some problems since an expression cannot be translated literally word for word because the result is usually in nonsense or even convey quite wrong meaning. The translator has to be able to make smart semantic adjustments, in order to get the best result. The source which is used is a novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three</span><span class="font1"> by Madeleine Wickham because this novel has many expressions which were needed to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two problems discussed in this writing, they are: (1) What types of translation techniques were used to translate the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Klub Koktail</span><span class="font1">? (2) What the loss and gain of information took place in the translation of English expressions and why they happen?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two aims of this study, they are: (1) To find out the types of translation techniques used in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Klub Koktail</span><span class="font1">. (2) To describe the occurrence loss and gain of information in the translation of English expressions and the reason why they happen.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This research is a qualitative research, in which all the data were collected directly from the source and emphasized the descriptive explanation because the data in a qualitative research usually in the form of words in a sentence rather than numbers of quantity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research method which was used in analyzing data in this study includes the accessing and handling of the data, which include the determination</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">of the data source, the method and technique of collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data. The research was collected through library research close reading, finding expressions and analyzing those data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation Techniques</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The categories used to analyze translations allow us to study the way of translation works. These categories are related to text, context and process. According to Molina and Albir (2002), translation techniques are presented in groups based on orientation, adapted and translated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This technique means taking the words directly from the source language into the target language. It caused the target language not to have equivalent and the words in the source language to sound better (more specific or just accepted).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.1.1 data 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this case, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> is familiar to Indonesian people society. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> can be translated into Indonesian into ‘riwayat hidup’, but the Indonesian people tend to use </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> in their daily life. That’s why the novel uses the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CV</span><span class="font1"> than ‘riwayat hidup’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A word-for-word translation can be used in some languages and not others dependent on the sentence structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Asleep like a lamb</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lelap seperti biri-biri</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.1.2 data 4) The translation that occur when the process of transferring message is no grammatical change. Therefore, the technique used is literal translation technique.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Calque</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is a special term of translation used to translate from two languages between two different cultures. Sometimes calque works, sometimes it does not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bridesmaids</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pengiring pengantin</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.1.3 data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bridesmaids</span><span class="font1"> cannot be translated into Indonesian word. If we try to force translate it literarily, it becomes ‘pembantu pengantin’, it is not suitable. It happens because in Indonesian cultures, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bridesmaids</span><span class="font1"> is not recognized.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oblique Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Transposition is the change of the structure of words in sentence when translating a text from source language into the target language. It occurs because of different grammatical structures between two languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Trouser pocket</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">saku celana</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.2.1 data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">trouser pocket</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saku celana</span><span class="font1"> which involves replacing one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message. In the data above the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">trouser</span><span class="font1"> (V) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pocket</span><span class="font1"> (N) one translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">saku</span><span class="font1"> (N) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">celana</span><span class="font1"> (N)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It changes in point of view. It is slightly more abstract than transposition; this consists of using a phrase to convey the same idea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">An old hand</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">berpengalaman</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.2.2 data 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If we compare the meaning, the lexical meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">old hand</span><span class="font1"> itself, ‘tangan tua’ meaning someone that is advanced and experienced in doing something. To make it easy to understand modulation technique is used to change point of view.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Source language culture is expressed in a totally different way that is familiar or appropriate to the target language culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Virus screening programs</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">program antivirus</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.2.3 data 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Virus screening programs</span><span class="font1"> cannot be translated into ‘program penyaringan virus’ because the reader misunderstand. Hence, the adaptation has to used in this translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basic Procedures</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amplification</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Amplification occurs when the target language uses more signifiers to cover syntactic or lexical gaps.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Turned down</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dimatikan</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.3.1 data 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The phrasal verb cannot be translated word to word because it could make to the reader misunderstand and the message cannot be delivered well. That’s why the amplification plays an important role in translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generalization</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This technique is applied if the source language word has no specific counterpart in the target language. Therefore, a general word is used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The corridor</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lorong</span><span class="font1"> (3.1.3.2 data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The difference in grammatical system especially in vocabulary makes the translator choose the best one to make a perfect translation. The translator translates the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lorong</span><span class="font1"> according to context of situation of the novel itself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loss and Gain of Information</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Nida (1975:27) “The basic principles of translation means that no translation in a receptor language can be the exact equivalent of the model in the source language”. Therefore, the adjustments usually lead to the occurrence of loss and gain of information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida clearly stated that the addition or omission of information is applicable not only to the immediate problem of grammatical categories, but to any and all types of measurability between the source and the receptor target language (1975:39)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loss of Information</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Two embossed cards</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dua kartu</span><span class="font1"> (3.2.1 data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Two embossed cards</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dua kartu,</span><span class="font1"> meaning that just ‘two cards’ is only translated into Indonesia. The translator omits ‘embossed’ in her translation. In the other words, loss in translation occurs in this translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">because even without translating the word ‘embossed’, the message cannot change and the reader can understand it well.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gain of Information</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The ladies</span><span class="font1"> translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">toilet wanita</span><span class="font1"> (3.2.2 data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">toilet</span><span class="font1">’ is added in the translation to make the translation equivalent. It aims to make the reader easily understand about the message from the author that wants to convey to the reader. Besides, the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">toilet</span><span class="font1">’ is added to avoid misunderstanding between the author and the reader.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>VI. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Having analyzed the translation technique used in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three</span><span class="font1"> (English version) into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Klub Koktail</span><span class="font1"> (Indonesian version), some points as conclusion can be drawn as follow:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are eight techniques used in the translation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three </span><span class="font1">into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Klub Koktail,</span><span class="font1"> there were: borrowing, literal, calque, transposition, modulation, adaptation, amplification, and generalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The answer to the second problem of this writing, loss and gain of information are found in the translation of this novel. The main reason why loss and gain of translation sometimes occur in translation is no translation in a target language can be the exact equivalent of the model in the source language. In other words, loss and gain of information are appropriate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>VII. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Laraskusuma, Nurkinanti. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Klub Koktail</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina, L. and Albir, A.H. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Techniques Revisited: Dynamic and Functionalist Approach</span><span class="font1">. Barcelona: Universitat Autὀnoma de Barcelona</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, E.A. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Structure and Translation</span><span class="font1">. California: Stanford</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wickham, Madeleine. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cocktails for Three</span><span class="font1">. London: A Random House Group Company</span></p>