---
layout: full_article
title: "Grammatical Error In Writing Made By The Second Grade Students of  SMKN 5 Denpasar"
author: "Ida Bagus Putra Adnyana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 15.2 Mei 2016: </span><span class="font0">91</span><span class="font1">-</span><span class="font0">94</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Grammatical Error In Writing Made By The Second Grade Students of SMKN 5 Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ida Bagus Putra Adnyana email: </span><a href="mailto:ibputraadnyana@rocketmail.com"><span class="font2">ibputraadnyana@rocketmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini berjudul “Grammatical Error in Writing Made by The Students of SMKN 5 Denpasar”. Terdapat dua permasalahan yang di analisa dengan menggunakan teori Error Analysis, diantaranya: Error yang dibuat oleh siswa dan kemampuan grammar dari siswa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam studi ini berupa essay yang dibuat oleh siswa kelas 2 SMKN 5 Denpasar, terdapat 40 siswa yang dipilih secara acak dari 10 kelas dan 40 essay yang dibuat oleh masing – masing siswa. Sekiranya ada 10 contoh data yang digunakan sebagai data dan di analisa dengan menggunakan teori Surface Strategy Taxonomy milik Burt dan Dulay. Dari analisa yang dilakukan, ditemukan 11 tipe omission error, 2 tipe addition error, 1 tipe misformation error dan 1 tipe misordering error.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan analisa yang dilakukan, dapat disimpukalkan bahwa kemampuan grammar dari siswa adalah dibawah rata – rata, dimana siswa masih kesulitan dalam menggunakan grammar dengan baik dan benar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword: Error analysis, grammar, writing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In daily life, people need to interact or communicate to other people. In interacting or communicating to others, of course, people need at least a language as an instrument of our communication. English language is the universal language used by people to communicate, especially for the people who have different cultures from different countries. Grammar is the structural foundation of people’s ability in order to express expression. The more people aware of how it works, the more people can monitor the meaning and effectiveness of the way people use language. It could help foster precision, detect ambiguity, and exploit the richness of expression available in English. And it could help everyone not only teachers of English, even teachers of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">anything. Grammar is the most important thing in English, because it taught how to write ‘good English’ and speak ‘properly’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Referring to the background illustrated previously, two research questions are the focus of current study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of errors are made by the second grade students of SMKN5 Denpasar in paragraph writing?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the grammatical ability of second grade students of SMKN 5 Denpasar in mastering English grammar in paragraph writing?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the errors in paragraph writing that made by the second grade students of SMKN5 Denpasar.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the grammatical ability in paragraph writing of second grade students of SMKN 5 Denpasar.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Basically, this study used field research, this field research in finding and collecting data and information from various kinds of references. It refers to more practical activities to collect the primary data because it has close relationship with the paper. The method used in this paper consists of four steps, those are: data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and technique of presenting the result.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into two parts; analysis error and analysis of grammar ability.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Errors</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">More specifically the analysis deals with omission, addition, misformation and misordering.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Omission errors are characterized by the absence of an item that must appear in a well-formed utterance. The omission could happen in grammatical words such as “is”, “the”, “of”, because those little words play minor role in conveying the meaning of the sentence. There are given some parts of omission and error omission made by the second grade students of SMKN5 Denpasar. There are eleven types of omissions of grammatical morphemes were found in the data. The corpuses are: Omission of Head Noun, Omission of Subject, Omission of Preposition: to/on/in, Omission of Article: the, Omission of Both Plural Markers, Omission of Auxiliary: is/am, Omission of Copula: is/am, Omission of Progressive: -ing, Omission of Regular Past Tense: -ed, Omission of Irregular Past Tense, Omission of Initiative Marker: to</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many addition errors are the opposite of omission. They are characterized by the presence of an item which must not appear in a well-formed utterance. Addition errors usually occur in the later stages of second language acquisition when the learner has already acquired some target language rules. It could be a regularization, double marking, or simple addition error. These error can be as an indicator that some basic rules been acquired, however the refinement has not yet been made. The writer identified two types of addition errors during the research. There are: Simple Addition of Past Tense Irregular and Addition of Article a</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Misformation errors are characterized by the use of the wrong form of the morpheme or structure. Unlike in omission, the item is not supplied at all, in misformation errors the learner supplies something, although it is incorrect. Still in Dulay’s explanation in book Language two (1982) explained that there are three types of misformation that have been reported in the literature: regularization, archi-form and alternating form. Misformation of Preposition :at/to on/in the only is one type of misformation that found in this study.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Misordering is the incorrect olacement of morpheme or group of morphemes in a well-formed utterance. According to Dulay in her book entitled Language two (1982) there are three types of misordering: auxiliary in simple question, auxiliary in embedded question and adverb. Misordering of adverb is the only one that found in this study.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Grammar Ability. The grammar ability of second grade students of SMKN 5 Denpasar is limited or below. It could be said limited or below because the students made a lot mistakes in using appropriate grammar. The variety of vocabulary that used in the paragraph writing is limited, therefore the story that wrote by the students is monotone and not interesting.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The second grade students od SMKN 5 Denpasar still have some problems in using English, especially in using the appropriate grammar in writing. The grammar ability of second grade students of SMKN 5 Denpasar is limited(below), it could be said limited that because the students made a lot of errors in paragraph. This statement is based on the analysis of the essays that are made by the students. The errors that made by the students were: omission, addition, misformation, and misordering. The most errors made by the students are omission error. There were 11 types of omission errors which are found in the data. Based on the analysis of the data, the most omission error that made by the students of SMKN 5 Denpasar is omission of plural: -s. the students were failed to use the correct form of short plural –s in the writings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Dulay, H. Burt, M. Krashen,S. 1982. Language two. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K. 1993. An introduction of functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">94</span></p>