---
layout: full_article
title: "LANGUAGE STYLE OF DIDEK TEXT IN THE ISLANDS OF SELAYAR,  SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE"
author: "Dra Dafirah, I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, I Nyoman Suarka, Dr Pudentia"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-11989 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-11989"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-11989"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN: --</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 9. Na.2 Page 41--50</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>LANGUAGE STYLE OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">DIDEK</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> TEXT</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>IN THE ISLANDS OF SELAYAR, SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Dafirah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:irahacim@hotmail.com"><span class="font1">irahacim@hotmail.com</span></a><span class="font1"> Makasar University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, M.S. e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:weda_kusuma@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">weda_kusuma@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Study Program of Linguistics, School of Postgraduate Studies, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Suarka, M.Hum e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:nyomansuarka@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">nyomansuarka@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1"> Study Program of Linguistics, School of Postgraduate Studies, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dr. Pudentia, MPSS, M.A.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:pudentia_mpss@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">pudentia_mpss@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesia University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This article aims to describe the language aesthetic elements of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Didek</span><span class="font0"> is an oral tradition that is presented in the form of song of unrequited-reply. One of the peculiarities of this oral tradition is the emphasis on aesthetic elements or beauty. The speakers / singers are required to always use a beautiful language while singing. </span><span class="font1">Berangkat dari pandangan Roman Jakobson penulis membahas unsur estetika yang ditemukan dalam teks </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font1">. Artikel ini akan berfokus pada pembahasan tentang estetika bahasa dalam teks </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font1"> yang mencakup penggunaan gaya bahasa berupa: diksi dan majas. </span><span class="font0">Departing from the view of Roman Jakobson this article is focused on a discussion of the aesthetic language of the didek text including the use of language style: diction and figures of speech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font0">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style, Didek</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Didek</span><span class="font0"> is one of the cultural heritage of Selayar community in South Sulawesi. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Didek</span><span class="font0"> is presented in the form of song of unrequited-reply between groups of men with women. </span><span class="font1">The</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">existence of </span><span class="font0">Didek is part of oral tradition of Indonesian people competing with modern values offered by the outside world as a result of modernization, globalization of information (Badrun, 2014: 3). The offered modern values are difficult to avoid because it is disseminated through mass media (printed and electronic) reaching remote corners. The times and modern technology have shown their dominance in grabbing the attention and sympathy of the people, especially the younger generation. As a result, young people are no longer interested in studying </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> and it gradually </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">drove</span><span class="font0"> didek on extinction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">On the other hand, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> becomes a cultural product of Selayar community that contains a variety of moral teaching, life guidance and so forth. In expressing their thoughts and feelings, the performers of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> use beautiful and polite language as the medium. The strength of didek lies in the use of language elements. The use of diction, and style, and the formula becomes a distinctive feature of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Concept</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2.1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Didek</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Didek is presented in the form of unrequited kelong characterized by the vocabulary of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kelong</span><span class="font0"> 'singing' that appears at the beginning of each speech </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">padidek 'didek</span><span class="font0"> players'. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kelong</span><span class="font0"> in Makassar language and Elong in Bugis means singing in Indonesian. The meaning of Kelong listed in Makassar-Indonesian Dictionary is a rhyme or a poem (1995: 197). According to Maknun (2012: 73) Kelong is a form of language that has a certain pattern, expressed by means intone, and contains a specific meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Didek</span><span class="font0"> is displayed in groups, at least by four people consisting of a group of men and women. Before the play both of these groups were given signs as a rule in the play. The rules are determined by traditional leaders and simultaneously monitor / supervise each participant behavior and attitude. The fundamental rules in this show is that the song performed by each</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">group should be polite and courteous to set two seniors as referees in the show. Furthermore, each group must keep sight and the way they sit while singing. In addition to these rules there are rules about songs to be performed by each group. The song of each group should be no more than three lines and the reply of every song should be precise. The groups who violate the rules will be sanctioned by custom. Didek performance could be held at night or during the day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Selayar Community</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Selayar society is the name of Makassar ethnic community from a regency in South Sulawesi, namely, the Regency of Selayar Islands. In this paper those classified as Selayar society are the people who are still settling in Selayar islands and the people who have migrated to other areas.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theoretical Framework</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Poetic language is one of the central themes in the works of Roman Jakobson who appeared with functional structural view of the language. According to Roman Jakobson (1987: 71), from the point of poetic language and literature, there are six functions of language, namely: 1) emotive function, 2) referential, 3) poetic , 4) metalingual, 5) conative, and 6) the phatic. One of the six functions, i.e poetic is a function of language that necessitates the aesthetic elements. The basic framework that becomes the work reference in this article refers to the principle that </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Didek</span><span class="font0"> is oral tradition that highlights the aesthetic element in the delivery of the message. The use of language style is one strategy in maintaining the aesthetic elements</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font0">Analyzing the language style means analyzing the techniques of word usage, use of figure of speech either individually or in groups</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Language style is a way of expressing a thought or feeling in verbal or written form, all kinds of expression used to express something with the figurative meaning (Panumbangan, 2013: 149). According to Fachruddin (1994: 49) style of language is someone’s language statement who</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">consciously or not, intends to inspire and captivate the attention of the listenerss or reader to a particular purpose or sense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Diction is the choice and use of appropriate words to represent the thoughts and feelings to be expressed in a sentence pattern (Fachruddin, 1994: 37). The words chosen are generally associated with denotative and connotative, suggestive meanings. Keraf (2010: 24) indicates that there are three understanding of diction, namely: </span><span class="font1">(1) </span><span class="font0">choice of words / diction including ideas, how to form a group of words in the use of expressions and style that are appropriate to the situation; (2) word choice / diction is the ability to distinguish shades of meaning precisely and ability to find a form that corresponds to the value of the listener community groups; and (3) the appropriate choice of words is made possible by a number of vocabulary mastery of the language used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Figure of speech is the choice of a particular word in accordance with the intent of the writer or speaker in order to obtain the aspect of beauty (Ratna, 2009: 164). Figure of speech is the use of word beyond the limits of common meaning or deviate from its literal meaning (Sudjiman, 1990: 50).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diction (Choice of Words)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Diction (word choice) influences the process of speech creation. In the oral tradition, diction undergoes a short process and can not be repeated. Diction in didek found meaningful denotation, connotation, the word suggestion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">, the use of denotative or connotative words take place in a balanced manner. The frequency of use of words having the same denotative and connotative meanings. In the performance of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> the use of denotative and connotative words is done alternately and is not found in any performance purely using denotative or connotative words only. Here are some examples of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> text that use denotative words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Didek La si pakkelongki banngini</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘ </span><span class="font0">Didek will each sing tonight '</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Para bajikmamo naung labajik todong biritta erang kanangta</span><span class="font1"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘ </span><span class="font0">equally well indeed be good news also bring our words'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font0">We will sing didek tonight, if everything goes right all would be good news)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The text above is an example of the use of denotative words. The rows of the text as a whole imply denotation. The choice of words used has the meaning of what it is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In contrast to the following text fragment, the words used implies connotations, the implied meaning and that meaning is found when the words are in a broader context.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kassibalasaki kelong balasaki cinna mataku</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'Because of the unrequited-reply please reply my desire'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Laanda tongkang sala tannang ri baruga</span><span class="font1"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'So that no wrong behavior in Baruga'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font0">For our song has an unrequited-reply please response to my love)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Connotative meaning is found in the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cinna mata</span><span class="font0">, if the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cinna</span><span class="font0"> stands alone the connotative meaning is desire. When the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cinna</span><span class="font0"> is joined with the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mata</span><span class="font0"> into </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">cinna mata</span><span class="font0"> then its meaning transformed into affection or love.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In addition to the denotation and connotation, diction with suggestive words is also found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> , ie words that are able to give suggestions to the audience with the power of the existing meaning. Selection and placement of such words seem as if emitting supernatural power bringging suggestive effect to the readers to be sad, thrilled, excited, or angry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Choice of words in the following example gives specific suggestions to the audience. The word hell brings the listener as if to feel the torment while the atmosphere is described by the speaker in the following text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Parri-parriki sambayang ri genteng longguna lino</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Please hurry to pray while still in the world '</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kalompo duduk bambang apinna naraka</span><span class="font1"> (2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">Do your prayer while still in the world, because the fire of hell is so hot’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The word of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">naraka</span><span class="font0"> 'hell' at line (2) gives suggestions to the audience a sense of the fear because hell is synonymous with torment and distress. Hell to Muslims is a comeuppance for man who during his life did away orders and prohibitions. </span><span class="font1">Di samping sugesti rasa takut, kosa kata neraka juga memberi sugesti kepada pendengarnya untuk tidak melalaikan kewajibannya, seperti: shalat, berbuat baik, dan tidak menzalimi sesamanya. </span><span class="font0">In addition to the suggestion of fear, the word naraka also gives suggestions to the audience to not neglect its obligations, such as: prayer, do good, and not oppress one another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Figure of Speech</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Figure of speech is one of the language richness. It is an expression of thoughts and feelings that pour in the form of figurative expression. The expression can be found in oral and written form. The following discussion shows the kinds of figure of speech found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Litotes</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The phrases that indicate the smoothing or degradation with the intention to humble oneself are found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">. This expression is found mainly in the early songs (performance) or in the opening part. This figure of speech states something that does not fit with reality. The goal is not to lie, but to humble oneself as a manifestation of appreciation and respect for others. Here are some examples of litotes found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Barak massipubali tokkelong tunaba</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">may be replied to the lowly singers’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font0">please reply to the song of that despicable</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The above text is found in some performances. The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tuna</span><span class="font0"> 'despicable' is smoothing characteristic performed by the speaker. Denotatively the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tuna</span><span class="font0"> implies despicable person, the undignified low person. in fact, the speaker is not of the class as it was conceived by means of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tuna</span><span class="font0">. The presence of the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tuna</span><span class="font0"> in the opening of the song is the realization of respect for others</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Similar word meaning is used interchangeably in the text opening that is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kamase</span><span class="font1"> 'poor' or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">to kamase</span><span class="font1"> 'the poor'. Either </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kamase</span><span class="font1"> 'poor' or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">to kamase</span><span class="font1"> 'the poor' denotatively means destitute people, people who do not have any property. This fact is contrary to the reality of life of its speakers who have home furniture, even among existing speakers there are some people who have two-wheeled vehicles. The use of words such as those mentioned above serves as a medium of respect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Manna kamase lattajang tongkang tugguruk panngamaseang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">'Despite the poor will wait also compassion'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font0">Although poor but still expect attention</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In addition to the examples mentioned above, there are still refining by the use of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kodong </span><span class="font0">'pity', which means helpless people, people who need pity, people need aids, and people who are in poor condition. The use of the word is found in several </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> performances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ikambe kodong pakokok nisukuruk</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">We feel pity, farmers remain grateful’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font0">We pity, though the farmers remain grateful</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Personification is a figure of speech which type of disclosure is done by comparing the human behavior with something that is not human. The following example is the use of personification in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Manna bulang buru tonja bintoeng kaballe tonja</span><span class="font1"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">Although the moon lies, stars lie as well '</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Matanna allo niak tonja taaggiling</span><span class="font1"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">The sun is also moved’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">Although the moon and the stars lie as well, the sun also shifts’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The use of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulang</span><span class="font0"> 'moon', </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bintoeng</span><span class="font0"> 'star', and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mata allo</span><span class="font0"> 'sun' in this example, is compared to the properties owned by humans. To lie is only possessed by humans and are not owned by celestial objects such as stars, moon, and sun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>4.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pleonasm</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The phrase using pleonasm is a phrase that intends to provide an affirmation by adding information on the actual statement that is already obvious. This kind of figure of speech is also found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kalompo dudu bambang apinna neraka </span><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">Due to immense heat of the fire of hell</span><span class="font1">’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The use of the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">bambang</span><span class="font0"> 'hot', is an explanation of the nature of fire. When someone mentions the word fire, in the mind of the listener already emerges an understanding that it is hot, not cool or cold. So in the absence of any word indicating hot, the listeners already know that the fire is hot.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>4.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hiperbole</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Hyperbole is kind of figure of speech that tends to exaggerate or overstate the truth of reality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Karagumba nyurrungi langik na butta </span><span class="font1">'the joy through the sky and the earth' ( </span><span class="font0">Our excitement gets through the sky and earth)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The joy that is felt to penetrate heavens and the earth, is a style that is exaggerating because someone’s real excitement is in the heart. It is in the heart that happiness is felt.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Figure of speech or language style in the form of repetition is a style that repeats the word, group of words or phrases in order to better assert. According to Keraf (2010: 127), repetition takes the forms of repetition of sounds, syllables, words, or parts of sentences that are considered important to give the pressure in an appropriate context. The type of repetition that are found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> is repetition in the form of words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paria beru kulamung beru kupalehek-lehek</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(the </span><span class="font0">newly planted Paria has just spread</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pengulangan terjadi adalah kata </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">beru</span><span class="font1"> ‘baru’. Pengulangan kata beru dilakukan sebagai penegasan pada kata </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">paria</span><span class="font1"> ‘pare’</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font1">Pare yang dimaksud dalam teks ini adalah pare yang baru ditanam, dan biasanya pare yang baru ditanam sifatnya menjalar atau dijalarkan. </span><span class="font0">A repetition occurs with word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">beru</span><span class="font0"> 'new'. The repetition of words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">beru</span><span class="font0"> is done as an emphasis on the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pariah</span><span class="font0"> 'pare'. The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pare</span><span class="font0"> referred to in this text is a newly planted </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pare</span><span class="font0">, which has the characteristic of a plant that usually spread or creep</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>4.2.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paradox</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Paradox is a figure of speech in the form of opposition. This figure of speech indicates a contrary condition but true.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Barang lakana tattolong-tolong tunaji natinggi geok</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">Let them called low in position, but noble in behavior’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The contradiction in the above example is characterized by the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tuna</span><span class="font0"> 'despicable' and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tinggi geo</span><span class="font0"> 'noble'. The referred position in this context is the position in the community, though just as ordinary people (not an official nor nobility), but must be still well behaved, polite and courteous.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>4.2.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphor</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Metafora adalah jenis majas yang membandingkan sesuatu benda dengan benda yang lainnya. </span><span class="font0">The metaphor is a figure of speech that compares a type of object with other objects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kanara to malompoiya kujanjanngi bulu tinggiya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘</span><span class="font0">For a leader is just like high mountain’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The compared objects in the example above is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">to malompoiya</span><span class="font0"> 'leader' with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bulu tinggi</span><span class="font0"> 'high mountain'. Both of these objects are compared since both share the same properties. A leader is in the high position, resembling a high mountain.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The use of language style is not only found in written texts but also on oral works, such as the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0">. The speakers of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> beyond their awareness have made use of linguistic elements in their speech. These elements become the particularities of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The use of language style in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> indirectly makes </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> fulfill a language function that is poetic function. The style found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">didek</span><span class="font0"> includes diction and figure of speech. Diction includes the selection of denotative, connotative, and suggestive meanings. The figures of speech consist of: litotes, personification, redundancy, hyperbole, repetition, paradox, and metaphor.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ambo Enre, Fachruddin. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-Dasar Keterampilan Menulis</span><span class="font1">. Ujung Pandang: IKIP</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jakobson, Roman. 1960. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics and Poetics.</span><span class="font1"> London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jakobson, Roman. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language in Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Junus, Umar. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stilistik: Suatu Pengantar</span><span class="font1">. Kualalumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keraf, Gorys. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Diksi dan Gaya Bahasa</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mahsun. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bahasa</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: PT Rajagrafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maknun, Tadjuddin. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nelayan Makassar; Kepercayaan, Karakter.</span><span class="font1"> Makassar: Identitas Universitas Hasanuddin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moeliono, Anton M. 1982. “Diksi atau Pilihan Kata: Suatu spesifikasi dalam Kosa Kata”. Dalam </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pembinaan Bahasa Indonesia III</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Bhratara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Panumbangan, Abraham. 2013. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Panduan Lengkap: Majas, Peribahasa, Pembentukan Istilah, Sinonim-Antonim.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: PT Suka Buku</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poerwadarminta, W.J.S. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Umum Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha. 2009</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Stilistika, Kajian Puitika Bahasa, Sastra, dan Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Acreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rosyidi, Ikhwan, dkk. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Teks Sastra: Mengungkap Makna, Estetika, dan Ideologi dalam Perspektif Teori Formula, Semiotika, Hermeneutika dan Strukturalisme Genetik. </span><span class="font1">Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Siswanto, Wahyudi. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Teori Sastra.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta: PT Grasindo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudjiman, Panuti. 1990. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Istilah Sastra</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: UI Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">51</span></p>