---
layout: full_article
title: "THE MEANING OF VISUAL AND VERBAL ASPECT OF PARAMORE  VIDEO CLIPS"
author: "Fitria Maulita"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE MEANING OF VISUAL AND VERBAL ASPECT OF PARAMORE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">VIDEO CLIPS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FITRIA MAULITA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini menganalisis dan membahas langkah-langkah dari aspek visual yang digunakan dalam video dan arti dari lirik berdasarkan aspek verbal dalam klip video paramore. Video ini dipilih karena di samping memiliki visualisasi yang menarik, juga karena memiliki lirik yang jujur serta memiliki cerita yang sangat melekat dalam kehidupan kita Dua teori yang diterapkan untuk mendukung penelitian ini. Melalui serangkaian tahapan analisis, dapat ditemukan bahwa langkah-langkah dari mengetahui aspek visual didalam video adalah dengan menganalisis video melalui teori elemen komunikasi visual dimulai dari menganalisis penampilan, cara, aktivitas, alat peraga, dan pengaturan dan menganalisis foto atau gambar telah berhasil menyampaikan pesan dari lagu tersebut. Teori representasi verbal juga di butuhkan untuk menafsirkan lirik dari lagu, yang dimaksudkan untuk menarik penonton dan membantu mereka untuk mengungkapkan makna sebenarnya didalam lagu, yang seringkali tersembunyi dan kadang-kadang mungkin sulit untuk dimengerti, sehingga dapat meningkatkan daya tarik penonton terhadap video tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: visual aspek, verbal aspek, komunikasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Sign is something that can be interpreted as having a meaning. In analyzing video clip, there are two aspects of sign which are needed to figure out the message of the video clip. The visual aspect, which has been the most important element in communicating the meaning of the video clip, is mostly represented on the combination of elliptical storylines in the video. The visual aspect has become the key elements to represent the visual communication. Therefore, to reinforce the message of the videos, the verbal aspect is actually needed. The verbal aspect has something to deal with text and words. In the video clip, there must be a meaning behind the song, and the verbal aspect could be analyzed through the lyric of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">song. In order to interpret the lyric of the song to the video clip, the audio visual is also needed to support the content of the video clip. Audiovisual known as an intermediary media or the use of materials and absorption through sight and listening to establish conditions and get a meaning or message that would be delivered. Paramore is one of the great musicians who had very interesting visual communication in their video clip. They have an extraordinary video clip which combines great visual performance, songs, lyric and music. They tend to include lightening effects, special sound effect, and setting to support their concept. It made a positive correlation between the song, the performance and the lyrics of the song. Since most of songs and their representation in the video clips have very interesting stories that are close to our real life, analyzing the visual and verbal aspects of the video clips could help the audience to understand the message of the song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the background given above, there are two major problems required to be discussed as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What steps of visual aspect used in the Paramore video clips?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of the lyrics based on the verbal aspects in the video clip?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of the study are as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the steps of visual aspect used in “paramore” music video.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the meaning of lyrics based on the verbal aspects in the video clip.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study were taken from Paramore music videos entitled “The Only Exception” and the lyrics of the song. The video clip were taken from their album entitled “Brand New Eyes” downloaded in </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font1">. The music video chosen as the data source because the music videos consist of a deep story which is closed to our reality which is represented in their lyrics, connected with the music videos, verbally and visually. The collected data were analyzed using qualitative method. The visual aspect used in the video clips was analyzed based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the concept of visual sign proposed by Dyer, and the meaning of lyrics based on the verbal representation were analyzed using the concept of verbal sign by Dyer and the concept of meaning proposed by Leech. The analysis would be done with the conclusion of the analysis and become the answer of the problems being mention above.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paramore Video Clip : The Only Exception</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This Song was from Paramore’s third album </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Brand New Eyes,</span><span class="font1"> released in 2009. The writer of the song, Hayley William was inspired to write this song based on her condition of real life. Her parents divorced when she was a little girl, and since that time, there was a hole in her heart, that she could not trust any kind of love, and always saw the bad side of love. This song has a deep meaning about love and loyalty, about trust and conviction how she always wished that she would meet a better man in the future, way far from her father that easily gave up, and did not fight for his love.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual Communication Elements in “The Only Exception” Video Clip</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The five main components of visual communication elements used in paramore video clip are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance :</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The identification of the age based on the characters represented by the actress and actor and also the information collected from the internet 20-25 years at age could be classified as mature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gender</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The overall classificitaion of gender including all of the supporting characters could be divided into two, female and male, but the main character can be identified as a female from her overall appearance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nationality and Race</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the overall appearance and the information gathered from the internet, the character known as an American and it can be seen from the white skin, the structure of her face. And also for the other actor, who has a tall body and steady. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d. Hair</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The main character has a short bright orange mixed with red color hair as well as her hallmark. Meanwhile the supporting character mostly has a dark brown hair. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">e. Body and Size</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The woman as the main character of this video has a small body, it can be seen when she stood side by side with other supporting characters, it is around 150cm, and the supporting characters are around 180cm </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">f. Looks</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The look of the main character is meant to convey something, it can be seen from the expression of her face, sad and flat, since she was not saying anything on the video, meanwhile the other characters of the video has come to complete the position and the story of the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Manner</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expression</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The expression of the main character of this video clip changes depending on the situation. Mostly they show a sad or flat expression along the video.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eye Contact</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The eye contact happens between the actress and the supporting characters; they talk through their eye contact, tries to say something which means everything that should not be exposed and it seems that they have a very deep conversation through it </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. Pose</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The pose that occurs in the video clip is concluded as an active pose. They are doing some motion together and creating a relation that are dynamically processed between them.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>d. Clothes</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">They are using a formal and also casual clothes depending on the setting of the video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Activity</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Touch</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This happens in the beginning of the video, there is a scene, when the woman hugs her father.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body Movement</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It begins from the time she woke up and wrote a note to her boyfriend, and walk out to her living room, where her father waiting for her, and then she hugs him and talk for a while, after that she continued moving from room to room.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Position of Communication</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The position of communication in this video clip refers to the relationship between the actress and actor.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Props (Properties)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are many props used in this video clip. Beside the instruments of the band, the main properties mostly used in this video clip are the house tools.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It can be assumed that the place used in this video is actually a studio room which is designed in such a way that it resembles a house completed with living room, bedroom and dressing; in the other part the design resembles a restaurant and a small church, and in the end, there is an indoor concert room which is connected to each other. Since it is a sad song, the colors of each room and also the dress of each artist is using dark color. It can be stated that everything represents sadness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of Photographs and Images</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Focus and Depth of Vision</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Focus and depth vision of this video clips is on the activity of the actress who is the vocalist of the band and also appears for the subject inside the room.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Close Up</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The close up techniques can be seen in the middle of the scene, in the part when the actress lies in a thousand of valentine card to show her flat expression straight to the camera, it is ambiguous whether she shows a happy or sad face.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lighting and Color</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The lighting which is used in “The Only Exception” video is spot lighting. From the beginning to an end of video, not many lights are and the colors of the video are using natural colors and are dominated with dark color. It correspond with the low lighting representing sadness and loneliness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cropping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Since it uses a natural movement and rythm, the video clip is not using a cropping.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>5.1.2 Visual Communication Elements in “The Only Exception” Video Clip</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis is done using textual analysis of verbal representation. Based on the conceptual and connotative meaning, the overall lyrics tell about a woman who does not believe in love, since her parents are divorced and failed in making a great relationship based on love. She covers herself with the lonely atmosphere she makes to defense herself of love. She refuses it, until she meets someone who becomes her only exception of her fears. The message of the song is you might be afraid of love, once, but you cannot deny that love is a good thing, even in the most fragile heart, the light of love could heal it. Never easy to trust someone, but do not hesitate to try and believe in love, and believe to the one who ever becomes your exception for this kind of feeling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Video clip is constructed by visual and verbal aspect in producing the meaning. “The Only Exception” video uses 20 elements from 6 categories of visual communication elements such as appearance, manner, activity, props and setting, and analysis photograps or images, and for the verbal representation of the song lyrics, the textual analysis is done. The visual and verbal aspects have important role in conveying the song messages. It can be said that the fusion of the visual and verbal aspects in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">video clip and its lyrics are a right combination to tell and emphasize the people about the meaning of the song itself. It will be easier to understand what would conveyed in the clip if the visual sign and verbal representation are supported with the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Camera angles. Available from : </span><a href="http://www.mediaknowall.com/camangles.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.mediaknowall.com/camangles.html</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1">Chandler, Daniel. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics for Beginners.</span><span class="font1"> Available from : </span><a href="http://www.aber.ac.uk"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.aber.ac.uk</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1">Dyer, Gillian. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication.</span><span class="font1"> London: Reuledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">English in Advertising:A Linguistic Study of Advertising in Great Britain.</span><span class="font1"> London: Longmans</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics. Great Britain :</span><span class="font1"> Hazell Watson and Viney Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Paramore. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Playing God.</span><span class="font1"> Available from : </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Paramore. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Only Exception.</span><span class="font1"> Available from : </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Paramore. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Only Exception Music Video Clip Deconstruction.</span><span class="font1"> Available from : </span><a href="http://stcmekmpp1312.wordpress.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://stcmekmpp1312.wordpress.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Paramore. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“The Reason Behind Brand New Eyes”.</span><span class="font1"> Available from : </span><a href="http://www.mtv.com/news/articles"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.mtv.com/news/articles</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Understanding the meaning of color in psychology. Available from : </span><a href="http://www.empower-yourself-with-color-psychology.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.empower-yourself-with-color-psychology.com</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.paramore.net"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.paramore.net</span></a></p>