---
layout: full_article
title: "LOCAL COMMUNITY’S PARTICIPATION IN DEVELOPING NUSA DUA TOURIST AREA (IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES)"
author: "I Nyoman Madiun, I Wayan Ardika, I Nyoman Sirtha, I Made Suradnya"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3572 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3572"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3572"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">LOCAL COMMUNITY’S PARTICIPATION IN DEVELOPING NUSA DUA TOURIST AREA</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Madiun<sup>1</sup> , I Wayan Ardika<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Sirtha<sup>3</sup>, I Made Suradnya<sup>4</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduate Study, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>3</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>3</sup></span><span class="font0">Faculty of Law, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>4</sup>Faculty of Ecomomics, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:nmadiun@hotmail.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">nmadiun@hotmail.com</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">That the management of various potentials has been essential in developing Bali tourism has made planning one of the important elements which should be seriously and carefully done in order to be able to control various environmental and cultural effects resulting from the development of tourist sector. To make such a condition come true, the participative role of the local community as the owner of the area is very essential and cannot be bargained. In reality, however, the community’s participation cannot be easily conducted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, the theories of hegemony, deconstruction, criticism, power/ knowledge, and conflict are employed. The data were obtained by observation, interview, documentation, and library research. The data were qualitatively analyzed and descriptively presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The research findings show various forms of the community’s participation such as manipulative participation, coersive participation, induced participation, and spontaneous participation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The factors motivating the community to participate are: the Availability of Potential Qualified Resources, the Appearance of Tourism-Oriented New Paradigm in Development among the Local Community Members, the Desire of Obtaining Economic Usefulness, the Influence of Modernization on the Local Community Life, the Prospect of Complementary Businesses in the Future, and the Desire of Establishing an Autonomous Community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The meaningfulness of the local community’s participation in developing Nusa Dua Tourist Area refers to the meaningfulness of Adherence to Rules, Economy, Pluralism and Multiculturalism and of Competition. There are two findings in this study; they are: (a) there is hegemony over the local community’s rights and (b) the local community is getting marginalized in getting access to opportunities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Key word: Participation, Local Community, Development, Tourist Area</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>MATERIAL AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In order to achieve what is aimed at in this study, it has been decided to choose qualitative method by which all the phenomena related to the local community’s participation which has appeared from the phase of thinking out of and planning the development to the phase of commercializing and developing Nusa Dua tourist area are presented. To obtain the information from the local community in order to achieve what is aimed at in this study, the important steps done related to the study are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In step one the data both primary and secondary were collected. In step two the relevant theories were selected for observing the data. The theories of hegemony, deconstruction, criticism, power/knowledge, conflict were employed. In step three the selected data were analyzed and interpreted. In step four the research findings were described and presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The local community’s partici pation can be presented in several phases. In the first phase, that is, in the phase of thinking out of and planning the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">development of the area, it is revealed that the local community members are prepared to shift from their old tradition to culture of tourism by submitting their land. Such a submission means various resources which can be classified as potentials can be changed into actual resources. The local community’s partici pation in making use of various resour ces available for the development of Nusa Dua tourist area is realized with reference to the community-based tourist development concept.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the second phase, the local community and the government develop various supporting facilities such as health, security, and so on. Tourism is able to create a situation which makes the local community participate in improving the values of their various resources. As a consequence, the local community is getting aware that their human resources especially in forming competence are starting to grow. The formation of the local community’s competence strongly supports their participation in serving tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the third phase, that is, in the phase of commercializing and develop ping Nusa Dua tourist area, the local</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">community’s involvement and partici pation in tourism sector is spontaneously done by running home stays, food and beverage stalls, and other mutually complementary businesses. The phase of commercialization also makes the local community aware of preserving their local culture which has been inherited since a long time ago. However, various limitations cause the local community to participate in a small scale. As far as the importance of multiculturalism is concerned, the local community clearly participates in realizing what has been planned by the government to build holy places for the followers of different religions. It cannot be avoided that the newcomers who have been experienced and competent in tourism cause the local community to be always under pressure in business competition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study also reveals the factors motivating the local community to participate in developing Nusa Dua tourist area. They are: the availability of potential qualified resources, the appearance of tourist-oriented new paradigm in development among the local community members, the desire of obtaining economic usefulness, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">influence of modernization on the local community, the prospect of complement tary businesses in the future, and the desire of realizing an autonomous community. From the various forms of participation and factors motivating the local community to participate in developing Nusa Dua tourist area, the meaningfulness of the local commu nity’s participation refers to the meaningfulness of adherence to rules, economy, pluralism and multicultu ralism, and of competition.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>NOVELTY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The novelties in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1) . The hegemony of power over the local community’s rights. Claiming that the tourist development is based on the local community, a paradigm of deve lopment is implicitly introduced and forced to the local community. As a modern phenomenon, the tourism development is considered to be the most suitable one to be developed at Nusa Dua area, considering that it has the natural and cultural potentials. Faced with the really new phenomenon, on one side the local community finds it very difficult to comprehend the substance of the paradigm introduced to them, and on the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">other side the paradigm should be applied. Consequently, the hegemony plays an important role in realizing the concept of the new development. The local community has no choice, whether they like or dislike, they should accept such a condition, which is, in fact, full of pressure and intimidation in applying it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2) . The local community is getting marginalized in getting access to opportunities. When the community is motivated to participate by submitting their land to the government, to build various supporting facilities, and to get involved in other participations which are induced (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">induced participation</span><span class="font0">), they remain powerless in facing the pressures which come not only from the government but also from foreign cultures. Most forms of participation done by the local community is indirect, passive, very formal and consultative. Furthermore, the information and decisions come from top to down. The decisions made by the government are full of manipulations and very dirty games. The local community should adapt to claim for the substance of the new paradigm which is full of modern culture. The power is still fully held by</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">the government. The participation given by the local government is completely false (pseudo participation). The benefit acquired by participating is not significant; furthermore, the feedback given by the local community regarding the decisions made by the government is frequently neglected. To overcome such a difficult situation in order to be able to participate as a modern community in their area, knowledge and competence in tourism which can be used as the power in participating are needed. It cannot be avoided that when the local community gets involved in tourism in their area, communication issue is becoming important. There are many obstacles encountered by the local community when they are to present themselves in the process of communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Communicating in tourist sector means that the local community should be prepared to interact with the other communities which have various cultural backgrounds. Being less competent, the local community is not able to get involved in the process of business communication perfectly. Being aware of this, the local community must start from the beginning how to communicate</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">culturally in order to support their businesses in their area. Facing serious problems in one’s own area is a contradiction</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH CONCLUSIONS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The findings show that the local community’s participation in the early phase of thinking out of and planning the development of the area is manipulative and coersive. In the phase of physical development, the local community’s participation is induced. In the phase of commercialization and development of Nusa Dua tourist area, the local community’s participation is sponta neous. The factors motivating the local community to participate in developing Nusa Dua tourist area are: the availability of potential qualified resour ces, the appearance of a tourism-oriented new paradigm in development among the local community members, the desire of obtaining economic usefulness, the influence of modernization on the local community, the prospect of complementary businesses in the future, and the desire of realizing an autonomous community. The meaning fulness of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">local community’s participation refers to the meaningful ness of Adherence to Rules, Economy, Pluralism and Multiculturalism, and of Competition.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity the writer would like to express his indebtedness to Prof. Dr. I Wayan Ardika, M.A. as the Promotor, Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Sirta, S.H., M.S. as the First Copromotor and Dr. I Made Suradnya, S.E., M.Sc., as the Second Promotor for their patience, full attention, motivation, and guidance starting from when the study was in the form of proposal up to when it was in the form of dissertation. The writer would also like to express his appre ciation to the Rector of Udayana University, the Director of the Postgra duate Program Udayana University and all his staff members, and to the Head of the Doctorate Program (S3) School of Cultural Studies Udayana University and his all staff members for the admission provided to be a student at the Doctorate Program (S3) School of Cultural Studies.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Ardika, I Wayan, 2007, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Pusaka Budaya dan Pariwisata</span><span class="font0">, Cetakan Pertama, Pustaka Larasan, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ardika, I Wayan, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Pariwisata Budaya Berkelanjutan, Refleksi dan Harapan di Tengah Perkemba ngan Global</span><span class="font0">, 2003, Program Studi Magister (S2) Kajian Pariwisata, Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Aronsson, Lars, 2004, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Develop ment of Sustainable Tourism</span><span class="font0">, Thomson, the UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah, 2002, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Menuju Terwujudnya Ilmu Pariwisata Di Indonesia, </span><span class="font0">Universitas Uda yana Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chris, 2000, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Cultural Studies, Theory and Practice</span><span class="font0">, Sage Publications, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Brunt, Paul, dkk, 2001, Tourism: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">A Modern Synthesis</span><span class="font0">, Thomson, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bungin, Burhan, 2001, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Metodologi Penelitian Sosial,, FormatFormat Kuantitaif dan Kualitatif</span><span class="font0">, Airlangga University Press, Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Burns and Holden, 1995, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourism a new perspective</span><span class="font0">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prentice Hall,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Burns, Peter M, 1999, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">An Introduction to Tourism and Anthropology</span><span class="font0">, Routledge, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Conlin, Michael V. and Baum, Tom, 1995, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Island Tourism, Manage ment Principles and Practice</span><span class="font0">, John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cooper, Chris, dkk, 2005, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourism, Principle and Practice</span><span class="font0">, Third Edition, Pearson Education Limi ted, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dumairy, 1996, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Perekonomian Indone sia</span><span class="font0">, Penerbit : Erlangga, Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fakih, Mansour, 2003, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Runtuhnya Teori Pembangunan dan Globa lisasi</span><span class="font0">, INSIST PRESS, Yogya karata.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Foucault, Michel, 2002, Alih Bahasa: Arief, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Power/Knowledge, Wacana &nbsp;&nbsp;Kuasa/Pengetahuan</span><span class="font0">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bentang Budaya, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gee, Chuck Y, 1999, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">International Tourism: A Global Perspective</span><span class="font0">, World Tourism Organization, Education Network.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Giddens, Anthony, 1994, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Masyarakat Post-Tradisional, </span><span class="font0">IRCiSoD, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Habermas, Jurgen, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Teori Tindakan Komunikatif I, Rasio dan Rasionalisasi Masyarakat, </span><span class="font0">Kreasi Wacana, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Inskeep, Edward, 1991,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourismplanning, An Integrated and Sustainable Development Approach</span><span class="font0">, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Korntjaraningrat, 2002, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kebudayaan Mentalitas dan Pembangunan</span><span class="font0">, PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Yakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lubis, Akhyar Yusuf, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Dekonstruksi Epistemologi Modern: Dari Posmodernisme, Teori Kritis, Poskolonialisme Hingga, Cultural Studies, </span><span class="font0">Pustaka Indonesia Satu, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lubis, Akhyar Yusuf, 2004, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Setelah Kebenaran dan Kepastian Dihancurkan Masih Adakah Tempat Berpijak Bagi Ilmuan, Sebuah Uraian Filsafat Ilmu pengetahuan Kaum Posmo dernis</span><span class="font0">, Akademia, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Norris, Christopher, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Membongkar Teori Dekon struksi Jaques Derrida</span><span class="font0">, ARR-RUZZ MEDIA, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tosun, Cevat, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Expected nature of community participation in tourism development</span><span class="font0">, School of Tourism and Hotel Management, Mustafa Kemal University, Turkey, Tourism Management.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ardika, I Wayan, 2007, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Pusaka Budaya dan Pariwisata</span><span class="font0">, Cetakan Pertama, Pustaka Larasan, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ardika, I Wayan, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Pariwisata Budaya Berkelanjutan, Refleksi dan Harapan di Tengah Perkemba ngan Global</span><span class="font0">, 2003, Program Studi Magister (S2) Kajian Pariwisata, Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Aronsson, Lars, 2004, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Deve lopment of Sustainable Tou rism</span><span class="font0">, Thomson, the UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah, 2002, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Menuju Terwujudnya Ilmu Pariwisata Di Indonesia, </span><span class="font0">Universitas Udayana Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chris, 2000, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Cultural Studies, Theory and Practice</span><span class="font0">, Sage Publications, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Brunt, Paul, dkk, 2001, Tourism: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">A Modern Synthesis</span><span class="font0">, Thomson, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bungin, Burhan, 2001, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Metodologi Penelitian Sosial,, FormatFormat Kuantitaif dan Kualitatif</span><span class="font0">, Airlangga University Press, Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Burns and Holden, 1995, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourism a new perspective</span><span class="font0">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prentice Hall,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Burns, Peter M, 1999, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">An Introduction to Tourism and Anthropology</span><span class="font0">, Routledge, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Conlin, Michael V. and Baum, Tom, 1995, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Island Tourism, Mana gement Principles and Practice</span><span class="font0">, John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cooper, Chris, dkk, 2005, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourism, Principle and Practice</span><span class="font0">, Third Edition, Pearson Education Limited, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dumairy, 1996, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Perekonomian Indonesia</span><span class="font0">, Penerbit : Erlangga, Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fakih, Mansour, 2003, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Runtuhnya Teori Pembangunan dan Globa lisasi</span><span class="font0">, INSIST PRESS, Yogya karata.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Foucault, Michel, 2002, Alih Bahasa: Arief, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Power/Knowledge, Wacana &nbsp;&nbsp;Kuasa/Pengetahuan</span><span class="font0">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bentang Budaya, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gee, Chuck Y, 1999, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">International Tourism: A Global Perspective</span><span class="font0">, World Tourism Organization, Education Network.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Giddens, Anthony, 1994, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Masyarakat Post-Tradisional, </span><span class="font0">IRCiSoD, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Habermas, Jurgen, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Teori Tindakan Komunikatif I, Rasio dan Rasionalisasi Masyarakat, </span><span class="font0">Kreasi Wacana, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Inskeep, Edward, 1991, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tourism Planning, An Integrated and Sustainable Development Approach</span><span class="font0">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Van Nostrand</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Reinhold, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Korntjaraningrat, 2002, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kebudayaan Mentalitas dan Pembangunan</span><span class="font0">, PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Yakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lubis, Akhyar Yusuf, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Dekonstruksi Epistemologi Modern: Dari Posmodernisme, Teori Kritis, Poskolonialisme Hingga, Cultural Studies, </span><span class="font0">Pustaka Indonesia Satu, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lubis, Akhyar Yusuf, 2004, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Setelah Kebenaran dan Kepastian Dihancurkan Masih Adakah Tempat Berpijak Bagi Ilmuan, Sebuah Uraian Filsafat Ilmu pengetahuan Kaum Posmo dernis</span><span class="font0">, Akademia, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Norris, Christopher, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Membongkar Teori Dekonstruksi Jaques Derrida</span><span class="font0">, ARR-RUZZ MEDIA, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tosun, Cevat, 2006, </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Expected nature of community participation in tourism development</span><span class="font0">, School of Tourism and Hotel Management, Mustafa Kemal University, Turkey, Tourism Management.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>