---
layout: full_article
title: "MOTHER TONGUE’S INTERFERENCE IN PRONUNCIATION OF ENGLISH FRICATIVE BY BALINESE HOUSEKEEPING EMPLOYEES IN WESTIN RESORT NUSA DUA BALI"
author: "Ni Wayan Erni Cahriani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vol 14.1 Januari 2016: 96-103</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">MOTHER TONGUE’S INTERFERENCE IN PRONUNCIATION OF ENGLISH</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">FRICATIVE BY BALINESE HOUSEKEEPING EMPLOYEES IN WESTIN RESORT</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">NUSA DUA BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ni Wayan Erni Cahriani</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Email:</span><a href="mailto:ernicahriani@gmail.com"><span class="font4"> ernicahriani@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini membahas tentang kata-kata yang mengandung bahasa Inggris Fricative yang diucapkan oleh orang Bali. Data utama dalam studi ini adalah orang yang bekerja sebagai pegawai Housekeeping Department di hotel Westin Resort Nusa Bali. Tujuan dari studi ini adalah untuk menganalisis ucapan bahasa Inggris Fricative. Data tersebut diperoleh melalui beberapa teknik yaitu recording dan membagikan questionnaire. Kemudian data dianalisis dengan metode kualitatif. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori bahasa Inggris Fricative oleh Tiffany dan Carrell (1987) dan teori bahasa Bali Fricative oleh Warna (1993).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari analisis tersebut menunjukkan bahwa bahasa Inggris Fricative yang tidak terdapat dalam bahasa Bali Fricative digantikan oleh konsonan yang memiliki kesamaan karakteristik. Penggantian yang mereka lakukan seperti; penggantian phoneme /f/ dan /v/ menjadi /p/, penggantian phoneme /θ/ menjadi /t/, penggantian phoneme /ð/ menjadi /t/, penggantian phoneme /z/ menjadi /s/, penggantian phoneme /</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ʃ</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">/ menjadi /s/, dan penggantian phoneme /ʒ/ menjadi /s/. Penggantian ini terjadi karena konsonan-konsonan tersebut tidak terdapat dalam bahasa ibu mereka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Bahasa Ibu, Bahasa Inggris Fricative, Bahasa Bali Fricative</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The difficulty of pronouncing some words becomes a challenging stuff especially for non-native speaker in one language. English as the most important language in the world makes people find it necessary to learn English as their second language or foreign language. In learning English as a foreign language, mispronounce may occur since English phonological system is different from another language, in this case,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Balinese language. There are some English sounds which are absent in Balinese phonological system, in this case is consonant sounds. English has twenty four consonant sounds while Balinese only has eighteen. The most existence of numerous English consonant sounds which is absent in Balinese is English fricative consonant sounds. There are nine English fricative sounds / f, v, θ, ð, s, z, ʃ, ʒ, h /, which Balinese never recognizes because Balinese only has two fricative sounds /s/ and /h/.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The discussion of this study is focused on:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">How the English Fricative Consonants were pronounced by Balinese employees in Westin Resort Nusa Dua Bali?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The purpose that especially achieved in this study is as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">To analyze the pronunciation of English Fricative Consonant sounds produced by Balinese employees in Westin Resort Nusa Dua Bali</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The primary data in this study were people who work as hotel employees. There were 20 Balinese employees in Housekeeping Department of Westin Resort Nusa Dua Bali who involved in this study by considering their origin of Balinese descendant and Balinese language as their mother tongue. The data was collected by doing observation and technique of collecting data was recording and giving questionnaire. The data were analyzed by using qualitative method and analyzed using theory of English fricative consonant which is proposed by Tiffany and Carrell (1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English Fricative is introduced according to their places of articulation along with the necessary terminology for the analysis of English fricative. According to Tiffany and Carrel (1987: 188), the class of obstruent consonant termed fricative is characterized by an incomplete or leaky obstruction of the airstream. Fricatives require a constriction which allows the air to escape with difficulty and it produces a hissing sounds. There are nine English fricative consonants, those are / f, v, θ, ð, s, z,</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font1">ʒ</span><span class="font4">, h /. Some are voiced and some are voiceless.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /f/ (Voiceless Labiodental Fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The labiodentals fricative sounds were made by the flow of air out of the body is constricted by upper teeth to the lower lip and creates turbulence for the air but not stopping its passage out of the mouth. This sound /f/ is easy to place in any position of words and it is common in English. In order to see the production of initial /f/, it was used the word ‘Few’ that should be pronounced as /fju:/. The production of phoneme /f/ in initial position according to the findings is described below;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word Pronounced as ‘few’ /fju:/ /pju:/ (S1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were 12 employees committed the error by replacing fricative /f/ with phoneme /p/. According to the error they committed, they tend to articulate ‘few’ with both lips and by partially stopping the air coming from the mouth. Therefore, they produced bilabial sound instead of labiodentals sound. In order to produce this sound correctly, they have to produce it with the lower lip touching the upper front teeth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /v/ (Voiced Labiodental Fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English fricative /v/ is produced by the lower lip touch the upper teeth. The vocal fold is used, therefore, it’s produced a vibration. This sound is more lax and less strident sound than /f/. In the medial position of fricative /v/, the English word</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">chosen was ‘Review’ that phonetically should be pronounced as /r</span><span class="font3">І</span><span class="font4">’vju:/. The production of phoneme /v/ in medial position according to the findings is described as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘Review’ /r</span><span class="font3">І</span><span class="font4">’vju:/ /re:pju:/ (S7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were 7 Balinese employees who replaced phoneme /v/ as /p/. They produced English plosive /p/ instead of English fricative /v/ since phoneme /p/ is the closest phoneme to replace English fricative /v/.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives / θ / (voiceless dental fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English Fricatives /θ/ is made by placing the tip of the tongue on or very close to the edge of the upper central teeth and by directing an unvoiced breath stream through the close but broad gap between tongue and teeth. This sound is weak because the friction sound created by passage of the airstream between tongue and teeth may not be heard in actual speech. In the final position of fricative /θ/, the English word chosen was ‘Youth’ that phonetically should be pronounced as /ju:θ/. The result upon this is provided as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word Pronounced as ‘Youth’/ju:θ/ /ju:t/ (S3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to the finding, it found that overall Balinese employees failed to pronounce this word correctly since they only recognize phoneme /t/ rather than phoneme /θ/. Besides, the characteristic of these sounds are almost similar. /θ/ is voiceless dental fricative while /t/ in Balinese is voiceless alveolar plosive</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives / ð / (voiced dental fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This sound is made by the tip of the tongue makes light contact with the back of the top, front teeth. The common classification of /ð/ is identical with /θ/ except for the voicing. In order to see the production of final /ð/, it was used the word ‘Clothe’ that phonetically should be pronounced as /kləυð/. The production of phoneme /ð/ in final position according to the findings is described below;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Clothe’/kləυð/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/kləυt/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(S2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The finding shows that there was replacement of phoneme /ð/ to phoneme /t/. Among 20 Balinese employees, there were only 6 employees pronounced the word correctly. The error of /ð/ pronunciation in overall Balinese employees was similar to the error of fricative /θ/ pronunciation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /s/ (voiceless alveolar fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English fricative /s/ is made as the voiceless breath stream which is forced through the narrow channel between the roof of the mouth and blade of the tongue. The blade of the tongue makes light contact with alveolar ridge and soft palate is raised. The word used to observe the production of fricative /s/ in initial position of word was ‘See’ which should be pronounced as /si:/. The result upon this initial fricative /s/ is provided as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘See’/si:/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/si:/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(S1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The result shows that overall Balinese employees succeed in producing phoneme /s/ and pronounced the word perfectly. It might be perceived because the existence of this phoneme in Balinese language. Not only Balinese language, most languages in the word have fricative /s/. Therefore, there was no interference found in producing this sound.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /z/ (voiced alveolar fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English fricative /z/ is classified as voiced alveolar fricative sound. The common classification of /s/ is identical with /z/ except for the voicing. The word used to reveal the result upon this fricative was ‘Easy’ which should be pronounced as /’i:zi/. The result for this medial fricative is shown as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘Easy’/’i:zi/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/i:si:/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(S7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The finding for medial fricative /z/ show that there were 3 Balinese employees pronounced ‘easy’ as how it’s written. Although the word contains ‘s’ letter, it should be pronounce with phoneme /z/. There was replacement of phoneme /z/ to phoneme /s/ since there is no phoneme /z/ in Balinese inventory. In English, phoneme /z/ and /s/ are identical regarding to the place and manner of articulation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">/ (voiceless palato-alveolar fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English fricative /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">/ is produced by the tongue blade which makes light contact with the alveolar ridge and the front of the tongue is raised. The soft palate is also raised. When the tongue held in this position, an unvoiced breath stream is directed against the palate and alveolar ridge. The word that contained fricative /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">/ in initial position used in this study was ‘Shoe’. It should be pronounced as /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">u:/. The result upon this fricative is provided as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word Pronounced as ‘Shoe’/</span><span class="font1">f</span><span class="font4">u:/ /sυ/ (S11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The finding shows that there was obstacle in pronouncing fricative /</span><span class="font1">f/. </span><span class="font4">Overall Balinese employees tend to replace fricative /</span><span class="font1">f/ </span><span class="font4">to fricative /s/. Since fricative /</span><span class="font1">f/ </span><span class="font4">and /s/ are almost the same regarding to lips position and both are voiceless sound. However, the place of articulation is different</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /</span><span class="font1">ʒ</span><span class="font4">/ (voiced palatoalveolar fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This sound’s production is the same as /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">/ which is the front of the tongue is raised and create a narrowing reaching from the ridge to the beginning of the hard palate. The distribution of this sound </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/</span><span class="font1">5</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/ </span><span class="font4">is very limited. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/</span><span class="font1">3</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">/ </span><span class="font4">does not occur as an initial sound in English, and is rare as a final sound. It is commonly found in medially position of words. The word that contained fricative /</span><span class="font1">ʒ</span><span class="font4">/ in medial</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">position used in this study was ‘Pleasure’. It should be pronounced as /’pleʒə(r)/. The result upon this fricative is provided as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘Pleasure’/’pleʒə(r)/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/ple</span><span class="font0">s</span><span class="font4">υə/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(S2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were 13 Balinese employees who failed to pronounce this word and replaced phoneme /ʒ/ as /s/. The production of phoneme /ʒ/ is almost similar with phoneme /s/ but front of the tongue is raised. Since phoneme /s/ is existed in Balinese inventory, therefore, Balinese employees tend to replace phoneme /ʒ/ into phoneme /s/ as the closest phoneme.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Fricatives /h/ (voiceless glottal fricative)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">English fricative /h/ is voiceless which the vocal cords do not vibrate during the production of this sound. This sound can only be found in initial and medial position of word. There is no English word contains /h/ in final position of word. The word used to research the fricative /h/ in medial position was ‘Behind’ which phonetically should be pronounced as /b</span><span class="font3">І’</span><span class="font4">ha</span><span class="font3">І</span><span class="font4">nd/. The production of phoneme /h/ according to the findings is described as follows;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English Word &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pronounced as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">‘Behind’/b</span><span class="font3">І’</span><span class="font4">ha</span><span class="font3">І</span><span class="font4">nd/ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;/b</span><span class="font2">І’</span><span class="font4">he</span><span class="font2">І</span><span class="font4">nd/ (S13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The discussion of the production of fricative /h/ in medial positions of word can be considered successful. Since the existing of fricative /h/ in Balinese inventory. Both Balinese and English have fricative /h/ in medial position and both are glottal sound. Therefore, most of Balinese employees pronounced the word correctly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to the findings, English fricative consonants that are not found in Balinese inventory were replaced by the nearest consonants which are share similar characteristics regarding to the voicing, place of articulation, and manner of articulation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This replacement was applied since some particular sounds are not existed in their mother tongue. Therefore, Balinese employees tend to substitute the nearest equivalent sound they know. The replacement they were committed such as; the replacement of phoneme /f/ and /v/ with phoneme /p/, the replacement of phoneme /θ/ with /t/, the replacement of phoneme /ð/ with /t/, the replacement of /z/ with phoneme /s/, the replacement of phoneme /</span><span class="font1">ʃ</span><span class="font4">/ with phoneme /s/, the replacement of phoneme /ʒ/ with phoneme /s/.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Oxford University Press. 2008. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Learner’s Pocket Dictionary.</span><span class="font4"> London: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pastika, Wayan. (2005). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Fonologi Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font4">. Kuta: Pustaka Larasan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Roach, Peter. (2001). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Phonetics: Oxford Introduction to Language Study</span><span class="font4">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Roach, Peter. (2009). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">English Phonetics and Phonology: A Practical Course</span><span class="font4">. 4<sup>th</sup> ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tiffany &amp;&nbsp;Carrel.(1987). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Phonetics Theory and Application</span><span class="font4">. Washington: McGraw-Hill Book Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Warna, Wayan. (1993). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Bali</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Upada Sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">103</span></p>