---
layout: full_article
title: "PROMOTION OF NON-SUBJECT NOUN PHRASE TO SUBJECT IN CLAUSE OF SABU LANGUAGE, SABU RAIJUA REGENCY,  EAST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE"
author: "I Nyoman Sukendra, Ketut Artawa, Aron Meko Mbete, I Nyoman Kardana"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-11197 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-11197"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-11197"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistic</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">PROMOTION OF NON-SUBJECT NOUN PHRASE TO SUBJECT IN CLAUSE OF </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SABU</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> LANGUAGE, SABU RAIJUA REGENCY,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">EAST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Sukendra</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Teacher Training Faculty</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">University of Dwijendra Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ketut Artawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Doctorate Program of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Aron Meko Mbete</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Doctorate Program of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Kardana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Faculty of Letters, Warmadewa University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study is a descriptive-qualitative one exploring the relation of non subject THAT was promoted to the slot of subject. From the syntactic point of view, two informants were considered adequate in the present study. The reason was that the Sabu language ‘Bahasa Sabu (hereinafter referred to as BS), as a langue, was homogenous in nature. The data needed were collected through observation and interview. The words, phrases, clauses and sentences focused on the topic of the study were note taken. In addition, the data were also collected by recording the speeches made by the BS speakers and the informants using a tape recorder and an electronic recorder. In this manner, it was possible to obtain as many data as possible. From the analysis, it was found that the clausal construction in BS could promote the non subject NP to the subject as the original subject could not be deleted. The other finding was that the promotion of the non-subject NP could be promoted to the slot of subject in the transitive and intransitive clauses. The clausal construction which could allow the promotion of the non-subject NP to the clausal construction was the clausal construction which had semantic roles as the MOTION, AFFECT, and CORPOREAL verbs. The clausal construction which could not allow the non-subject NP to be promoted to the subject was the instrumental clausal construction whose verb was realized by the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">hernabi</span><span class="font0"> ‘tutup’ [close].</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Key words: semantic role, promotion of non subject NP, slot of subject, transitive, intransitive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dixon (2011: 451) states that the semantic role which is mostly relevant to make an activity successful is the syntactic subject relation. This can be illustrated by the word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mary</span><span class="font0"> in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mary sells sports cars</span><span class="font0"> ‘Mary menjual mobil balap’, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mary cut the veal with the new knife</span><span class="font0"> ‘Mary memotong daging dengan pisau baru’, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mary poured the custard (onto the pie) with the new jug</span><span class="font0"> ‘Mary menuangkan podeng dengan kendi baru’. If the adverbials such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">quickly, easily, properly</span><span class="font0"> or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font0"> are added to the sentences above, they will be used to indicate how the subject does the activities – </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mary certainly sells sports cars quickly, Mary cut the veal easily with the new knife, Mary didn’t pour the custard properly (onto the pie) with the new jug (but split some on the cloth)</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Furthermore, (Dixon, 2011) states that in some cases the success is not caused by the subject but by several roles in the non-subject relation. In such cases, the role can be promoted to the slot of subject and the original subject is deleted from the clause. As some illustrations, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sports cars sell quickly</span><span class="font0"> (this reflects that the essence is attached to the car and therefore someone wants to buy it); </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The veal cuts easily</span><span class="font0"> (this means that the meat is not hard); </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The new knife cuts veal easily</span><span class="font0"> (the knife is good and sharp); </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">the custard doesn’t pour properly</span><span class="font0"> (there are too many clumps in it).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There are two reasons why the O NP is promoted to the subject in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sports cars sell quickly.</span><span class="font0"> The first reason is that the promotion to the subject is available for several O NPs (as can be seen in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sports cars sell quickly; The veal cuts easily; The custard won’t pour properly)</span><span class="font0">; however, this is also made to be possible by the peripheral NP (as can be seen in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The new knife cuts the veal easily</span><span class="font0">; </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The new jug doesn’t pour custard properly</span><span class="font0">). The second reason is that the promotion to the subject does not change the transitivity of the sentence; if NP, apart from the object, is promoted to the subject, then the subject will still remain after the verb. The O NP or the peripheral NP of the transitive clause is promoted to the A relation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">If the role of non-subject is promoted to the subject, the original subject then will be deleted. This cannot be classified as a peripheral constituent. The role of non-subject which is not promoted to the subject remains in its original position, that is, after the verb. In addition, no verbal marker is added to the construction where the promotion to the subject takes place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Almost all the promotions to the subject involve transitive clauses; however, some also involves intransitive clauses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Consider </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">John jumped with the pogo stick</span><span class="font0"> ‘John loncat dengan tongkat togo’. The result can be good as John is very good at that. As an illustration, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">John jumped well with the pogo stick</span><span class="font0"> ‘John melompat dengan baik dengan tongkat pogo’, or it is possible that the stick </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pogo</span><span class="font0"> has a good jump in that event. As another illustration, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">That pogo stick jumps well ‘</span><span class="font0">Tongkat pogo itu meloncati dengan baik’. The examples show that the non subject NP of the transitive clause or intransitive clause can be promoted to the slot of subject; the transitivity of the clause is not affected.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There are several clear differences between the promotion to the subject and the passive construction. The differences are that the prepositional object can only be the subject in the passive construction if there is no direct object; that the preposition leaves it object after the clause, and that the original transitive subject can be left in the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">by </span><span class="font0">phrase. As an example, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">This knife has been cut with by John</span><span class="font0"> ‘Pisau itu telah dipotongkan oleh John’. The prepositional phrase can be promoted to the subject if there is direct object (which can be deleted), the preposition can be deleted, and the original subject can be deleted as well, as exemplified by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">This knife cuts (veal) easily</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on what was described above, the focus of analysis in the present study is how the role of non-subject is promoted to the subject in BS.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The present study was conducted in Sabu island, Sabu Rijua Regency, East Nusa Tenggara Province from March 2011 to March 2012. The oral data were obtained from several informants and the written data were obtained from the documents of BS. The instruments used to collect the data were the researcher, syntactic questionnaire, and a tape recorder.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The method used to collect the data were observation (field linguistics), which included (1) direct elicitation, (2) recording, and elicitation checking method (Mithun, 2001). In field linguistic research, the direct elicitation method is the main method used. In the present study, this method was used to collect the language data which was initiated by preparing the list of questions or questionnaire related to words, phrases, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">clauses/sentences. The questionnaire was made in Indonesian so that it could be easily understood by both the researcher and the informants/speakers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The second method used in the present study was the recording method. It was used to record the speeches in BS made by the informants. This method was supported by a tape recorder and an electronic recorder so that various daily conversations could be recorded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The third method used in the present study was the elicitation checking method. It was used to check constituents if there were several clausal structures which were not clear. In this case, the researcher made several clauses to check whether the clauses produced by the speakers were grammatical or not, and whether there were other clauses which could be used to give the same information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The third methods were supported by observation and interview methods. Further note taking technique was used to record the data obtained from the direct elicitation, recording and elicitation technique. The observation method was used to observe how the language was used (Sudaryanto, 1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The interview method in the present study involved the contact between the researcher and the speakers (Sudaryanto, 1993: 137).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The collected data were analyzed using direct division of elements technique. It was used to identify the basic clauses in order to identify the functions and roles of the constituents as the direct elements forming the clauses. Using this technique, (1) the intransitive clauses, that is, the clauses which were made up of the subject and predicate, and (2) the transitive clauses which were made up of the subject, predicate and object, could be identified.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion and Results</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on what was described above, the promotion of non NP subject in BS could be realized in the MOTION, AFFECT, GIVING, and CORPOREAL verbal constructions; however, the promotion of non NP subject in BS could not be realized in the instrumental construction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>11. The role of MOTION verb which could be promoted to Subject</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The non-subject in BS could be put in front of the clause using the MOTION verbs such as mage ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tuang</span><span class="font0">’ [pour], </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dede</span><span class="font0"> ‘angkat’ [lift], </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kepa</span><span class="font0"> ‘tangkap’ [catch], </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tebe</span><span class="font0"> ‘jinjing’ [carry] as illustrated in the following examples.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(1a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a do mage kowi</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘ITG PERF tuang kopi’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Saya (sudah) menuangkan kopi’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I have poured the coffee]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(1b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a do mage kowi nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘ITG PERF ruang kopi dengan cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya (sudah) menuangkan kopi dengan segera’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I have poured the coffee quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(1c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kowi do mage nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kopi PERF tuang dengan cepat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Kopi tertuang dengan cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The coffee was quickly poured]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(2a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ro d’ede &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;meja la kama</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">3JM angkat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;meja PREP kamar</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Meja angkat ke kamar dengan cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[Move the table to the room quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(2c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">La kama d’ede meja nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">PREP kamar pindah meja dengan cepat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Ke kamar pindah meja dengan cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[To the room move the table quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(3a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a ta kepe bola</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wowiu</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">Saya IMPER tangkap bola &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;baru</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya mau tangkap bola baru’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I want to catch the new ball]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(3b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a ta kepe bola wowiu nga woie</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG IMPER &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tangkap bola baru baik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya mau tangkap bola baru dengan baik’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I want to catch the new ball well]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(3c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bola wowiu ta kepe nga woie</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bola baru IMPER tangkap dengan baik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Bola baru tertangkap dengan baik’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The new ball is well caught]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(4a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a nab’e kelewa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG lempar kelewang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya melempar kelewang’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I throw the sword]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(4b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a nab’e kelewa nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG lempar kelewang dengan mudah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya melempar kelewang dengan mudah’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I throw the sword easily]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(4c) Kelewa nab’e nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">kelewang lempar dengan mudah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Kelewang terlempar dengan mudah’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The sword is easily thrown]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Clauses 1a, 2a, 3a, and 4a are basic clauses, and clauses 2b, 3b, and 3b are clauses with adjuncts/adverbials such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nga heweka</span><span class="font0"> ‘dengan cepat’ [quickly] in clauses 1b, 2b,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">and 4 b, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nga woie</span><span class="font0"> ‘dengan baik’ [well] in clause 3b. Semantically, the adverbials added to clauses 1b, 2b, 3b, and 4b are used to explain how the subjects present their activities. The role played by the non-subject or O NP kowi ‘kopi’ [kopi] in clause 1b can be promoted as the subject; as a result, the original subject (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ya’a</span><span class="font0">) in that clause can be deleted without adding any marker to the verb in clause 1b, and the clause becomes clause 1c </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kowi ta mage nga heweka</span><span class="font0"> ‘Kopi tertuang dengan mudah’ [the coffee is easily poured]. That fact shows that the transitivity in clause 1c does not change. The same explanation applies to clauses 3b and 4b.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Unlike clause (2 ), clause (2a) is a clause which is completed with non-subject locative, namely, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">la kama</span><span class="font0"> ‘ke kamar’ [to the room]. The role of the non-subject locative </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">la kama</span><span class="font0"> ‘ke kamar’ can be promoted to the subject as clause (2c) in which </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">La kama d’ede meja nga heweka</span><span class="font0"> ‘Ke kamar terngakat meja dengan cepat’ [To the room the table is quickly lifted]. It is identified in that clause that the role of non verbal (Direct Object) which is promoted to the subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">meja</span><span class="font0"> ‘meja’ (table) remains after the verb (2c), in which the verb is not marked,, and the original subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ro</span><span class="font0"> ‘mereka’ is deleted after the promotion to the subject (2b and 2c) takes place. That fact shows that the Direct Object (table) remains after the verb (2c) when the non-subject NP is promoted to the subject showing that construction (2c) is still a transitive clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Role of affect verb which can be promoted to the subject</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The affect verbs in BS are the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pare</span><span class="font0"> ‘potong’ [cut] which causes </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manip</span><span class="font0"> to appear, and the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pemou</span><span class="font0"> ‘clean’ which causes Target to appear which then can be promoted to the subject. This takes place in BS. The following is the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manip</span><span class="font0"> (tool) which is promoted to the subject as presented by the following examples.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(5a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ro pare &nbsp;aj’u nga woie ri ketaka nani</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">3JM potong kayu dengan baik PREP kapak PEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Mereka motong kayu dengan kapak itu’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[They cut the wood with the ax]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(5b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ketaka nani pare aj’u nga woie</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Kapak itu memotong kayu dengan baik’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The ax cut the wood well]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Clause (5a) is completed with the argument </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ro</span><span class="font0"> as the subject which at the same time also functions as the agent (Dixon, 1994: 7; Artawa, 1998: 13; Arka, 1998: 17; Verhaar, 1996: 183-185), </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aj’u</span><span class="font0"> as the object and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kataka</span><span class="font0"> ‘kapak’ [ax] is the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manip</span><span class="font0">. In clause (5b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ketaka</span><span class="font0"> ‘kapak’ [the ax] is promoted as the subject and the original subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ro </span><span class="font0">‘mereka’[they] is deleted. The direct object </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aj’u</span><span class="font0"> remains after the verb, indicating that the construction is still a transitive clause in which the verb is not marked.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The promotion to the subject can also be found in the role played by the target as presented in the following examples.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(6a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a ta pemou worai nga woie ri &nbsp;kehapu na’de</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG IMPER &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bersih lantai dengan baik PREP sapu ini</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya mau membersihkan lantai dengan baik dengan sapu ini’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I want to clean the floor with this broom well]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(6b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kehapu na’de ta pemouworai nga wole</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sapu PEN IMPER bersih lantai dengan baik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Sapu ini memberikan lantai dengan baik’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[This broom cleans the floor well]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The verb used in this clause is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pemou</span><span class="font0"> ‘bersih’ [clean], in which </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kehapu na’de</span><span class="font0"> ‘sapu ini’ [this broom] (6a) as the non-subject NP can be promoted to the subject as seen in clause (6b). The non-subject NP </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">worai</span><span class="font0"> ‘lantai’ [the floor] which functions as the direct object remains after the verb, indicating that the clause is a transitive one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Role of GIVING verb which can be promoted to subject</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The role of the GIVING verb, that is, Gift NP can be promoted to the subject. The verbs used in this clause are the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pewie</span><span class="font0"> ‘jual’ [sell], and the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pija</span><span class="font0"> ‘pijam’ [borrow] as shown in the following example.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(7a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">No ta pewie oto nani nga heweka</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3TG IMPER &nbsp;&nbsp;jual mobil PEN dengan segera</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">‘Dia mau menjual mobil itu dengan segera’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[He wants to sell the car quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(7b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Oto nani ta pewie nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mobil PEN IMPER jual dengan cepat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Mobil itu terjual dengan cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The car is quickly sold]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(8a) Ana hekola pija buku li jawa egi heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Murid &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pinjam buku bahasa Indonesia agak cepat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Murid meminjam buku bahasa Indonesia agak cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The student borrows Indonesian book rather quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(8b) Buku li jawa pija egi heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Buku bahasa Indonesia pinjam agak cepat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Buku bahasa Indonesian terpinjamkan agak cepat’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The Indonesian book is borrowed rather quickly]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In clause (7a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">oto nani</span><span class="font0"> ‘mobil itu’ [the car] is the gift argument which can be promoted to the subject; as a result, clause (7b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Oto nanai ta pewie nga heweka</span><span class="font0"> ‘Mobil itu terjual dengan cepat’ [The car is quickly sold] is produced. The car is quickly sold means that, due to its quality, many people want to buy it. In clause (8a) the non-subject NP </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">buku li Jawa</span><span class="font0"> ‘buku bahasa Indonesia’ [the Indonesian book] is promoted to the subject as clause (8b) in which the subject is deleted. The clause means that, as acknowledged by the librarian, many </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">buku li jawa</span><span class="font0"> [Indonesian books] are borrowed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Role of corporeal verb which can be promoted to subject</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The substantial role of the verb can be promoted to the subject. The verb is realized by the verbs </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dele</span><span class="font0"> ‘telan’ [swallow] and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nyame</span><span class="font0"> ‘kunyah’ [chew], as presented in the following examples.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(9a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a dele pe nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG telan pil dengan mudah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya menelan pil dengan mudah’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I swallow the tablet easily]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(9b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pil dele nga heweka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pil telan dengan mudah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Pil tertelah dengan mudah’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The tablet is easily swallowed]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(10a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ya’a nyame hed’ai egi gapa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ITG kunyah daging agak gampang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Saya kunyah daging agak gampang’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[I chew the meat rather easily]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(10b) Hed’ai nyame egi gapa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Daging kunyah agak gampang</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Daging terkunyah agak gampang’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The meat is rather easily chewed]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pe</span><span class="font0"> ‘pil’ [tablet] in clause (9a) is the argument non-subject NP which can be promoted to the subject in clause (9b), in which the original subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ya’a</span><span class="font0"> ‘saya’ [I] is deleted. Similarly, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">hed’ai</span><span class="font0"> ‘daging’ [meat] in clause (10a) is the argument non-subject NP which can be promoted to the subject (10b) in which the original subject ya’a ‘saya’ [I] is deleted.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Promotion to Subject in BS Instrumental Construction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The instrumental construction with the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">henabi</span><span class="font0"> ‘tutup’, the argument nonsubject NP cannot be promoted to the subject. This can be observed in the following example.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">(11a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Walu henab’I</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">j’enela ri b’alla</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">NAMA tutup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;j’enela PREP kain</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Walu menutup jendela dengan kain’ [Walu closed the window with cloth]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(11b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">J’enela Walu henab’I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ri &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b’alla</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">J’enela NAMA tutup PREP kain</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Jenela Walu tutup dengan kain’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The Walu’s window is closed with cloth]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(11c) *J’enela henab’I ri balla</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">J’enela &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tutup PREP kain</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The window is closed with cloth]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(11d) Balla Walau henab’I la j’nela</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kain NAMA tutup PREP jenela</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Kain Walu tutup ke jendela’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[Walu’s cloth closes to the window]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(11e) *Balla henab’I la j’enela</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kain tutup PREP jenela</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Kain tutup ke jendela’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[Cloth closes to the window]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Walu</span><span class="font0"> functions as the subject of clause (11a). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">J’enela</span><span class="font0"> ‘jendela’ [window] is the non-subject NP (direct object), </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">balla</span><span class="font0"> is the non-subject NP (Oblique). If </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">j’enela</span><span class="font0"> ‘jendela’ [window] as the non-subject NP (Direct Object) is promoted to the subject, the original subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Walu</span><span class="font0"> cannot be deleted (11b). Similarly, if </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">balla</span><span class="font0"> ‘kain’ [cloth] as the non-subject NP (Oblique) is promoted to the slot of subject, then the original subject </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Walu</span><span class="font0"> cannot be deleted (11d). If the original subject is deleted (11c) and (11e), then the two clauses will not be acceptable. According to Artawa (1998: 70), in construction (11b) the promotion of Direct Object to the slot of subject without any deletion, the original subject is</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">referred to as topicalization, and the promotion of oblique to the slot of object without deleting the original subject is termed as fronting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Promotion to Subject in Intransitive Clause</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dixon (2011: 448) states that most examples of promotion to the subject involve transitive clauses, only a few examples involve intransitive clauses. However, he further states that the non-subject NPs which involve both transitive and intransitive clauses have the potential to be promoted to the slot of subject. What happens in BS? Consider the following examples involving intransitive clauses in BS with the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kewaji</span><span class="font0"> ‘loncat’ [jump].</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(12a) Neru kewaji &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nga aju &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kajji &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nani</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">NAMA loncat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dengan kayu tongkat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Neru loncat dengan tongkat kayu itu’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[Neru jumped using the wooden stick]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(12b</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">) Neru &nbsp;&nbsp;kewajjji nga woie nga aju kajji nani</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">NAMA loncat dengan baik dengan kayu tongkat PEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Neru loncat dengan baik dengan tongkat kayu itu’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[Neru jumped well with the wooden stick]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(12c) Ayu &nbsp;&nbsp;kaji nani kewajji &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nga woie</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kayu tongkat PEN loncat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dengan baik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">‘Tongkat kayu itu meloncati dengan baik’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[The wooden stick jumped well]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Clause (12a) shows that Neru functions as the subject who does the jumping activity using </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aju kajji</span><span class="font0"> ‘tongkat kayu’ [tongkat kayu]. As the subject is highly good at jumping using the wooden stick as revealed by the adverbial </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nga woie</span><span class="font0"> ‘dengan baik’ [well], it is shown through clause (12b); or as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aju kaiji</span><span class="font0"> ‘tongkat kayu’ [wooden stick] has a good jumping, the non-subject NP (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">aju kajji</span><span class="font0"> ‘tongkat kayu’) is promoted to the slot of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">subject (12c). All the constructions are acceptable in BS. Based on that fact, it can be identified that BS has the promotion of non-subject NP in the intransitive clause. Thus, what is stated by Dixon (2011) that the non-subject NP which involves the transitive and intransitive clauses has the potential to be promoted to the subject is acceptable in BS.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.4 Conclusions</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The semantic role is highly relevant to make the activity successful in syntactic subject relation. However, in certain cases, the success can result from several roles in non-subject relation. Thus, the role of non-subject relation can be promoted to the slot of subject. If the non-subject role is promoted to the subject, then the original subject is deleted. It cannot put under category of peripheral constituent. The non-subject role which is not promoted to the subject remains in its original position after the verb. In addition, no marker is added to the verb in the construction of promotion to the subject. Based on the analyses in 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5, three conclusions can be drawn; they are (1) in general, the promotion of non-subject NP is found in BS. The promotion of non-subject to subject in BS is found in the construction using the MOTION verb, which is realized by the verbs </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mage</span><span class="font0"> ‘tuang’ [pour], </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dede</span><span class="font0"> ‘angkat’ [lift] in point (3.1); in the construction using the AFFECT verb which is realized by the verbs </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pare</span><span class="font0"> ‘potong’ [cut] and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pemou</span><span class="font0"> ‘bersih’ [clean] in point (3.2); in the construction using the GIVING verb which is realized by the verbs </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pewie</span><span class="font0"> ‘jual’ [sell] and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pija</span><span class="font0"> ‘pinjam’ [borrow] in point (3.4); in the construction using the CORPOREAL verb which is realized by the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dele </span><span class="font0">‘telan’ [swallow] and the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nyame ‘</span><span class="font0">kunyah’ [chew]; (2) in the construction of the instrumental clause, point (3.5), the non-subject NP cannot be promoted to the subject as in the process of promotion, the original subject, if identified, cannot be deleted; if the subject is deleted, the clause will not be acceptable; (3) based on what was analyzed in (3.6), it can be identified that the promotion to the subject in BS can be potentially done both in the transitive and intransitive clauses.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>REFERENCES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Artawa, Ketut. 1998. Bahasa Indonesia: Sebuah Kajian Tipologi Sintaksis. Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Artawa, Ketut. 1998. Ergativity and Balinese Syntax. Nusa Linguistic Studies of Indonesiann and other Language in Indonesia Volloma 44,1998.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Comrie, Bernard. 1981. Language universal and Linguistic Tipology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dixon, R.M.W, 2010. Basic Linguistic Theory. Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dixon, R.M.W, 2011. A Semantic Approach to English Grammmar. United Kingdom by the MPG Books Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mitun, Marianne. 2001. “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Who Shapes the record: the speaker and the linguist</span><span class="font0">” In Newman, Paul and Marta Ratliff, editor. Linguistics Fieldwork. First Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sudaryanto, 1993. Metode dan Teknik Analisis Bahasas: Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebbudayaan Secara Linguistik. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Acknowledgements</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, I would like to thank Prof. Drs. Ketut Artawa, M.A., Pd.D, as supervisor, Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, as co-supervisor I, Dr. I Nyoman Kardana, M.Hum., as co-supervisor II, and the board of examiners: Prof. Dr. I Wayan Pastika, M.S., Prof. Dr. Drs. Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, M.A., Prof. Dr. I Ketut Darma Laksana, M.Hum., Dr. Ni Made Dhanawaty, M.S., Dr. A.A. Putu Putra,. M.Hum., for their comments and suggestions.</span></p>