---
layout: full_article
title: "METAPHORICAL MEANING IN WORDSWORTH’S POEM “THE SIMPLON PASS”"
author: "I Gede Nyoman Oka Mahardika"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">METAPHORICAL MEANING IN WORDSWORTH’S</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">POEM “THE SIMPLON PASS”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">I GEDE NYOMAN OKA MAHARDIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">William Wordsworth adalah seorang penyair yang sangat populer, bahkan bisa disebut super populer, dan, puisi-puisinya yang dibuatnya nya sangat baik. Pada akhir hidupnya ia mencapai status yang disebut legenda hidup. Sebagai penyair Alam, Wordsworth adalah pemujamalam dan cintanya terhadap alam mungkin lebih benar, dan lebih lembut, daripada setiap penyair Inggris lainnya, sebelum atau sesudah ia mengisi dunia sastra kerajaan Inggris sebagai penyair.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wordsworth memiliki filosofi kehidupan pandangan baru dan asli dari alam. Tiga poin dalam keyakinannya terhadap alam dapat dicatat sebagai berikut: (1.) Ia memahami alam sebagai kepribadian yang hidup. (2.) Ia percaya bahwa alam memberikan sukacita bagi hati manusia dan ia memandang alam sebagai latihan penyembuhan hati yang dilanda kesedihan. (3.) Wordsworth juga menekankan pengaruh moral Alam. Dia percaya bahwa antara manusia dan alam ada saling kesadaran, persekutuan spiritual atau 'hubungan mistik'</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ada dua teori utama yang diadopsi dalam penelitian ini. Pertama adalah Knickerbocker dan Reninger (1955: 309) yang menyatakan bahwa sebagai langkah pertama dalam memahami puisi, akan sangat membantu untuk membuat parafrase arti yang sederhana. Arti dari setiap bagian dari puisi bisa membantu untuk menentukan makna isi puisi tersebut secara keseluruhan, dan pada akhirnya seluruh isi puisi akan membantu menentukan arti dari masing-masing bagian. Dan yang kedua adalah teori dari Wellek dan Warren tentang pendekatan biografi untuk menemukan hubungan antara kehidupan nyata dari para penyair dengan isi cerita yang mereka katakan dalam puisi mereka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Melalui puisi ini, Wordsworth ingin menggambarkan perjalanannya melalui Alpen bersama dengan temannya Robert Jones. Trekking dari Swiss ke Italia, mereka berjalan melalui Simplon Pass, puncak besar mengelilingi cakrawala. Saat ini, kita dapat mempercepat melalui dalam mobil, tapi Wordsworth mengambil langkah lambat nya di jalur tanah yang mengingatkan kembali ke Abad Pertengahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: puncak, filsafat, moral.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Knickerboker &amp;&nbsp;Reninger, (1963; 307) says that “poetry is the hymn of praise”. Good talk about poetry is nevertheless rare and even the best of it will rest on fallow ground until we ourselves have learned how to penetrate the inner life of a few poem”. Poem is a medium not only to express the feeling of the poets but also to make us enter into these feelings about the things, persons, situations or ideas in the poem. Poetry is able to give entertainment, satisfaction, pleasure and enjoyment to the reader. This is because there is great difference between language in a poem and our daily language, in that poetic language is stylized with aesthetic or artistic effect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Poetry is narrative, which tells a story. It conveys the meaning in ways that are different from those found in prose fiction. Poetry makes a statement, and the reader should be able to paraphrase that statement, realizing however that the paraphrase is not the poem itself. Most poetry has a formal structure that differentiates it from prose. The language of poetry is characterized by a greater intensity than a prose. It is likely to be more metaphorical and connotative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Poetry is one of the literary works beside prose and drama where the poet wants to express his/her feelings, mind and emotion of the reality of life. It is a human imaginative experience of what has happened in his/her life and which is never gone away from his/her mind. Then, he/she writes and tells the readers what exists in his/her mind as a poem. So, when the readers read the poem, it is hoped that they will know what the meaning of the poem is, what the readers can catch and find after reading it. And also it is possible that they will know the poet’s personality and his/her life in the past, by reading the poem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Discovering and describing meaning in a poem seems to be the goal of analysis. That is why biography is also important when the readers want to know the real meaning hiding in a poem. After reading the biography of the poet, it is possible to the readers to get the meaning of the poem easily.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, William Wordswortht’s poem was analysed. The title of the poem is </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass.</span><span class="font0"> In this poem, Wordsworth describes a journey through the Alps that he once made with his friend Robert Jones. Trekking from Switzerland into Italy, they wended their way through the Simplon Pass, huge peaks ringing the horizon. Nowadays, we can speed through in a car, but Wordsworth took his slow steps on a dirt track that dated back to the Middle Ages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background mentioned above, some problems could be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What metaphorical meanings are found in Wordsworth’s </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What does Wordsworth want to tell the readers in the poem?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the problems formulated above, there are three aims to be achieved in this article. They are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">1.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the metaphorical meanings which are found in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse the meaning of metaphorical word used in the poem.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department and to give contribution to this department, so this article writing can be used as reference for the student who is interested in poetry.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">A method is a systematic procedure in analysing an object of research in accordance with the approach being used. There are three aspects of the research in this study; they consist of data source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this article the source of the primary data were taken from the website through internet. The poem used as data source was </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass</span><span class="font0"> written by William Wordsworth Source: </span><a href="http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174821"><span class="font0">http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174821</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">This poem was chosen as a data source because the poem was constructed by the poet’s journey which seemed very interesting to learn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected through reading the story intensively and noting down all the information relevant to the poem then the data were identified in accordance with their type then they were descriptively presented. They were several types of collecting data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading the poem carefully, selecting and taking note the selected items based on the related topic</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The metaphorical meaning of the poem to be found out.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis correlates to the problems that were formulated. The method for analysing the data was descriptive. The data were collected from the data source and through the data collection, it was analysed by using the theory of Smith, Sybille entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry</span><span class="font0"> (1985) and a theory proposed by Knickerboker &amp;&nbsp;Reninger, entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font0"> (1963)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">The Simplon Pass</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By William Wordsworth</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">—Brook and road</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And with them did we journey several hours</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">At a slow step. The immeasurable height</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Of woods decaying, never to be decayed, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The stationary blasts of waterfalls,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And in the narrow rent, at every turn,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As if a voice were in them, the sick sight</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And giddy prospect of the raving stream,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light— &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Were all like workings of one mind, the features</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Characters of the great Apocalypse,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The types and symbols of Eternity,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Of first and last, and midst, and without end. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;20</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Simplon Pass 2,005 m or 6,578 feet is a high mountain pass between the Pennine Alps and the Lepontine Alps in Switzerland. It connects Brig in the canton of Valais with Domodossola in Piedmont in Italy. The pass itself and the villages on each side of it, such as Gondo, are in Switzerland. The Simplon Tunnel was built beneath the vicinity of the pass in early 20th century to carry rail traffic between the two countries.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this poem, Wordsworth describes a journey through the Alps that he once made with his friend Robert Jones. Trekking from Switzerland into Italy, they wended their way through the Simplon Pass, huge peaks ringing the horizon. Nowadays, we can speed through in a car, but Wordsworth took his slow steps on a dirt track that dated back to the Middle Ages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The poem can be naturally divided into two parts. In the first part, it is found a vivid description of the natural scenery in an impassioned style. In this poem by Wordsworth, he describes a journey through the Alps that he once made with his friend Robert Jones. Trekking from Switzerland into Italy, they</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">proceeded their way through the Simplon Pass, huge peaks ringing the horizon. (Line 1-2) On all sides were tall woods, their height being immeasurable to the human eye. In the waterfalls, the water fell without stop, blasting noise. (Line 4-5) On the top of the hill, the wind blew with a bewildering, confusing noise. A small stream ran down the valley like stars shooting in the blue sky. \</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wordsworth catches this process in a remarkable and baffling series of paradoxes, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">woods decaying, never to be decayed</span><span class="font0">, / </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The stationary blasts of waterfalls</span><span class="font0"> / . . . </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Winds thwarting winds</span><span class="font0"> (Line 5 - 9). The woods change but remain the same; the waterfall appears still while in constant motion: Wordsworth shows the readers at the moment of inception the transforming process that is central to feeling, maintaining identity within difference.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The wayside crags or black rock continuously dripped, and the poet felt as if they were addressing him in their own language (Line 10).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The sight of the stream raving in its bed made those who were travelling in the pass feel giddy (Line 13). Clouds freely moved in the blue sky. It was a fascinating scene and the poet was greatly impressed by these scenes. He felt that whatever he saw around was the manifestation of one, eternal mind, like the numerous flowers and blossoms growing on the tree (Line 17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The poem can be naturally described as a vivid natural scenery in an impassioned style. The ceaseless fall of water appears to be an unchanging blast. On the top of the hill, winds blow bewilderment. The torrents shoot from the clear blue sky (Line 8 - 9) Black rocks keep continuously dipping. Deep below in the valley, the stream flows noisily. (Line 11) Clouds walk along freely in the sky (Line 14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">An important aspect of these descriptions is the personification of the various object of nature. The brook and the road are fellow- traveller. The rocks mutter close upon the ears. Black drizzling crags speak by the wayside as if a voice were in them. The stream flows on noisily like a raving man sick of life. Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn, the clouds freely move about in the sky (Line 8). The poet later describes these scenes as the feature on the same face. So there is no wonder that he invests them with life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This poem is the record of that memorable occasion when Wordsworth’s fellowship with nature was connected in a mystical experience. This mystical experience is described in the second part of the poem. What Wordsworth had seen was splendid and sublime. He had been fascinated with it. He regards them as the blossoms upon one tree, the characters of the great apocalypse and the types and symbols of eternity (Line 17-19). These scenes are different forms of one life that informs the universe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wordsworth depicts a distinct stage in the development of his attitude to Nature. Here nature is described as typical of spiritual life. Later he goes ahead and begins to regard nature as animated by spiritual life and nor merely by a symbol of spiritual life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Simplon Pass</span><span class="font0"> is replete with natural energy. The blast of waterfalls, winds thwarting winds, the raving stream, all become unified as the working of one mind.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Wordsworth’s poem tells the readers his journey through the Alps that he once made with his friend Robert Jones. Trekking from Switzerland into Italy, they wended their way through the Simplon Pass, huge peaks ringing the horizon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Here, Wordsworth indicates the correspondence in the human realm. His account, in short, points to the common processes underlying the evolution of both Nature and Mind. Wordsworth does not simply attribute human feelings to the scene before him, a technique that evades what is unique or distinctive about the ecosystem in question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass</span><span class="font0"> begins as a landscape poem but as the poem progresses; we become aware that the language of description gives way to the language of meditation, a state produced by the intense contemplation of nature. We are also aware that the real subject of the poem is not nature as seen at this poem, but rather experiences that are open to the mind which can create and recall at will and mental landscape based on a remembered scene.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Abrams, M.H. 1971. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">A Glossary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font0">. Third Edition. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">1977. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Encyclopedia Americana</span><span class="font0">. Volume 4. International Edition. New York: American Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hornby, A.S. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font0">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jones, Edward.H. 1968. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Outlines of Literature</span><span class="font0">. New York: The Mac Millan Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Willard H. Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">USA: Holt Renehart and Wilson Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Morner, Kathleen and Rausch, Ralph. 1998. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary.</span><span class="font0"> USA : NTC Publishing group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan, Prof. Dr. M. Pd. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Pengkajian Sastra</span><span class="font0">. Yogya: Gajah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Smith, Sybille. 1985. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry</span><span class="font0">. Pitman Publishing Ltd : London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wellek, Rene and Austen Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font0">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wiyatmi. 2006. Pengantar Kajian Sastra. Yogyakarta: Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wordsworth, William. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Simplon Pass.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174821"><span class="font0">http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174821</span></a></p>