---
layout: full_article
title: "WOMEN’S LANGUAGE IN “WILD CHILD” MOVIE"
author: "Marvina Mrs"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>WOMEN’S LANGUAGE IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“WILD CHILD”</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Marvina</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Departement, Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan utama dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan dan juga menemukan fungsi dari masing-masing fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data diperoleh dari film ‘Wild Child’ dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi. Data yang terkumpul kemudian dianalisis secara deskriptif berdasarkan desain kualitatif dengan menerapkan teori Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisis data menunjukkan bahwa ditemukan enam fitur bahasa yang digunakan oleh perempuan, yakni: hedges or fillers, tag questions, empty adjective, intensifier, hypercorrect grammar, and emphatic stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: bahasa perempuan, fitur bahasa perempuan, dan fungsi fitur bahasa perempuan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language is the system of communication in speaking or writing that is used by people in daily life. All of us have different styles of communication with other people. Our style depends on many things: where we are from, how and where we were brought up, our educational background, our age, social status, and our gender. Coates (1986:4) define that sociolinguistics is the study of language in social context. The different social contexts in society influenced the appearance of stylistic variation, where an individual talks in different ways in different social contexts. People with different social status, ages, sexes, ethnics, and group will also differ from each other in their speech, even in the same context.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff (1975) argued that women's language reflect the powerlessness of women. Women tende to speak politely since they are status-conscious. They also use standard speech forms since they believe that the way they speak signal or indicate their social status in society. This fact makes them aware of their speech, even though their real status background is not coming from the high-class society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, there are some problems that appear in this study, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What language features are applied by the women in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of the language used by women in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are related to the problems proposed above. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the language features applied by women in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child. </span><span class="font2">2. To find out the functions of language used by women in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scope of Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Related to the problems which have been mentioned above, the scope of discussion in this study is focused on the language features and their functions that occur in conversations of female characters in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child</span><span class="font2">. This study used the theory of women language features proposed by Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method in this study covers three points of discussion, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The primary data used in this study were taken from an American/British teen drama film entitled “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child”</span><span class="font2"> starring Emma Roberts. It was first published on 15 Augusts, 2008. The duration is 98 minutes. The reason for selecting this movie as the data because this movie showed conversations containing the women’s language features. Moreover, the story of this movie is also interesting that tells about the lives of a group of women in boarding school, especially teenagers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected through documentary method by conducting library research and direct observation to the movie. First, watching intensively and note taking the women’s language such as the words, phrases, or sentences, which occurred in the conversation, used by women in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child</span><span class="font2">. Then, transcripts, reading, and classifying the women language based on the characteristics of women's language suggested by Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed through qualitatively method. Based on the method and technique of collecting data above, after classifying the data based on the characteristic of women’s language, the data were analyzed descriptively to find out the language features applied by the women and analyzed their functions based on theory proposed by Lakoff (1975).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After the data were collected, they were identified into some groups according to their features and functions of women’s language. The data were in DVD form in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wild Child</span><span class="font2"> movie. The data were analyzed using theory of Robin Lakoff (1975) in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman's Place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Features of Women’s Language and Their Functions</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hedges or fillers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hedge is one of the features that contain the words that can weaken the speaker's statement. The functions to mitigate the possible unfriendliness or unkindness of a statement used for the sake of politeness and to show speaker’s uncertainty about what she is saying, or cannot vouch for the accuracy of the statement. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mrs. Kingsley : Oh, what can I do for you, Poppy?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy : It's what I used to start it. It was an accident, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I thought</span><span class="font2"> I put it out. But </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I guess</span><span class="font2"> not. Obviously not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation, Poppy handed a lighter to Mrs. Kingsley (headmistress). She told about the fire at the boarding school. The hedges </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I thought</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I guess</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance expressed her uncertainty. First, she said “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">thought</span><span class="font2"> I put it out”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I thought</span><span class="font2"> here showed uncertainty whether she had turn off the fire or not, and second she said “but </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I guess</span><span class="font2"> not”, it showed that she was more uncertain about what she was saying, because actually she still hesitant with what had happened. It could be seen that the function of the hedge that she could not vouch for the accuracy her statement, because she could not corroborate her own statement. In addition, these hedges do have their uses when one really has legitimate need for protection, or for deference, but used to excess.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tag questions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tag question is a grammatical structure in which a declarative statement or an imperative is turned into a question by adding an interrogative fragment (the &quot;tag&quot;) to request confirmation or disconfirmation of the statement from the addressee. The functions are to give the addressee leeway, not forcing him to go along with the speaker, make ‘small talk’, trying to elicit conversation from the addressee, ask one’s opinion in polite way in discussing personal feeling, avoid asserting herself in strong way, thereby to avoid coming in the conflict with the addressee. For example: Kate : Hi, how do you do?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy : I already have a sister. (Answer arrogantly)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kate : It's just school lingo. I'll be your friend, a helping hand, that's all. Poppy : Okay, but I choose my friends, and FYI, you don't make the cut. Kate : I'm sure that comment would sting a lot more if I knew what FYI meant.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">But, for the moment, let's just pretend it's had the desired effect, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shall we?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation, Poppy met Kate (Poppy’s friend) for the first time and they became acquainted in boarding school in England, where Kate went to school. In Kate’s utterance, she used tag question </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shall we</span><span class="font2"> since she was pretty certain that his statement will be accepted. It can be seen that the function of tag </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shall we</span><span class="font2"> is to avoid asserting herself in a strong way, thereby to avoid coming in the conflict with the addressee, and not forcing him to go along with the speaker, because Kate did not want to force Poppy to be her friend but she asked Poppy to pretend to do so. In addition, to avoid conflict, she did not need confirmation from Poppy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Empty Adjectives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Empty adjective is used to the express approbation in terms of one’s own personal reaction, rather than by gauging the likely general reaction. The function is to show the speaker’s approbation or admiration for something in her own way. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kate : This is a charity shop. The money goes to charity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy : Oh, I just had a heart palpitation. You guys are so </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2">, but we need to look really hot for the social. So let's go hit Oxford Street.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation occurred between Kate (Poppy’s friend) and Poppy, when they wanted shopping in the Charity Shop. She used empty adjective </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2"> which functions to show her admiration to what Kate did. In addition, the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2"> terms that denote approval of the trivial, the personal; that express approbation in terms of one's own personal emotional reaction, rather than by gauging the likely general reaction. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adorable</span><span class="font2"> was only an amusement for the speaker (Poppy) herself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intensifier</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Intensifier is the emphasis on the words spoken by the speaker. The function is to strengthen an assertion which shown women’s feeling about something as they do not know how strong the feeling is. For example: Poppy : Hey, you promise we'll talk every day? Swear on your life?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ruby : Dude, who loves ya? Everything's going to suck without you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy : Ruby, you're my best friend. I'm going to miss you </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> much.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Poppy’s conversation was addressed to Ruby before Poppy left California. Poppy used the intensive </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> in her utterance to express her feeling to Ruby. She did not know what would happen when she missed Ruby if she lived in England one day, because Ruby was her best friend. Intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> has the same meaning as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font2">, but in this conversation she preferred using the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> rather than </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font2">. In this intensifier </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> functions to emphasize strong emotion or to make assertion for Ruby.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hypercorrect Grammar</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hypercorrect grammar is standard grammar used by the speaker while they are speaking. The function is that they are supposed to be polite as they are considered having sub-ordinate status in society. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Harriet : It is with great regret and sadness that we call the Honour Court to session. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">It will henceforth be</span><span class="font2"> our job to objectively and dispassionately ascertain what happened that fateful night </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that will </span><span class="font2">hence to forth long blight the memory of this proud institution. It is your duty to understand the dark forces that drove a seemingly...</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mrs. Kingsley : Harriet? </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">May I remind you</span><span class="font2"> that the Honour Court is no place for your personal grandstanding, and that Poppy has a right to speak in her own defense before the Court as a whole passes judgment?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy : Thank you, Mrs. Kingsley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I won't insult everybody by trying to defend myself or my actions. So, I think it's safe to say that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've really messed up</span><span class="font2">. And I apologize profusely. But I'm also so grateful to you all. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I tried </span><span class="font2">really hard to get out of this school, and only now do I realize just how much I want to stay. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've learnt</span><span class="font2"> so much being here, being with all of you. And in some ways being with my mom, who I found out was actually a student here. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've had</span><span class="font2"> a hole in my heart for five years, and somehow being here, it slowly started to heal. I know </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I may have looked</span><span class="font2"> like a California girl, but in my heart </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've discovered</span><span class="font2"> that I really am an Abbey Mount girl.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation, they spoke in front of the all members of the school in honour court. There were some grammar that used in their utterance, they are: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">It will be</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that will</span><span class="font2"> in Harriet’s utterances were considered future tense and the rule is: S+ will+ be/ S+ will</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> the sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">May I remind you</span><span class="font2"> in Mrs. Kingsley’ s utterance was considered modal auxiliaries</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> the sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I tried</span><span class="font2"> in Poppy’ s utterance was considered past tense and the rule is: S+ VII, and the sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've really messed up, I've learnt</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I may have looked, I've had, I've discovered</span><span class="font2"> in their utterance were considered present perfect tense and the rule is: S+ have/has+ VIII. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ve</span><span class="font2"> means </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have</span><span class="font2">. Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I've discovered</span><span class="font2"> is similar to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have discovered</span><span class="font2">. They</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">used the standard English as they wanted to speak politely. Therefore, their utterance above was in the correct form. Hypercorrect grammar serves as to show politeness and at the same time creates a distance between the speaker and addressee as they are considered having sub-ordinate status in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphatic Stress</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Women usually strengthen an utterance to describe their judgment about something. The function is to emphasize one’s judgment on something. Women who is concerned more on feeling and affective functions use emphatic stress to show the positive politeness to the addressee. For example: Poppy : Where do I go?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Freddie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Out the door, turn left, and down the stairs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Run towards the bright orange flickery thing. Right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Freddie : Oh, and try not to get caught.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poppy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Excellent point</span><span class="font2">, sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation, Poppy met Freddie when she runs away from a fire drill night. She asked the way to Freddie, and then he gave idea to Poppy. Therefore, she used the emphatic stress </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">excellent</span><span class="font2"> which functions to show or express her judgment to Freddie’s idea. She judged that the idea of Freddie is a very good point so that she could run away from a fire drill night. She stressed her judgment of Freddie idea using </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">excellent</span><span class="font2">, which indicated her good impression to Freddie.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">There were six language features with their functions found in the movie, there are: (1) feature hedges in the words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I thought</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I guess</span><span class="font2"> which showed uncertainty by women in her speaking, (2) feature tag question in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shall we</span><span class="font2"> as asking one’s opinion in polite way and not forcing the addressee to go along with the speaker, (3) empty adjective in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adorable</span><span class="font2"> as admiration for something, (4) intensifier in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> as emphasizing her feeling, (5) hypercorrect grammar to show standard English in her speaking, and (6) emphatic stress in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">excellent</span><span class="font2"> as judgment for something.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Coates, J. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men and Language.</span><span class="font2"> A Sociolinguistic Account of Sex Differences in Language. Longman: London &amp;&nbsp;New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darya, I Wayan. 2011. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Lakoff’s Women’s Language Features Among the 12<sup>th</sup> Grade-Indonesian Students of Taman Rama School’s Cambridge International Examination Programme Mahatma Gandhi Foundation”. </span><span class="font2">Denpasar: Faculty of Letter, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1998. 'Women's Talk: The Question of Sociolinguistic Universals'. In </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and. Gender: A Reader</span><span class="font2">, ed. Coates, Oxford: Blackwell, pp 461483.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, R. 1975</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Language and Woman's Place.</span><span class="font2"> Published by: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Payne, K.E. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Different but Equal: Communication between the Sexes</span><span class="font2">. Connecticut: Praeger Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Susanti, I G A. Agung Dian. 2007 “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Women’s Speech Used in Ever After (A Cinderella Story) Movie</span><span class="font2">”. Denpasar: Faculty of Letter, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Weatherall, A. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gender, Language and Discourse</span><span class="font2">. New York: Routeledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, R. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font2">. Great Britain: Page Bros (Norwich), Ltd.</span></p>