---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF POLITENESS STRATEGIES USED IN OPRAH WINFREY’S TALK SHOW  WITH RICKY MARTIN AS GUEST STAR"
author: "Luh Putu Ayu Adhika Putri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF POLITENESS STRATEGIES</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">USED IN OPRAH WINFREY’S TALK SHOW</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">WITH RICKY MARTIN AS GUEST STAR</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LUH PUTU AYU ADHIKA PUTRI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oprah Winfrey adalah pemilik media Amerika, talk show host, aktris, produser, dan dermawan. Winfrey terkenal karena penghargaan yang didapatkannya, multi-pemenang penghargaan bicara, yang telah menjadi program rating tertinggi dari jenisnya dalam sejarah dan dia juga wanita paling berpengaruh di dunia menurut beberapa penilaian. Dalam studi ini, satu script dari talk show Oprah Winfrey dengan bintang tamu yang berbeda digunakan. Bintang tamunya adalah Ricky Martin yang dikenal sebagai penyanyi pop. Data diklasifikasikan ke dalam jenis strategi kesantunan yang diusulkan oleh Brown dan Levinson (1978). Strategi ditemukan dalam skrip talk show yaitu Bald on record, Positive politeness, Negative politeness, dan Off record. Tapi tidak semua jenis setiap strategi yang diterapkan dalam naskah talk show Oprah Winfrey tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Strategi Kesantunan, Oprah Winfrey, Talk Show</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Brown and Levinson (1993:1) politeness strategies are developed in order to save the hearers “face”. Face refers to the respect that an individual has for him or herself maintaining that “self-esteem” in public or in private situations. Usually person tries to avoid embarrassing to other person, or make them feel uncomfortable. Face Threatening Acts (FTA’s) are acts that infringe on the hearers need to maintain his self-esteem, and be respected. Politeness strategies are developed for the main purpose of dealing with these FTA’s. There are four types of politeness strategies, described by Brown and Levinson that sum up human “politeness” behavior. The strategies are bald on record, positive politeness, negative politeness, and off record-indirect strategies. It is chosen to analyze considering that when the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">speaker doing the FTA’s, it will reflect to the speaker’s feeling and influencing the speaker’s responds.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Related in this study, talk show of Oprah Winfrey shows the application of politeness strategy used for ask question and respond question directly between Oprah and her guest star. Writer considers it is important to analyze the factor influencing of politeness strategy used in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show. As we know Oprah Winfrey is an American</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_proprietor"><span class="font2"> media proprietor,</span></a><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk_show_host"><span class="font2"> talk show host,</span></a><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actress"><span class="font2"> actress,</span></a><span class="font2"> producer, and</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philanthropist"><span class="font2"> philanthropist.</span></a><span class="font2"> Winfrey is best known for her self-titled, multi-award-winning talk show, which has become the highest-rated program of its kind in history and she is also the most influential woman in the world according to</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_100:_The_Most_Important_People_of_the_Century"><span class="font2"> some assessments.</span></a><span class="font2"> In this study, one script from Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with a guest stars were used. A script is when the guest star was Ricky Martin who known as pop singer. So that, Oprah Winfrey’s talk show becomes the proper subject to analyze in the context study of politeness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing the talk show script there are some problems that were formulated to the used of politeness strategy applied in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of politeness strategies are used in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script with Ricky Martin as the guest star?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the factor that might influence the choice of strategies in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script with Ricky Martin as the guest star?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Having looked at the problems above, the aims of this study were focused on: </span><span class="font0">a. </span><span class="font2">To analyze the types of politeness strategies used in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script with Ricky Martin as the guest star.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. </span><span class="font2">To analyze the factor that might influence the choice of strategies in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show scripts with Ricky Martin and J.K Rowling as the guest stars.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In doing a scientific writing, it is necessary to follow scientific procedures for the success in conducting a research. The procedure known as research method is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">very important for the validity of research. It can be defined as the procedure or the method used in writing a scientific paper, which in this case includes the method of determination of the source of data, the process of collecting data, and how the data will be analyzed, they are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This Oprah Winfrey’s talk show was chosen as the data source because Oprah Winfrey as we know is one of the greatest talk show host and the most influential woman in the world. The Oprah Winfrey talk show script contains many of conversation, in situation ask question and respond question directly and spontaneously between Oprah and her guest star in her talk show.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">All the data was taken from the Oprah Winfrey talk show script with one guest stars. The script was taken from a sources; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">rmfoundation.arsls.net/0 1.24.05.media2.html</span><span class="font2">. The first technique was done by watching the Oprah Winfrey’s talk shows and then read the scripts of the Oprah Winfrey’s talk show. After that the process of collecting data also was done by re-watching the talk show and did the technique of collecting data while re-reading the Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Then after the all data was collected, the data was divided into the sub-theories of politeness strategy. After that the writer divided them into the factors that influence the choice of politeness strategy. This is a library research so there were no respondents and informants involved in this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data that has been collected was classified according on the theory from Brown and Levinson (1987) to find the types of politeness strategies used in the conversation of the talk show script. There four types of politeness strategy, they are; bald on record, positive politeness, negative politeness, and off record politeness strategy. Then this study also used theory from Brown and Levinson about the factors influencing the choice of strategies by characters in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script with Ricky Martin as the guest star.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Oprah Winfrey’s talk show scripts</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Used of Politeness Strategy in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script with Ricky Martin</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In using bald on record type 1 in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with Ricky Martin, there are cases of Non-minimization of face treat found:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2 – Metaphorical Urgency for Emphasis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Take a look</span><span class="font2"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: When speaker (S) speaks as if maximum efficiency is very important, she provides metaphorical urgency for emphasis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3 – Metaphorical Urgency for High Valuation of Hearer’s Friendship Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Good to see you</span><span class="font2"> (2)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This type perhaps explains why orders and entreaties (or begging), which have inverted assumptions about the relative status of Oprah and Ricky Martin.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 5 – Task Oriented/Paradigmatic Form of Instruction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Have a seat</span><span class="font2"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Which is the S’s wants to satisfy the H’s face by asked the hearer to sit down.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 7 – Sympathetic Advice or Warnings</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We have to stop this</span><span class="font2"> (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: In doing the FTA, in this case he conveys that he does care about child trafficking therefore he cares about H’s positive face, no redress is required Sympathetic advice is baldly on record. This type of bald on record occurs where doing the FTA is primarily in H’s interest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In using bald on record type 2 in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with Ricky Martin, there are cases of FTA-oriented bald on record usage found:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. </span><span class="font2">Strategy 1 – Welcoming</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Please welcome Ricky Martin!</span><span class="font2"> (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This strategy is used by Oprah as the speaker to welcome Ricky Martin as the guest star.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In using positive politeness strategy which was applied there are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1 - Notice, attend to H (his interest, wants, needs, goods)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You look great</span><span class="font2"> (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This output suggest that he should take notice of aspects of Oprah’s condition (anything which looks as though Oprah would want his to notice and approve it) other aspects of this sentence is that he should ‘notice’ and indicate that host from the talk show not embarrassed by it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2 - Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ricky Martin skyrocketed to megastar status with his number-one hit &quot;Livin' La Vida Loca.</span><span class="font2"> (7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: The S (Oprah) shows her interest to her guest star figure, Ricky Martin by saying the sentence (7).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3 – Intensify interest to H</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ricky says that he felt helpless sitting at home on his couch watching the news coverage of the tsunami. So he decided to do something, and last week, Ricky traveled to Thailand and my producers went with him to Thailand.</span><span class="font2"> (8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Oprah as the speaker communicated to audience that she shared some of Ricky Martin’s experience to intensify the interest of audience to know how feeling touched Ricky Martin when saw the orphans.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 5 – Seek agreement</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that is so disturbing that we're hearing about. Young tsunami victims, that you have the pornographers...</span><span class="font2"> (9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah</span><span class="font2">. (10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Strategy 5 (seek agreement) is applied in their conversation in example it starts when Oprah is saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“that is so disturbing that we're hearing about. Young tsunami victims, that you have the pornographers...</span><span class="font2">(9)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font2"> and Ricky Martin is answering </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Yeah”</span><span class="font2"> (10).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">e.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 6 – Avoid Disagreement – Hedging Opinion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">They call him Little Wave, but he's a big local hero</span><span class="font2"> (11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: The use of this strategy is to assume some degree of common ground between S and H, in that S calls upon H to use her common knowledge to interpret S’s attitude.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">f.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 7 - Presuppose/raise/assert common ground</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah, and real powerful</span><span class="font2"> (12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This is where unidentified woman#2 as speaker speaks as if hearer (H) in this case is Ricky Martin were speaker (S). Unidentified woman#2 feels the same as what Ricky Martin says about the powerful woman who saved her life by holding herself on that window.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">g.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 10 – Offer, promise</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ricky Martin will tell us about this miracle.</span><span class="font2"> (13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: The usage of this strategy is for help to obtain in order to redress the potential treat of some FTA’s.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">h.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 11 – Be optimistic</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">So you said, `I'm going to go back to the children...</span><span class="font2"> (14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Oprah as the speaker wants to convince back up his opinion about Ricky Martin that he is going to go back to the children by using strategy 10.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">i.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 12 - Include both S and H in the activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">…</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">let's </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">take that in for a moment because we hear the numbers…</span><span class="font2"> (15) Description: When she uses </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘Let’s’</span><span class="font2"> it is including both of them to the conversation that is trying to find Oprah’s want and she is making an effort to figure it out. She is trying to soften requests to her audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">j.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 13 - Give (or ask for) reasons</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Why did you walk away at the top?</span><span class="font2"> (16)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: By involving her to his reason, she is thereby led to see the reasonableness of his FTA. In order words, assuming cooperation, away of showing what reason is needed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In using negative politeness strategy which was applied there are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1 - Be conventionally indirect</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I needed to step out of the picture for a little while.</span><span class="font2"> (17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: In this sentence there are two tensions that a speaker faced in this strategy are the desire to give H an “out” by being indirect and the desire to go on record. Ricky Martin as S wants to communicate his desire to be indirect even though in fact the utterance goes on record.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2 – Question, hedge</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Is it comfortable for you to tell us your story? Is it OK?</span><span class="font2"> (18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Avoiding coercion of H may take the form of attempting to minimize the treat of coercion by clarifying S’s view of the power, social distance, and ranking values.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3 – Be pessimistic</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">how did an infant only one month old survive the tsunami?</span><span class="font2"> (19) Description: Gave redress to the H’s negative face by expressing doubt of an infant only one month’s condition. She just being amazing and there’s nothing that she can speak, not a word about that infant.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 6 – Apologize</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I'm sorry, but I need to be this raw...</span><span class="font2"> (20)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This strategy is used where Ricky Martin as speaker can simply admit that he is impinging on H’s face. S can indicate his reluctance to impinge on H’s negative face and hereby partially redress that impingement by apologizing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In using off record strategy which was applied there are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1 – Give hints</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">We need people that can help us take care of our children. We need people that can help us build new homes</span><span class="font2">. (21)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: This means the orphans need volunteers who are ready to help and care for them well and sincerely. The volunteers, who will take the time to charity,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">donate some money to help their daily lives and give their passion, dreams, and a new hope for re-live the tragedy they have faced.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2 - Give association clues</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“What would have happened to these girls if institutions like this didn't exist?' And that's when I found out about child trafficking</span><span class="font2"> (22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Ricky Martin wants everyone to open their eyes and heart to help each other or build similar institutions to help those who are victims of child trafficking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 4 – Understatements</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Are you able to describe now what it was like in that morgue?</span><span class="font2"> (23)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Not yet, Oprah. It was really intense.</span><span class="font2"> (24)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Oprah Winfrey want to know how the conditions and the situation there. Then Ricky Martin answered in sentence 24 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Not yet, Oprah. It was really intense”</span><span class="font2">. From the answers we can conclude a point on scalar predicates that happens there is an emergency</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 9 – Use Metaphor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">girls that lived under a plastic bag.</span><span class="font2"> (25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: The use of metaphor is perhaps usually on record, but there is a possibility that exactly which of the connotation of metaphor S intends may be off record. It have meaning that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;girls that lived under a plastic bag&quot;</span><span class="font2"> means that a little girl who became homeless living on the streets of other people and seek mercy from the leftovers of food on the street.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">e.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 10 – Use rhetorical questions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">So when did you decide that your passion was helping to save the world's children?</span><span class="font2"> (26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Description: Where this strategy is used for asking question with no intention of obtaining an answer is to break sincerity condition on question namely, that Oprah as speaker wants Ricky as hearer to provide her with the indicated information which said by Oprah in sentence 30. When Oprah Winfrey gave the question, Ricky Martin did not answer Oprah's questions in advance, but he explained</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">everything else first. It indicates that the question that is asked by Oprah Winfrey had no intention of obtaining an answer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.2 The Factors That Influence the Choice of Strategies in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The factors that influence the choice of strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson also applied in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script in delivering the topic of talk show. In used the Intrinsic Payoffs: a priori consideration in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with Ricky Martin such as: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Good to see you”</span><span class="font2"> (have the opportunity to pay back in face whatever he potentially takes away by the FTA), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Yeah, and real powerful</span><span class="font2">” (can minimize the face threatening aspect of an act by assuring the addressee that S considers himself to be ‘of the same kind’), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“I needed to step out of the picture for a little while”</span><span class="font2"> (can respect and honor in return for FTA receivers), and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“They call him Little Wave”</span><span class="font2"> (to get credit for being wise, not pushy, and he could be responsible for the interpretation of potentially damaging the face).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The factors that influence the choice of strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson in used the circumstances: sociological variables in Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with Ricky Martin is showed in dialogue </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">”Is it comfortable for you to tell us your story? Is it OK?”</span><span class="font2">(to ask politely to keep the distance between speaker and hearer).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Based on the analysis and discussion, </span><span class="font2">it can be concluded that politeness strategies and the factors that influence the choice of strategies have a correlation whether when speak to female or male person or have a close relation or not they always try to be polite in all situations. It can be occurred in all kinds of social distances, for example based on this study, it found in friendship, job as presenter in talk show, and for the first meeting. They all applied politeness strategies depend on the situations and the needs of communication. When applied the politeness strategies they should be carefully to choose the strategies, moreover conversation in a small of group like in talk show.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In Oprah Winfrey’s talk show with Ricky Martin the politeness strategy mainly applied is the use of positive politeness strategy, it also has the correlation with the factors that influence the choice of strategies. Positive politeness believes to build some familiar situation between speaker and hearer and sometimes they used joking to break the formal conversation in term of a small distance between speaker and hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim. 2012a. The Oprah Winfrey Show With Ricky Martin Script. </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">rmfoundation.arsls.net/0 1.24.05.media2.html</span><span class="font2"> (on online on September 24<sup>th</sup>, 2012)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, Penelope and Stephen C. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dewi, Octania. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of the Negative Politeness Strategies by the Master of Ceremony</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kartini, Hari. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Address Terms and Politeness in the Movie ‘The Duches’ </span><span class="font2">Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mimba, Primanda. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Strategies Used by Women Found in A Movie ‘Pretty Woman’</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Oxford Advanced Learner Dictionary 7<sup>th</sup> Edition (Oxford University Press 2005)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p>