---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH PERSONIFICATION AND SIMILE EXPRESSIONS IN JOHN GRISHAM’S THE STREET LAWYER INTO INDONESIAN"
author: "Komang Yukti Utami"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH PERSONIFICATION AND SIMILE EXPRESSIONS IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">JOHN GRISHAM’S THE STREET LAWYER</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> INTO INDONESIAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">KOMANG YUKTI UTAMI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">0818351020</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Karya tulis ini berjudul “The Translation of English Personification and Simile Expressions in John Grisham’s The Street Lawyer into Indonesian”. Tujuan dari penulisan karya tulis ini adalah untuk mengetahui dan menjelaskan majas personifikasi dan simile yang terdapat pada novel John Grisham yang berjudul The Street Lawyer beserta terjemahannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Karya tulis ini menggunakan dua novel sebagai sumber datanya, yaitu “The Street Lawyer” oleh John Grisham dan “Pengacara Jalanan” oleh Widya Kirana dan Diniarty Pandia. Data yang digunakan dalam karya tulis ini dikumpulkan dengan cara membaca secara seksama dan teliti yang berfokus pada majas personifikasi dan simile. Kumpulan data tersebut dianalisis dengan metode qualitative dan disajikan secara dekriptif. Data tersebut dianalisis dengan menggunakan teori figurative language oleh Knickerbocker dan Reninger (1963) dan teori terjemahan oleh Larson (1998). Hasilnya ditemukan bahwa terdapat sepuluh majas personifikasi dan enam majas simile dalam novel John Grisham yang berjudul “The Street Lawyer” dan terjemahannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Keenam majas personifikasi diterjemahkan secara‘non-figurative equivalent’. Dari keenam majas tersebut terdapat dua majas menggunakan teknik ‘structural adjustment’ dalam terjemahannya, empat lainnya menggunakan teknik ‘deleting secondary sense’ dalam terjemahannya karena tidak ada majas yang sesuai dengan bahasa sumber dan penerjemah tetap ingin menerjemahkan sesuai dengan makna pada bacaan. Terdapat empat majas personifikasi yang diterjemahkan secara figurative equivalent. Semua majas simile diterjemahkan secara figurative equivalent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Terjemahan, bahasa kiasan, personifikasi, simile.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Figurative language is much needed in making literature, such as poems, poetry, drama and novel. Novel as a literary work, often provide figurative expressions. The writers use figurative expressions in the novel in order to make the novel more interesting when the reader read it and to emphasize the meaning of the writers. This study used The Street Lawyer novel as data. This novel was</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">chosen because there were many figurative languages being used and they were interesting to be analyzed, especially personification and simile which can be used in this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems in this study which need to be discussed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the English personification and simile expressions found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2"> novel and how are they translated into Indonesian?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What the types of translation adjustment are used by the translator in translating personification and simile expressions in The Street Lawyer novel into Indonesian?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out personification and simile expressions found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2"> novel and their translation into Indonesian.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze types of translation adjustment found in translation of personification and simile expressions.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from an English novel written by John Grisham entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2"> (1998) and its translation written by Widya Kirana and Diniarty Pandia (2001) in Indonesian. The data in this study were collected by doing documentary method in some steps. The first, the data were collected through reading attentively and accurately with focus on the Personification and Simile Expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2"> novel (Source Language version) and their translation and then written down by the technique of note taking. The collected data in this study were analyzed by doing qualitative method and descriptively presented. There were some steps followed in analyzing the data: The first, the data containing figurative language are observed and classified into personification and simile expressions. The second step was</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">analyzing implementation of personification and simile expressions from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2"> novel into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengacara Jalanan</span><span class="font2"> novel. The last step was analyzing types of translation adjustment found in translation personification and simile expressions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis is based on Larson’s and Knickerbocker and Reninger’s theories. Next is followed by the analysis of translation of idiomatic expressions based on Larson’s theory of idiomatic translation with the types of adjustments.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification Expressions Translated into Non-figurative Expressions</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The gun was back on me.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kemudian moncong senjata itu kembali terancung padaku.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A lone police car sat empty with its lights on.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Sebuah mobil polisi diparkir di bawah, kosong, lampunya menyala.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A porcelain vase sitting innocently on a coffee table.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Vas porselen di atas meja kopi.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The city buries unclaimed.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Pemerintah kota menguburkan mayat-mayat yang tak dikenal.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A cup of apple juice was waiting at the end.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Di ujung dapur disediakan segelas jus apel.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The clock suddenly called him.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Tiba - tiba dia ingat waktu.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To translate the sense of the word non-figuratively, that is the intended meaning may be made plain so that there is no longer a figurative sense in the receptor language translation. It is necessary to translate idiomatic expressions into non figurative expressions equivalent when it is not available in the receptor language. In this there were six personifications expressions were found and they translated non-figuratively. If they were translated into non figurative expressions, the most difficult problem is when the concepts are unknown in the receptor culture. So, the translator can use one of the possibility techniques.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In The Street Lawyer novel there were two techniques used in translating personification expressions. Two personification expressions were translated using structural adjustment. In this study the subject </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the gun</span><span class="font2"> as a prepositional</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">phrase in the source language is translated as an adverb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kemudian</span><span class="font2"> in the receptor language and the subject </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the clock</span><span class="font2"> as a noun phrase in the source language is translated as an adverb of time </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tiba-tiba</span><span class="font2"> in the receptor language. This may mean that a very different form will be used in order to insecure correct meaning and natural expression. It will not always be possible to translate a source language noun with a noun in the receptor language since the form in the receptor language is very different from the source language form and yet this kind of adjustment, using verbs or preposition rather than noun, must be made in order to communicate the message.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this study there are four personification expressions found and they are translated by deleting sense of the expressions. The equivalent lexical items will never have the same sense from languages to languages. This technique was used because in the receptor language there was not the same sense as the source language and the translator only transferred the intended meaning of the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification Expressions Translated into Figurative Expressions</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">The sunglasses were looking at me.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Kacamata hitam itu memandangku.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">A gust of wind hit the side of the building and rattled the windows.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Angin dingin menerpa samping bangunan dan menggoyang-goyangkan jendela.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">The radio said the day’ s high would be twenty degrees.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Radio meramalkan bahwa suhu tertinggi hari ini minus tujuh derajat Celcius.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">A sweet note on the table told me that she had to make her rounds.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Pesan singkat yang manis di meja mengatakan bahwa dia harus berkeliling memeriksa pasien.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Another way of translating idiomatic expression is to substitute a figurative expression of the receptor language for the figurative expression in the source language (if it is available) with a note the meaning is retained. There were four personification expressions found and they were translated figuratively. The translator tried to make the same message from the source language, keep the meaning of the source language. Although the receptor language still used figurative language but it can be accepted and understood by the reader. A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">translator also needs to develop sensitivity to the use of idioms in the receptor language and use them naturally to make the translation lively and keep the style of the source language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile Expressions Translated into Figurative Expressions</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Language</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Wire ran like colored spaghetti.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Kabel-kabel bersilangan seperti spageti.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">It sounded like a cannon.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Letusan itu terdengar seperti dentuman meriam.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">The change in careers had hit like a bullet.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Perubahan dalam karier menghantamku seperti peluru meriam.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Dumped them in other parts of the city like manure.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Dicampakkan ke bagian kota yang lain seperti sampah.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">I roared into the apartment like a man possessed.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Aku mnyerbu masuk ke apartment seperti orang kerasukan.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Fancies himself as a godfather type.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Menganggap &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dirinya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;semacam</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">godfather.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were six simile expressions found and they were translated figuratively. The translator tried to make the same message from the source language and make it lively and easily understood by the reader. The same simile expressions was used in the receptor language as long as they was acceptable and understood by the reader.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6. Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that there were ten Personification Expressions and six Simile Expressions. The translations of idiomatic expressions were implemented by non-figurative expressions and by figurative expression. There was also structural adjustment because it is not always possible to translate a source language noun with a noun in the receptor language since the form in the receptor language is very different from the source language form. The deletion of the secondary sense also cannot be avoided because sometimes the comparison object that is used in the source language idiomatic expression is not commonly used as the comparison object in the receptor language.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Beekman, John and John Callow. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translating the word of God</span><span class="font2">. Michigan: The Zondervan Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dewi, Putu Handayani. 2011. “Figurative Languages and Their Translation in Hemingway’s Novel Entitled The Old Man and The Sea” (Undergraduate Thesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Grisham, John. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Street Lawyer</span><span class="font2">. New York: Dell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kirana, Widya and Diniarty Pandia. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengacara Jalanan</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbocker, K.L &amp;&nbsp;H. Willard Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font2">. New York. Chicago, San Fransisco. Toronto: Holt, Renihart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation, A Guide to Across-Language Equivalence</span><span class="font2">. New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Marzocchi, Carlo. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">On Idioms, Intertextuality, Puddings and Quantum Physic. Translation Journal (serial online)</span><span class="font2"> Vol. 9, No. 2/ April 2005. 1-9, Resource http:/www.accurapid.com</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">6</span></p>