---
layout: full_article
title: "SUGGESTION SENTENCES USED IN THE NOVEL ENTITLED "DEWEY THE SMALL LIBRARY CAT WHO TOUCHED THE WORLD""
author: "Marlik Khusnawati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SUGGESTION SENTENCES USED IN THE NOVEL ENTITLED &quot;DEWEY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE SMALL LIBRARY CAT WHO TOUCHED THE WORLD&quot;</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Marlik Khusnawati</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Non-regular Program English Department Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul Suggestion Sentences Used In The Novel Entitled &quot;Dewey The Small Library Who Touched The World&quot;. Permasalahan dalam penelitian ini adalah membahas tentang jenis-jenis saran dan jenis-jenis kalimat yang digunakan untuk mengekspresikan saran itu sendiri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode penelitian yang digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data adalah metode dokumentasi yang berarti data dikumpulkan melalui membaca dan mencatat data yang akan dianalisis. Metode ini terdiri dari beberapa teknik, diantaranya adalah membaca novel secara keseluruhan, kemudian mengumpulkan data yang termasuk kalimat saran, lalu mencatatnya, setelah itu data yang terkumpul digolongkan sesuai dengan jenis-jenisnya. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori dari Searle (1985) yang mengklasifikasikan jenis kalimat saran menjadi tiga jenis, yaitu saran secara langsung, konvensional, dan saran secara tidak langsung. Ketiga jenis kalimat saran tersebut memiliki strategi yang berbeda dalam menyampaikan saran kepada pendengar, saran secara langsung dibagi menjadi empat strategi, yaitu performatif, saran yang berbentuk kata benda,imperatif, dan negatif imperatif. Saran konvensional dibagi menjadi empat strategi, diantaranya interrogatif, kemungkinan, kata kerja modal should and need, dan pengandaian. Sedangkan strategi yang digunakan pada saran tidak langsung adalah impersonal. Jenis-jenis kalimat yang digunakan untuk mengekspresikan kalimat saran menggunakan teori Quirk (1985), kalimat yang digunakan untuk mengekspresikan kalimat saran adalah kalimat deklaratif, kalimat imperatif, dan kalimat interogatif. Jenis kalimat saran yang paling banyak digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah saran konvensional dengan strategi kemungkinan. Sedangkan untuk jenis kalimat yang digunakan untuk mengekspresikan kalimat saran adalah kalimat deklaratif yang banyak ditemukan dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Saran, Kalimat, Strategi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Hornby in his </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Dictionary</span><span class="font2">, suggestion is an idea or a plan that you mention for somebody else to think about (Hornby 1989: 1535). Suggestion sentence can be expressed by declarative, imperative, and interrogative sentences. It is very interesting to analyze more detail about suggestion sentence because no one has</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">analyzed about suggestion sentence and not so many students expose the use of the declarative, imperative or interrogative sentence in suggestion sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Quirk (1986: 803) declarative sentence is a sentence in which the subject is present and generally precedes the verb, and imperative sentence is a sentence which normally have no overt grammatical subject, and whose verb has the base form, while interrogative sentence is used in asking question. The question can be divided into three major classes according to the type of answer they expect, that are; Yes-No question or question which can be answered by yes or no, W-H Question, and those that expect as the reply on of two or more options”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Each sentence has its function, and one of the functions is making suggestion. Each sentence has its own characteristic in expressing the suggestion sentence. For example, in imperative sentence, the suggestion sentence is expressed without using subject. In interrogative sentence, suggestion sentence is expressed by using W-H question.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of suggestion sentences are found in the novel entitled “Dewey The Small Library Cat Who Touched the World?”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of sentences that are used to express the suggestion sentences in the novel entitled “Dewey the Small Library Cat Who Touched the World?”</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what are the types of suggestion sentences found in the novel entitled “Dewey the Small Library Cat Who Touched the World”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of sentences that are used to express the suggestion sentences in the novel entitled “Dewey The Small Library Cat Who Touched the World”</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method which is used in this study is descriptive qualitative method, it means to describe the data qualitatively. There are three techniques of analyzing the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">data, first, the suggestion sentences were taken from the novel entitled “Dewey the Small Town Library Cat Who Touched the World” (2008) written by Vicky Myron. The novel should be read thoroughly and deeply in order suggestion sentences can be determined easily prior to the identification and classification according to their types.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second was continued with the process of identifying the types of suggestion sentences and write down on the data card, it would be easier to be analysed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Third, after the data was selected based on the types of suggestion sentences, they also should be analyzed based on types of the sentences used, because it is the second problem which is analyzed as well. Moreover, the data has been collected and described based on their types of suggestion and their types of sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are three types of suggestion; they are direct suggestion, conventionalised suggestion, and indirect suggestion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Direct Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&quot;We suggest that you give Readmore as a last name for him&quot;. (2008: 29).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above was called direct suggestion because the speaker stated clearly and directly what they meant to the hearer. It can be seen from words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we suggest </span><span class="font2">that mean the speakers give suggestion directly to the hearer that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Readmore</span><span class="font2"> as a last name was a good name for the kitten.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.2 Conventionalised Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why don't you pet a cat? No response. (2008: 31)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above was called conventionalised suggestion. The suggestion sentence above was classified as conventionalised type because the speaker revealed indirectly the intention of his/her suggestion, but the hearer still capture what the the speaker mean/suggest.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.3 Indirect Suggestion</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&quot;It might be better to lift one gingerly for a better look&quot;. (2008: 10)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above was called indirect suggestion. The italic sentence was called an indirect suggestion because the speakers do not suggest/state their true</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">intentions therefore the hearer has to infer that the speaker is actually making a suggestion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sentence Types in Expressing Suggestion Sentence</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Performative of Direct Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dewey Readmore. Close, but not quite. I suggest the last name Books. (2008: 29).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Evidence suggests the suspect is intentionally avoiding your desk to throw us of the trail. (2008: 45)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I suggested exposing her gently (2008: 69)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are called direct suggestion which is performed by performative because those sentences used performative verb, namely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">suggest.</span><span class="font2"> Type of sentence that is used to express those suggestion sentences above is declarative sentence because the subject is present and generally precedes the verb. The sentence is used in expression of statement. It is formed by sentence elements such as subject, verb being followed by object and another element.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun of Suggestion of Direct Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My suggestion is to turn our backs on economic progress to preserve the kind of town, a town based on local merchants, farmers, and small manufacturers. (2008: 158)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above was called direct suggestion which is performed by noun of suggestion. It was called noun of suggestion because the verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">suggest</span><span class="font2"> that it should be used by the speaker turned into a noun </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">suggestion.</span><span class="font2"> Type of sentence that is used to express the suggestion sentence which is performed by noun of suggestion strategy above is declarative sentence. Declarative sentence is a sentence that is used to express statement. The example above shows the speaker who states something or suggests something directly also takes an action and wish it can be accepted and responsed by the audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Imperative of Direct Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Start asking for money and sooner or later. (2008: 64)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence above is direct suggestion which is performed by imperative without subject because there is no subject that mentioned before the verb but actually it</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">has the implied subject </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you.</span><span class="font2"> Suggestion sentences above are expressed by imperative sentence, exactly imperative without subject. It can be seen from sentence which do not use subject like another common sentence, the sentence mention the main verb directly that followed by the object. Although the sentences do not use subject, but it has the implied subject </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative imperative of direct suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&quot;Don't waste any more money training me. (2008: 96)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't give Dewey any more rubber bands. (2008: 41)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't care how much he begs (2008: 42)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't leave rubber bands lying out on your desk (2008: 42)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't ever do that again (2008: 135)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are performed by negative imperative, it can be seen from the word &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">don't&quot;</span><span class="font2"> before the verb</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Grammatically the suggestion sentences above are expressed by imperative sentence, exactly negative imperative because those suggestion sentences are marked by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">don't</span><span class="font2"> before the verb. Eventhough the meaning of those suggestion sentences are negative, but they also can be indicated to make suggestion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative Forms of Conventionalised Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How about we just remove the rubber bands?&quot; (2008: 45)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why don't you worry about new toys and clothes? (2008: 51)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why not just take the next step and attract a casino? (2008: 201)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why don't you take Dewey home to live with you? (2008: 245)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are interrogative of conventionalised suggestion, it can be seen from w-h question that is used in the sentence. Grammatically, those conventionalised suggestion sentences above used interrogative sentence, exactly interrogative </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">w-h</span><span class="font2"> question form and those are started with the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">w-h</span><span class="font2"> word &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">why</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">how</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.2.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Possibility/Probability of Conventionalised Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Modal verbs used in suggestion sentences are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">can, could, may, might</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You could make more money selling off land every few years than you could farm it? (2008: 23)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Today you can earn an accredited master's degree in library science on the internet. (2008: 98)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You may tell immediately he's not just another cat. (2008: 142)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You might probably hear the gasp in Nebraska. (2008: 192)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are possibility/probability of conventionalised suggestion because there is </span><span class="font1">a possibility that suggestion is true or that suggestion will happen, it might be true or it might happen </span><span class="font2">and those sentences are marked by modal verbs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">could, can, may, and might</span><span class="font2">. Type of sentence that used to express the suggestion sentences which are performed by possiblity/probability strategy above is declarative sentence. The modal verb “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Can”</span><span class="font2"> and &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Could</span><span class="font2">&quot; is used with declarative and interrogative sentences, this modal verb can express ability, possibility, and permission. Moreover, declarative sentence is sentence that used to express statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.2.7</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Should</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Need</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> of Conventionalised Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We should get him some medical help</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (2008: 244)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&quot;He needs to be neutered.&quot; (2008: 37)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are called conventionalised suggestion which is performed by the modal verb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">need</span><span class="font2"> because there are modal verbs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">need</span><span class="font2"> that is used to make suggestion. The modal verbs “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">should”</span><span class="font2"> and &quot;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">need</span><span class="font2">&quot; are used in declarative sentences, these modal verbs can express an advice. Moreover, declarative sentence is sentence that is used to express statement. Those data above show the speaker who stated the opinion or suggested something that can be accepted and responsed by the audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5.2.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conditional of Conventionalised Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If I were you, I would stay at home. I'd put on a record and dance, all alone in my bedroom. (2008: 87)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If you were receptive, he was there for you (2008: 205)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are conditional of conventionalised suggestion. They are called conditional sentence because it used conjunction </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">if,</span><span class="font2"> which is used commonly in conditional sentence. Type of sentence that is used to express the suggestion sentences which are performed by using conditional sentence above is declarative sentence. The conditional used in declarative sentence can express advice or the opinion of speakers</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">based on the reflection of themselves. Moreover, declarative sentence is sentence that used to express statement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.2.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Impersonal of Indirect Suggestion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It would be helpful if we could clean up those desks and put them away. (2008: 42)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It might be better to make a difference for the library (2008: 65)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentences above are called indirect suggestion which is performed by impersonal because the speaker did not suggest the true intention therefor the hearer has to infer that the speaker is giving suggestion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Type of sentence that is used to express the suggestion sentence which is performed by using impersonal strategy above is declarative sentence. The impersonal is used in declarative sentence can express general statements and to express advice or the opinion. Moreover, declarative sentence is sentence that used to express statement. The data above shows the speaker who states the opinion or suggests something that can be accepted and responsed by the audiences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the discussion above about the suggestion sentences used in novel entitled &quot;Dewey the Small Library Cat Who Touched the World&quot;, there are some points that can be drawn as the conclusion. First, there are three types of suggestions found in this study. They are direct suggestion, conventionalised suggestion, and indirect suggestion. Each of them has different strategy that is used to make suggestion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Direct suggestion is performed by four strategies, they are Performative, Noun of suggestion, Imperative, and Negative imperative. For Conventionalised suggestion is divided into four strategies, they are Specific formulae (interrogative forms), Possibility/Probability, Modal verbs of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font2">, Modal verbs of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">need</span><span class="font2">, and Conditional sentence. While Indirect suggestion is performed by Impersonal. In this study conventionalised suggestion which is performed by possibility/probability is the most commonly found in the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Second, there are three types of sentences that are used to express the suggestion sentence. They are declarative sentence, imperative sentence, and interrogative sentence. In this study declarative sentence is the most commonly used to express the suggestion sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A S. 1989. Oxford. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary Current English</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Myron, Vicky. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewey the Small Library Cat Who Touched The World</span><span class="font2">”. New York: Hachette Book Group, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk, Randolph and Sidney Greenbaum and Jan Svartvik Leech Geoffrey. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle, J.R and Daniel Vanderveken. 1985. Speech Acts and Illocutionary Logic. (retrieved April 01, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2013). Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.uqtr.ca/~vandervk/05_Searle_vanderveken.pdf"><span class="font2">http://www.uqtr.ca/~vandervk/05_Searle_vanderveken.pdf</span></a></p>