---
layout: full_article
title: "MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESS OF DERIVATIONAL NOUN IN MAHLIGAI MAGAZINE"
author: "Jenny Paska Sari Tanjung"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 14.1 Januari 2016: 52-58</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESS OF DERIVATIONAL NOUN IN MAHLIGAI MAGAZINE</span></h1>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>BY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Jenni Paska Sari Tanjung email: </span><a href="mailto:jennytanjung@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">jennytanjung@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department, Faculty Of Letters And Cultures Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul tulisan ini adalah &quot;Morphological Process of Derivational Noun in Mahligai Magazine” Proses Morfologi adalah cara mengubah batang untuk menyesuaikan maknanya agar sesuai konteks sintaksis dan komunikasi. Proses morfologi mengubah batang agar memperoleh kata baru. Morfologi adalah salah satu elemen yang paling penting bagi kita yang ingin mempelajari lebih lanjut tentang proses morfologis dalam bahasa Inggris. Ketika kita tidak tahu proses morfologi bahasa Inggris, morfologi memberi kita aturan untuk membentuk kata baru seperti kata kerja, kata benda, kata sifat, menjadi kelas kata lain. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui bahwa proses morfologi terjadi pada pembentukan kata benda dan tulisan ini ingin menemukan perubahankelas kata pada akhiran derivatif sebagai bagian dari proses morfologi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode penelitian yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah penelitian kualitatif. Penelitian kualitatif digunakan karena sumber data penelitian ini data non-numerik. Teori morfologi digunakan dalam tulisan ini yang dikemukakan oleh Matthew (1991) dan teori-teori pendukung dikemukakan oleh Katamba (1993), Bauer (1983). Dalam proses morfologi, proses morfologi terjadi pada kata benda serta kelas kata yang dapat diubah menjadi kata benda melalui proses morfologi dan ada 2 jenis proses morfologi terjadi pada kata benda; proses tersebut adalah derivasi dan infleksi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Proses morfologi, derivatif, akhiran</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Morphology is the study of how words are formed. Words that are composed of more than one morphemes have undergone some type of morphological process. Morphological processes alter stems to derive new words. They may change the word’s meaning (derivational) or its grammatical functions (inflectional). Through the morphological process, we can change the form of noun, verb, and adjective into new word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of morphological process occur in noun in the magazine entitled Mahligai?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of morphological processes depending on its types?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find types of morphological process occurring in noun in the magazine entitled Mahligai</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the functions of morphological processes depending on its types</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research is one of the effects involved to find and examine the truth of something. Methodology is the systematic, theoretical analysis of the methods applied to a field of study, or the theoretical analysis of the body of methods and principles associated with a branch of knowledge. Research method is an explanation about the way used by the researcher in doing the research. The research method in this study is classified into three, they are; data source, method and technique of collecting data, and the last one is method and technique of analyzing data. The research method used in this study was qualitative research. Qualitative research was used because the data source of this study in non-numerical data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study was taken from magazine entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mahligai</span><span class="font1"> (November 2013). Mahligai Magazine is an Indonesian magazine where this edition is very special. First, the number of pages are thicker than the original magazine. Each edition is usually only 174 pages, but in this edition, this magazine has 244 pages. Second, about the appearance. For Mahligai loyal readers, they will surely feel the 'metamorphosis' appearance of Mahligai. Both in terms of typographical arrangement, layout, and packaging, the feel of modernity, but it is still grounded in indigenous Indonesian culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Third, in terms of content, the publisher has prepared a number of new rubric that aims for more 'shoot' beautiful variety and Indonesian beauty. The reason why Mahligai magazine was chosen as data source it is because Mahligai magazine is bilingual of Indonesian and English so that the meanings of the words are easy to understand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In analyzing this study, library research method is applied. The data were taken by note taking technique. This data were collected through the following steps. First, the magazine was read carefully, which is used as data source. Second, the data of nouns, verbs, and adjectives were chosen, underlined and classified by note taking. The last step, the data were fixed to the types and functions of morphological process.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In analyzing this study, the data were analyzed based on the theories of morphology. Qualitative research method is applied based on the theories in this study. First, the data were chosen. Second, the data were categorized; they are the transposition of noun into verb and adjective. The last step, the data were analyzed with immediate constituent by using brackets which is a word may also be analyzed into its immediate constituents-morphemes, such as relaxation into base {relax} and suffix {-ation}.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Morphological Process of Derivational Noun in Mahligai Magazine</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Derivational Morpheme</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Fromkin (2013), derivational morphemes have clear semantic content. In this sense they are like content words, except that they are not words. When a derivational morpheme is added to a base, it adds meaning. The derived word may also be of a different grammatical class than the original word, as shown by suffixes such as</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">-able</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">-ly</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Class Changing Derivational Morpheme</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Remson (2007), derivational morphemes are used to change the grammatical categories of words. Derivational morphemes have clear semantic content. In this sense they are like content words, except that they are not words. When a derivational morpheme is added to a base, it adds meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Class Changing Suffix</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Suffix is an affix which is placed after the stem of a word. Common examples are case endings, which indicate the grammatical case of nouns or adjectives, and verb endings, which form the conjugation of verbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of Morphological Process to change verb into noun</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) In Koto Gadang terms this stage is called maresek –esek or </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">assessment</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Y: 2013 P:111 ; L2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word assessment is derived from {assess} + {–ment}. Assesment comes from free morpheme asses as base and bound morpheme –ment as nominal suffix produces a new word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assessment</span><span class="font1"> as stem. The addition suffix –ment at the end of asses is changing the word class and meaning of that word. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Assess</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assessment</span><span class="font1"> belongs to different word classes. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Assess</span><span class="font1"> belongs to verb and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assessment</span><span class="font1"> belongs to noun class. The differences also happen in the meaning of both words. Based on the context above, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assessment</span><span class="font1"> means “the action of assessing someone or something”. The differences of the word class and meaning are caused by the addition of suffix –ment at the end of the word assess.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of morphological process forming Noun from Adjective</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) That’s what made the price of the pearls gone crazy, and jewelry and fashion items from pearls can be more expensive than diamonds, and can only be purchased by the jetset and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">wealthy </span><span class="font1">because they were very expensive. (P:98 ; L16)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wealthy</span><span class="font1"> comes from the {wealth} + {–y}. The word wealthy as stem is derived from free morpheme wealth as base and –y as nominal suffix. Those words belong to different class and meaning. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wealth</span><span class="font1"> belongs to noun, but when the suffix </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">–y</span><span class="font1"> is added to the root it becomes adjective class. Suffix-y also changes the meaning of the base. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Wealth</span><span class="font1"> in the sentence means “An abundance of valuable possessions or money” and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wealthy</span><span class="font1"> means “Having a great deal of money, resources, or assets; rich”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Class maintaining Suffixes</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) Maybe pearls and keshi are combined with silver and role gold metal plating into a set of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">jewelry </span><span class="font1">such as brooch, bracelet and earrings with a unique koi fish theme. (P:93 ; L:1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewelry</span><span class="font1"> comes from base {jewel} + suffix {–ry}. The combination of the root </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewel</span><span class="font1"> and suffix –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ry</span><span class="font1"> gain the output word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewelry</span><span class="font1"> which change the meaning of both </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewel</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewelry,</span><span class="font1"> but does not change any word class of it. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jewel</span><span class="font1"> means “A precious stone, typically a single crystal or piece of a hard lustrous or translucent mineral cut into shape with flat facets or smoothed and polished for use as an ornament” after suffix –</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ry</span><span class="font1"> is attached and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewel</span><span class="font1"> becomes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jewelry,</span><span class="font1"> it has meaning “decorative objects worn on your clothes or body which are usually made from valuable metals, such as gold and silver”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Morphology is the study of how words are formed. Many words are simply a stem with no other morphemes added, such as table. Words that are composed of more than one morpheme have undergone some type of morphological process. Morphological Process is a means of changing a stem to adjust its meaning to fit its syntactic and communication context. Morphological process can occur in word classes of noun, adjective, and verb. There are 3 types of Morphological Process, they are affixation, prefixation and suffixation. Morphological Process has 2 functions, they are Derivational and Inflectional. Under the suffixes that can change word from one grammatical class to another, we have basically</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">three groups. The presence of the suffixes signal the grammatical class of the words in which they appear, they are: noun suffixes, verb suffixes, adjective suffixes</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bauer, Laurie. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">English Word-Formation</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bauer, Laurie. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Watching English Change</span><span class="font1">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dewi, Ni Luh Putu. 2013. “Morphological Process of Noun. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fromkin, Victoria, and Robert Rodman, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Language. 5<sup>th</sup> ed.</span><span class="font1"> Fort Worth: Harcout Brace Jovanovich College Publisher. 1993.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Katamba, Francis. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font1">. Basingstoke: Macmillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Katamba, Francis. 1994. Modern Linguistics: Morphology. London: The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Macmilan Press Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lynne Hebert Remson, &quot;Oral Language.&quot; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literacy for the New Millennium</span><span class="font1">, ed. By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barbara J. Guzzetti. Praeger, 2007</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mahligai Magazine (November, 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Matthews, P. H. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font1">, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Matthews, P. H. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction to the theory of word structure</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford Dictionary 8th Edition</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yudiansyah, Randi. 2006. “The Morphological Process Of English Verb: Jakarta: Gunadarma University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, G. (1985). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Study Of Language</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Victoria Fromkin, Robert Rodman, and Nina Hyams, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Language, 10<sup>th</sup> ed. Cengage,2013.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">58</span></p>