---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGES IN ADELE’S SONG LYRICS"
author: "Putu Ayu Retna Yanthi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGES IN ADELE’S SONG LYRICS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>PUTU AYU RETNAYANTHI</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">081 835 1075</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Karya tulis ini berjudul “The Analysis of Figurative Language in Adele’s Song Lyrics” yang memiliki tiga tujuan. Pertama untuk mengetahui tipe-tipe majas yang ditemukan pada lirik-lirik lagu Adele. Kedua untuk menganalisa dan menjabarkan pengertian kontekstual pada majas yang digunakan dalam lirik lagu-lagu Adele. Teori pertama menggunakann teori majas oleh Knickerboker dan Reninger (1963) kemudian teori yang kedua menggunakan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Halliday (1978). Data primer yang digunakan pada analisis ini di antaranya adalah lirik-lirik dari Adele yang berjudul “Make You Feel My Love, Rolling in the Deep, Set Fire to the Rain and Turning Tables” diambil dari album dua album Adele yang berjudul “19” dan ”21”. Data sekunder diambil dari biografi singkat penyanyi Adele yang bersumber dari internet. Karya tulis ini menggunakan metode kajian pustaka dan observasi dalam analisis ini berlangsung. Majas yang ditemukan termasuk personifikasi, metafor, sinekdot, hiperbola, alusi, paradoks, simbol dan metafor (mati). Berdasarkan pengertian kontekstual dari keseluruhan lagu milik Adele menceritakan tentang pengkhianatan dan pertentangan dalam percintaan. Pendekatan konteks kesusastraan dalam hal ini puisi yang berupa lagu sangat membantu mendalami dan memperluas pengetahuan literatur kita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kesusastraan, lirik lagu, bahasa figuratif, pengertian kontekstual, biografi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGES IN ADELE’S SONG LYRICS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Meyer (1997:1), literature is a term used to describe written texts marked by careful use of language, including features such as creative metaphors, well-turned phrases, elegant syntax, rhyme, alliteration, which are aesthetically read or</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">intended by the author to be aesthetically read and are deliberately somewhat open in interpretation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are some similarities between a song and a poem. A song has to be rhythmic and so does a poem. Rhythm is one of the important elements in both songs and poetry. In fact, there is even a form of poetry which is made into music called a lyric poem. They can be used in songs to express the thoughts and feelings of the author. Music without words is poetry, only not in the generalized sense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">These days there were so many good songs with beautiful lyrics sung by new comer singer. One of them is Adele. Adele is an English singer-songwriter and musician whose works have topped music charts worldwide and received appraisal from critics and numerous awards, including the Grammy. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">19</span><span class="font1"> is her first album released in early 2008, meanwhile </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font1"> is her second album released in early 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the above background, there are two problems that are formulated, and they are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of figurative language are found in the song lyrics by Adele?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the contextual meaning of the figurative language used in the song lyrics by Adele?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this study are related to the problems formulated above. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of figurative language found in the song lyrics by Adele</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the contextual meaning of the figurative language used in the song lyrics by Adele</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In order to further analyze the data and solve the problems, the appropriate methodology is greatly required. The methodology in this study covers the data source, the method and technique of collecting data and the method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from some song lyrics from Adele’s two albums. One is song entitled, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span><span class="font1"> from her first album entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">19</span><span class="font1"> and three are songs entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep, Set Fire to the Rain,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span><span class="font1"> from her second album entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font1">. One song entitled, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span><span class="font1"> from her first album entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">19,</span><span class="font1"> which was released in early 2008 and three songs entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep, Set Fire to the Rain,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span><span class="font1"> from her second album entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">21,</span><span class="font1"> which was released in early 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This is a library research. First, the lyrics of the songs are copied from </span><a href="http://www.elyrics.net/read/a/adele-lyrics/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.elyrics.net/read/a/adele-lyrics/</span><span class="font1">.</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method applied in this study is the qualitative method. The data is descriptively analyzed. After finding the occurrences of figurative language in the data source and jotting them down, the first step in the analysis is identifying the types of figurative languages found by using the theory of figurative language types by Knikerboker and Reninger (1963). Theory from Halliday (1978) were put to support the understanding of linguistic context from the song lyrics. Each song was separately analyzed and the background information related to the songs was obtained from some reliable sites and presented to support the analyses of the contextual meaning of the figurative languages found.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5 . Results and Discussions</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis Of Figurative Language and Contextual meaning In Song Lyric Rolling In The Deep</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is important to firstly outline the context of situation. After knowing some information about the song, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">field</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tenor</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> are analysed based on Halliday’s theory. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tenor</span><span class="font1"> refers to the relationships between the people involved in the interaction. The relationship here is love relationship between Adele (the author and singer) and her ex-boyfriend. This is indicated by the occurrences of the sentence indicating that the love relationship is over, that is “the scars of your love remind me of us”. The word “scars”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">indicates a lasting effect left by an unpleasant experience. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Field</span><span class="font1"> refers the subject matter. This song is about the feelings of the singer towards her ex-boyfriend. Adele expresses her love memories and feelings through the combination of literal and figurative language with the most frequent figurative languages used in this study are metaphors, hyperboles and personifications. They are used to beautify the song and convey deeper meaning than that of the literal one. The literal language used supports the analysis of the figurative language used in the song lyrics. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> can be spoken if this song is sung and written only if the lyrics are not sung.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Personification, like other types of figurative languages plays an important role to beautify the lyrics. From the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span><span class="font1">, there are some personifications found in the first verse and the bridge of the lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Personifications appear in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">chorus</span><span class="font1">:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">The scars of your love remind me of us</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">They keep me thinking that we almost had it all </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">The scars of your love, they leave me breathless </span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chorus)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From those lines, we can see that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">love</span><span class="font1"> is treated like a human being. Love is something abstract, which we feel with heart. It is clear that the above underlined lines belong to personification because </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">love</span><span class="font1">, an abstract idea, inanimate object, is described as if it were human.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Symbols in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span><span class="font1">, there are some symbols found and they are presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There's a </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">fire</span><span class="font1"> starting in my heart</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reaching a fever pitch</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And it's bringing me out </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">the dark</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1 and bridge</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fire</span><span class="font1"> is identified as a symbol because the word ‘fire’ is used to represent another thing. Here, ‘fire’ represents the singer’s anger that is starting in her heart because of her ex-boyfriend. As explained in the previous analysis that for her ex-boyfriend played with her heart and she finally knew it, this can support the interpretation that “fire” in this line is a symbol of anger. Fire is often used as the symbol of anger because it can easily destroy things, so can anger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the line, “It's bringing me out </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">the dark</span><span class="font1">”, the dark here doesn’t literally mean the situation when there is no light. Instead, it represents the situation when we know nothing or haven’t known anything about the truth. The author finally gets out of the dark because she finally knows who her ex-boyfriend is.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperboles in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of exaggeration is quite common in literary works. Many songs use exaggeration to elevate and stir feelings. From the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep</span><span class="font1"> lyrics, there are some hyperboles found and they are presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">You had my heart inside your hand</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(chorus)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This line is identified as a hyperbole because we cannot really have a heart inside of our hands. This line literally means that she really loved him, that her love was only for him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Figurative Language in the Song Lyrics </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Make you Feel My Love</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After knowing some information about the song, the context of situation, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">field</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tenor</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> based on Halliday’s theory need to be determined. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tenor</span><span class="font1"> refers to the relationships between the people involved in the interaction. The relationship here is a relationship between a woman and a man. The woman loves the man deeply. This is indicated by the occurrences of many hyperbolic sentences indicating that she would do anything to make him be her love. This is clearly indicated through the title of the song, Make You Feel My Love. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Field</span><span class="font1"> refers the subject matter. This song is about the feelings of the woman towards the man that she loves. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> can be spoken if this song is sung and written only if the lyrics are not sung.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphors in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor</span><span class="font1"> is the type of figurative language which is mainly found in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span><span class="font1"> lyrics. The first and the second ones used in the first verse are underlined and presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">When the rain is blowing in your face</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">And the whole world is on your case</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I could offer you a warm embrace</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To make you feel my love</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The “rain” in this line does not literally mean “rain”. It represents the hardship. This interpretation is supported by the lines following this metaphor. The next line, “And the whole world is on your case” also contain metaphorical meaning. When we say &quot;someone is on my case&quot;, it means that &quot;someone is meddling with my affairs&quot;. Therefore, in this case, &quot;the whole world is on your case&quot; is a metaphor that means &quot;the whole world is looking at you, judging you, and meddling with your everyday life. In this context, the author would with all her heart embraces and support her love. This is indicated by the line following this metaphor “I could offer you a warm embrace”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperboles in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hyperbole is the second most frequent type of figurative used in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Make You Feel My Love</span><span class="font1"> lyrics and they are presented along with the analysis below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When the evening shadows and the stars appear</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And there is no one there to dry your tears</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">I could hold you for a million years</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To make you feel my love</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Verse 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is clearly a hyperbole. No one can really live that long. Humans in general can only live for 70-80 years. Therefore, it can be said that ‘a million years’ here means ‘as long as the author lives’. The use of hyperboles in the lyrics along with the use of metaphors creates a special effect. The listeners would be blown through the use of the suitable exaggeration.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Of Figurative Languages In “Set Fire To The Rain”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on information about the background of the writing of the song, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">field</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tenor</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> based on Halliday’s are determined. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Field</span><span class="font1"> refers to the subject matter. This song is about the conflicting elements in a love relationship. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tenor</span><span class="font1"> refers to the relationships between the people involved in the interaction. The relationship here is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">love </span><span class="font1">relationship between Adele (the singer) and her ex-boyfriend. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> is spoken if the song is sung and written if the lyrics are not sung.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphors in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Set Fire to the Rain</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Four metaphors are found throughout the lyrics to the song </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Set Fire to the Rain</span><span class="font1">. Below are the data followed by an analysis for each figurative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">I let it fall, my heart,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">And as it fell you rose to claim it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">It was dark and I was over</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Until you kissed my lips and you saved me</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Verse 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Verse 1 of the lyrics describes an event in which the writer felt alive again with the presence of a lover. The first two lines are parallel in meaning with the last two lines. First, the writer felt dead inside, which is expressed by the lines “I let it fall, my heart” and “It was dark and I was over”. Suddenly, someone came and he brought her back to life again, which is expressed by the lines “And as it fell you rose to claim it” and “Until you kissed my lips and you saved me.” Here, the writer is comparing a dead, meaningless life to letting her heart fall and being in the dark and further still, the “death” was made clearer by the statement “I was over”. She was not really dead of course, but she was comparing her life with that of a dead person (i.e. having no feeling and being in the dark). Next, the lover saved her from such life by rising to claim her heart, which means he made her able to feel again. Of course all the actions in this verse did not happen literally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Set Fire to the Rain</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The writer also uses personifications in the lyrics of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Set Fire to the Rain</span><span class="font1">. Followings are the data followed by an analysis for each personification:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">That heart you caught must be waiting for you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Coda)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Whenever an inanimate object or abstraction is given human qualities or abilities, a personification occurs. In the coda in the second line, the writer gives an abstract object (her heart) the ability to perform an action (to wait for someone, that is, her ex-lover).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synecdoche in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Set Fire to the Rain</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As explained in the earlier chapter, a figure of speech in which a part is made to represent the whole or vice versa is called a synecdoche. Synecdoche is also employed by the writer as a means of expression in her lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">That heart you caught</span><span class="font1"> must be waiting for you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Coda)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When the writer wrote “the heart you caught must be waiting for you”, it could not be in a literal sense. What she meant is that she herself is waiting, which is represented by her “heart”. Here, a part is made to represent the whole and therefore this is a synecdoche.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Figurative Languages in the Song Lyric of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After knowing some information about the song, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">field</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tenor</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mode</span><span class="font1"> based on Halliday’s theory need to be determined. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Field</span><span class="font1"> refers to the subject matter. This song is about the breakdown of a relationship. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tenor</span><span class="font1"> refers to the role relationships between the people involved in the interaction. The relationship here is love relationship between a woman (Adele, the author) and her ex-boyfriend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A personification occurs in the first line of the coda.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">the thunder calls for me</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Coda)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Here, the thunder, which is an inanimate object, is given human qualities or an ability that is the ability to call for someone. Therefore, this is called a personification. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">relation to the contexts of situation, the line “the thunder calls for me” would be best interpreted as representing the writer’s courage and readiness to end her relationship with her boyfriend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hyperbole quite frequently occurs in the lyrics of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span><span class="font1">. The whole Verse 1 is full of hyperbolic statement, and so are the third and fourth lines of Verse 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Close enough to start </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">a war</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">All that I have</span><span class="font1"> is on the floor</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">God only</span><span class="font1"> knows what we're fighting for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">All that I say, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">you always say more</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Verse 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hyperboles are scattered throughout the entire verse. Firstly, it occurs in the use of the word ‘war’. This word is hyperbolically used to mean merely a fight. Then, there is the expression that all that the writer has is on the floor. While it is true that during the fight which involves a party turning the tables things would fall onto the floor, but obviously they are not “all” that the writer has. The line “God only knows what we're fighting for” gives emphasis that both parties are no longer sure what the cause of their problem is. Finally, there is the statement “All that I say, you always say more” which serves to explain that the quarrel has become very intense and seemingly endless.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dead Metaphor in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turning Tables</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Adele is found to use at least two metaphors that are already known and established in the society, whose meanings are agreed upon. They are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Under your thumb I can't breathe</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Bridge)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The phrase “under one’s thumb” is widely used in English when someone wants to convey that he or she is under the control of someone else.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are eight kinds of figurative languages found in four songs of Adele such as: personification, metaphor, synecdoche, hyperbole, allusion, paradox, symbols and dead metaphor. These kinds of figurative languages are used by the writer in order to make her creation in this case the songs look alive so we can feel the condition that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">writer tries to show in that song. The use of the contextual meaning in this study also opens up all the meanings and the purposes from four song lyrics by Adele. The words that firstly look complicated can be elaborated in the contextual meaning so that they can be better understood. So, by using the figurative languages and their contextual meaning, the writer wants to attract our attention and slowly leads us to the theme.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M. A. K. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and meaning</span><span class="font1">. Maryland: University Park Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker,</span><span class="font1"> Kenneth Leslie &amp;&nbsp;Harry Willard </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reninger. 1963. Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer. 1997. What is Literature? A Definition Based on Prototypes. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Work Papers of the Summer Institute of Linguistics</span><span class="font1">. North Dakota: University of North Dakota. Volume 41 1 Online. available from URL</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.und.nodak.edu/dept/linguistics/wp/1997Meyer.PDF%20visited%20on%2002-07-2012"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.und.nodak.edu/dept/linguistics/wp/1997Meyer.PDF visited on 02-07</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.und.nodak.edu/dept/linguistics/wp/1997Meyer.PDF%20visited%20on%2002-07-2012"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">2012</span><span class="font1">.</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.elyrics.net/read/a/adele-lyrics"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.elyrics.net/read/a/adele-lyrics</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/adele/setfiretotherain.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/adele/setfiretotherain.html</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/adele/turningtables.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/adele/turningtables.html</span></a></p>