---
layout: full_article
title: "THE IMPACT OF USING PICTURES AS MEDIA OF TEACHING ENGLISH VOCABULARY FOR KINDERGARTEN STUDENTS AT KUMARA LOKA SCHOOL, DENPASAR"
author: "Putu Deviana Eka Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h2><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE IMPACT OF USING PICTURES AS MEDIA OF TEACHING</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ENGLISH VOCABULARY FOR KINDERGARTEN STUDENTS</span><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>AT KUMARA LOKA SCHOOL, DENPASAR</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Putu Deviana Eka Pratiwi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Cultures</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption2"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ilmiah yang berjudul “The Impact of Using Pictures as Media of Teaching English Vocabulary for Kindergarten Students at Kumara Loka School, Denpasar” bertujuan untuk menganalisis jenis gambar yang digunakan untuk memotivasi siswa TK untuk belajar kosa kata bahasa Inggris dan efektivitas penggunaan gambar dalam mengajar kosa kata bahasa Inggris . Data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diambil dari siswa dari dua kelas di TK Kumara Lokaschool . Mereka dipilih karena mereka tidak pernah menggunakan gambar dalam pengajaran kosakata sebelumnya . Data diambil dengan menggunakan ujian tengah dan akhir , kemudian dianalisis sesuai dengan hasil tes di dua mata pelajaran bahasa Inggris . Analisis itu sendiri didasarkan pada PAP ( PolaAcuanPenilaian ) . Sementara itu, data dianalisis berdasarkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Harmer ( 2001) dan teori lain dibawa oleh Hill ( 1990) .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temuan menunjukkan bahwa jenis gambar yang digunakan adalah flashcard. Flashcard dibagi menjadi dua jenis , yaitu Big Picture Flashcard dan Small Picture Flashcard . Sedangkan dari pengujian menunjukkan bahwa siswa kelas A yang diajarkan dengan menggunakan gambar mendapat rata-rata yang lebih tinggi dalam dua mata pelajaran bahasa Inggris daripada siswa di kelas B yang tidak diajarkan dengan menggunakan gambar . Berdasarkan hasil penelitian , dapat dikatakan bahwa menggunakan gambar efektif dan cukup sukses dan juga berjalan dengan baik dalam situasi kelas . Dengan menggunakan gambar , siswa merasa lebih menarik dan menikmati melakukan kegiatan di kelas , juga dapat memberikan siswa kesempatan untuk actived dalam belajar kosa kata bahasa Inggris .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Kosakata , Gambar , Flashcard , TK .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">English as an international language that is used throughout the world is used in many fields of life. English teaching involves four language skills, they are Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. In teaching and learning a language, there are four aspects that support four language skills above such as : grammar, vocabulary, spelling and pronunciation that are also taught in English teaching and learning process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of pictures as the stimulus for improving the vocabulary learning has been one of the most popular ways of teaching English. Pictures are commonly used for learning new words related with the topic presented by teacher. Using pictures is one of the teaching aids that teacher depend on in their teaching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems of this study which could be formulated as follows: (1) What types of pictures are used in teaching English vocabulary for kindergarten students at Kumara Loka School? (2) How is the effectiveness of using pictures in teaching English vocabulary for kindergarten students?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two specific aims of this study, they are: (1) To identify what types of pictures that are used for kindergarten students in teaching English vocabulary. (2) To analyze the effectiveness of using pictures in teaching English vocabulary.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Research method is the procedure used in writing scientific paper, which includes the method of determination of the source data, the process of collecting data, and how the data analyzed, resulting to the finding of the research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULT AND DISSCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Pictures Used as Media in Teaching English Vocabulary for Kindergarten students at Kumara Loka School</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Hill (1990;6) the use of picture can motivate the students, make them want to pay attention and want to take a part. Pictures also contribute to the context in which language is being used, it can be described an objective way or interpreted subjectively. Pictures can stimulate and provide information to be referred to in conversation, discussion and story telling. There are some reasons why pictures helpful in teaching English vocabulary, pictorial material can be used to supplement whatever the textbook the teacher is using, also picture can be used to provide more practice of the exercises that students have done using the text book. Pictorial material also allows for practicing the meaning of vocabulary presented by the teacher. There are also some advantages of pictures uses such as, pictures are cheap and widely available, everyone can get them in any magazine, internet or books and pictures are flexible, it easly kept, useful for various types of activities. Pictures also can help the students to stay on focus attention and develop critical judgement and also pictures are personal, the teacher choose the pictures by themself. In this study, the types of pictures used to teach English vocabulary for Kindergarten students at Kumara Loka school are devided into two as proposed by Hill (1990;5), namely : big pictures flashcard and small pictures flashcard.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Big Picture Flashcard</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Big picture flashcard has a size about 15 x 20 cm or larger. This kind of flashcard are only used by the teacher on the first day of the topic introduced. This is because to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">be able to control the class better, in which all students are asked to focus themselves</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to the white board (where the big flashcard was attached). Example :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Object &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Picture an eye.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Teacher activity : said “eye”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Students activity : said “eye”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Teacher activity : said “this is my eye” and touched their eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Student activity : said “this is my eye” and touched their eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In teaching parts of body, especially “head” as in the example above, the teacher would start the lesson by naming all parts of the head, before focusing on them one by one. In learning English vocabulary of “eye”, teacher asked the students to see the picture of an eye and repeated after her. When the teacher said “eye”, the students should repeated by saying “eye” and touched their own eye. The teacher then put the vocabulary into a sentence “this is my eye” and the students should repeat it while touched their own eye. After the students learn and could memorize all parts of the head, they then were asked to say all parts of their head one by one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This technique was also applied by the teacher when she taught parts of house and school.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Small Picture Flashcard</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Small picture flashcard has a size smaller that 15 x 20cm. Consider to the time, small picture flashcard was choosen in order to build the students’ understanding one by one more effectively. In teaching parts of body, especially “head”, parts of school especially “classroom”, parts of house especially “bedroom” the teacher would start the lesson by mentioning all parts of the lesson in the small picture to the whole class, before focusing on them one by one. That was a little bit different when using small picture flashcard, the teacher asked the students to work in pairs. The students asked</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">each other with the question and answer like what she has been done before. For example :</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Subject</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: Parts of head</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Object</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: picture of mouth</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Student 1 activity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: said “ mouth”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Student 2 activity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: said “mouth”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Student 1 activity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: asked “ what is this?”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Student 2 activity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: said “ this is hair” and pointed the hair</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">This kind of flashcards are used more frequently. This is because by using small picture flashcard the students will build their understanding more effectively and they could know how every parts looks like more clearly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Effectiveness of Using Pictures in Teaching English Vocabulary for Kindergarten Students</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The remark of the students in Kindergarten will be presented in a table according to PAP, Purposed by Stamboel (1982) :</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ability</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Qualification</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Prediction</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">80%-100%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Excellent</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">65%-79%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">B</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">55%-64%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">C</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Fair</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">46%-54%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">D</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Poor</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">0%-45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">E</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Very Poor</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Besides, the average of the ability is remarked by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">PAP</span><span class="font2"> table, the following formula is also applied:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X = </span><span class="font0">Σ</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>X</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">N</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">% = </span><span class="font0">Σ</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>X</sup></span><span class="font2"> x 100%</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">N</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">X &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: the average</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Σ</span><span class="font2">X &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: total score</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: total students/total subjects</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The discussion of the result is based on two English subjects, tested in the middle and the final test, they are Listening and Speaking skills.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Subject Items</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Middle Test Questions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Final Test Questions</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Listening</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">5 questions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">10 questions</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Speaking</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">5 questions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">10 questions</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result of Middle Test</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The test shows the result of speaking and listening average scores in the middle test of two classes, which Class A who have been treated with pictures get higher average score in both subjects than Class B who have been treated without pictures. It is clearly show Class A get 74% in listening and 77% in speaking , meanwhile Class B get 70% in both subjects.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result of Final Test</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The test shows the result of speaking and listening average scores in the final test of two classes, which Class A who have been treated with pictures get higher average score in both subjects than Class B who have been treated without pictures. It is clearly show Class A get 79% in listening and 80% in speaking , meanwhile Class B get 69% in listening and 68% in speaking. From the result Class B average score in both subjects are decrases, in contrast with Class A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">average scores are increasing in both subjects.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>VI. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the result of the analysis the impact of using pictures in teaching English vocabulary for kindergarten student at Kumara Loka school, it can be concluded that :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The types of pictures that were used in teaching English vocabulary was Flashcard. The teacher was used two kinds of flashcard, they are Big Picture Flashcard and Small Picture Flashcard. Big picture flashcard was choosen in order to control the class better and it was used to introduce all parts of the house, school and head, so the big one is required. Meanwhile, considering to the time small picture flashcard was choosen in order to build the students’ understanding more effectively and it was used more frequently than big picture flashcard.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Teaching vocabulary using pictures is more effective than teaching it without using pictures, because pictures are more interesting. It can be seen from the result of the students of two classes in Kumara Lokaschool, that Class A who has been treated with pictures got higher average score in the middle ( 75%) and final tests ( 80% ), than Class B who has been treated without pictures , its average score is 70% in the middle and 68,5% in the final test. Class B average score decreases (1,5%) meanwhile Class A average score increases (5%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>VII. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Aitchison, Jean. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Words in The Mind.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford, UK: B.Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Asfa, Inta Aulia.2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Effectiveness of Using Describing Pictures to Iprove Students Speaking Skill in Descriptive text (An Experimental Research at the Eight Grade Students of SMP H.Isriati Semarang in the Academic year of 2010/2011).</span><span class="font2"> Semarang: Walisongo State Institute for Islamic Studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bowen, Morgan Betty. 1973. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Look Here! Visual Aids in Language Teaching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">London: Essential Language-Teaching Series.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, Douglas. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Language Learning and Teaching, 2nd ed</span><span class="font2">. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bruner, Jerome. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Process of Education.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chomsky, Noam. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rules and Representations.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Edward, David Allen. 1997.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Classroom Technique, Foreign Language and English as a Second Language.</span><span class="font2">New York:Horcout Brave Jovanovich.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Harmer, Jeremy. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The practice of English Language Teaching.</span><span class="font2"> London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hill, David A. 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2">Prentice Hall Collage.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/picture"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/picture</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kridalaksana,Harimurti, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1993.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">KamusLinguistik,edisi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ke-3.</span><span class="font2">Jakarta: PT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GramediaPustakaUtama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mudriqah, Rifqi. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Effectiveness of Using Movie in Speaking Descriptive Style teaching.</span><span class="font2"> Semarang: Walisongo State Institute for Islamic Studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rizky. M. Syaeful U. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Picture Games to Improve Students’ Motivation in Learning Vocabulary.</span><span class="font2"> English Education Journal. </span><a href="http://journal.unnes.ac.id/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://journal.unnes.ac.id/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shing Tang Li. 1982.English Teaching Forum, XIX, No./ 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stamboel, Soemawan. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">PrinsipTeknikPengukurandanPenilaian di DuniaPendidikan.</span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Mutiara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Susanto, NugrohoNoto. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Contribution of Speaking Practice with The Native Speaker Toward Students Speaking Ability,</span><span class="font2"> Mataram: Universitas NegeriMataram</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Szyke, Brazna. 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Using Picture as Teaching Aid.</span><span class="font2"> English Teaching Forum Vol. XIX No. 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">UR, Penny. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Course in Language Teaching: Practice and Theory. </span><span class="font2">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Watson, J. 1928. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The ways of behaviorism</span><span class="font2">. New York, NY: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Brothers. Pub.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Webster, Merriem, 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ninth Collegiate Dictionary.</span><span class="font2">New York: Merriem Webster’s inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wright, Andrew. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Picture for Language Learning : Cambridge Handbook for Language Teacher.</span><span class="font2"> USA: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yunus, Noor Azlina. 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Preparing and Using English Language Teaching. </span><span class="font2">Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.</span></p>