---
layout: full_article
title: "Sustainable Development Strategy  For Ecotourism at Tangkahan, North Sumatera"
author: "Agung Suryawan Wiranatha"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-19437 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-19437"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-19437"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.2. No.1. (2015): 1-8</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1</sup>Sustainable Development Strategy</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">For Ecotourism at Tangkahan, North Sumatera</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Agung Suryawan Wiranatha</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Udayana University, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Coressponding author: </span><a href="mailto:balitruly@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">balitruly@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ARTICLE INFO &nbsp;&nbsp;ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">20 October 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Accepted</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">02 February 2015 Available online 10 March 2015</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan is located at the edge of Gunung Leuser National Park, within the Sub-regency of Batang Serangan, Regency of Langkat, Province of North Sumatera, Indonesia. The Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan relies upon a distinctive tourist attraction, namely </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">elephant trekking</span><span class="font3"> that is undertaken along the edge of the river and in the Gunung Leuser National Park (GLNP), as well as the diversity of flora and fauna available at the GLNP. There are many activities can be undertaken by visitors at this destination, such as: elephant trekking, wildlife watching at the GLNP, trekking at the edge of Buluh river and come back by swimming wearing life jacket, tubing (traditional rafting) and canoeing at Batang Serangan river, swimming at Buluh river, camping and outbound activities at the camping ground, village tour at sub-village of Kuala Buluh, and traditional massage (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pijat / kusuk</span><span class="font3">) by local therapist. The research was undertaken to develop strategies which could be used as guidance in managing and developing this ecotourism destination. The proposed strategies were based upon the results of SWOT analysis. Data were assembled from the visitors’ survey, focus group discussions and workshop involving tourism stakeholders and several interested groups. Based upon the analysis of existing tourist attractions offered at the Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan, it could be said that the nature based tourist attractions were considered to be interesting up to very interesting. The uniqueness of elephant jungle trekking in the GLNP was the tourism icon of the Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan. Camping ground, plant nursery, and agriculture plantation were potential to be promoted as tourist attractions at the Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan. Based upon the results of SWOT analysis of the Ecotourism Destination of Tangkahan, several strategies could be recommended for ecotourism development at Tangkahan, namely, to maintain the diversity of flora and fauna at GLNP as ecotourism attractions at Tangkahan, to develop nature based tourism with consideration on the principles of ecotourism and conservation, to improve safety measures for visitors and guides who are undertaking tourism activities at the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan, to revitalize the traditional music and dances that are existed at the community of Tangkahan to become a tourist attraction, to establish an effort to extend the elephant trekking attraction that has been available at Tangkahan, to increase the number of elephants at the Community Respons Unit (CRU) Tangkahan, which are available for elephant trekking for tourists in order to accommodate an increasing demand of the elephant trekking in the near future, to organise the schedule of elephant trekking activities during rainy season, to improve the quality and quantity of the accommodation available at Tangkahan, to establish an emergency system (Search and Rescue - SAR) at Tangkahan, establish a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1</sup> </span><span class="font1">Paper was presented at the Asia Tourism Forum 2012, Bandung on 8<sup>th</sup> – 10<sup>th</sup> May 2012.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">solid waste management system at Tangkahan, to develop sewarage treatment systems for accommodation and restaurant at Tangkahan, to develop land transportation facilities (particulatly roads) at Tangkahan, to improve the accesibility to the locations of tourist attractions within the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan, to establish a banking facility at Tangkahan, to build public toilets, as well as to establish a management of public toilet at Tangkahan, to establish an institution to manage parking area at Tangkahan and to establish electricity networks at the centre of Tangkahan tourist area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keywords: ecotourism, elephant trekking, wildlife watching, sustainable development.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Introduction</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Eco-tourism is getting popular as an alternative form of tourism activity which is expected to bring benefits for the regional economy and to contribute to the nature conservation. Some countries have implemented eco-tourism in managing national park. Eco-tourism has been recognized to contribute to nature conservation, and to bring sustainable benefits to the park management, local community, and government (Sudarto, 1999). The eco-tourism type of national park management is also possible to be implemented in the area of Gunung Leuser National Park (GLNP) that covers an area of 1,094,692 hectares within the region of two provinces, namely North Sumatera and Nanggroe Aceh Darusalam (NAD). The GLNP has various tourist attractions which also consider being exotic, such as orangutan at Bukit Lawang (North Sumatera), and elephants at Conservation Response Unit (CRU) Tangkahan (North Sumatera).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This paper focuses on the eco-tourism at Tangkahan in which the elephants are the main attraction. Some elephants have been taken care by the CRU Tangkahan for jungle patrol and to protect the agricultural area near the forest from the wild elephants. However, these elephants have also become attractions for tourists, such as elephant trekking (Gunawan, 2008). The tourist areas of Tangkahan has been known as one of the popular eco-tourism destinations at North Sumatera Province. However, eco-tourism development at Tangkahan was cosidered to face some challenges, such as: lack of community awareness on nature conservation and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">environmental sanitation, lack of accessibility and tourism facilities, and lack of supports from local government (Langkat Regency) and provincial government (North Sumatera Province).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding the above challenges, this paper aims to provide some directions which were obtained from an academic study and analysis in order to develop sustainable ecotourism development at Tangkahan. The objectives of the study were:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to analysis of existing tourist attractions and facilities available at Tangkahan;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to undertake an analysis of internal and external factors related to eco-tourism development at Tangkahan; and</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to establish the strategies and programs that could be used as guidance in managing and developing ecotourism destination at Tangkahan by the tourism stakeholders.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The study was undertaken in several steps, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;research preparation, including: literature review, developing research instruments (check lists, questionnaires, and interview guide), and undertaking a coordination effort with provincial and local government, and Kantor BB TNGL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(ii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;data collection: undertaken by field survey, including on site observation, distributing questionnaires and interview to visitors, tourism stakeholders and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;local</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">community, and Focus Group Discussion (FGD) involving tourism stakeholders and local community (Riley, 1991).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(iii) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;data analysis: undertaken by using tourism destination indicators to analysis of existing tourist attractions and facilities available at the study area, level of importance analysis, Internal and External Factors (IFAS-EFAS) Analysis, SWOT analysis (expert judgement) (Rangkuti, 1998).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(iv) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;workshop: undertaken in order to develop a recommendation &nbsp;&nbsp;of eco-tourism</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">development strategies and programs, involving tourism &nbsp;&nbsp;industry, local</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">government tourism authorities, local community and NGOs at the study area.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Results and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Destcription of the study areas</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Eco-tourism Destination of Tangkahan has been relied upon a distinctive tourist attraction, namely elephant trekking that is undertaken along the river edge and in the GLNP, as well as the diversity of flora and fauna available at the GLNP. Other tourist attractions at Tangkahan, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nature based attractions, such as: Batang Serangan river and Buluh river, Alur Garut and Gelugur water fall, Buluh river and Gelugur hot springs, caves (Gua Kalong, Gua Kambing Hutan, and Gua Langkup Gendek), and palm oil plantation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Culture based attractions, such as: culture and tradition of several ethnics i.e. Karo, Melayu and Java with their traditional dances and music such as: Piso Surit and Terang Bulan Dance (Karo); Jaran Kepang &amp;&nbsp;Ludruk Dance (Java); and Sekapur Sirih and Serampang Dua Belas Dance (Melayu)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There were various tourist activities that could be done by visitors at Tangkahan, such as: &nbsp;elephant trekking, tubing (traditional</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">rafting) at Batang Serangan river, swimming at Buluh river, camping and outbound activities at the camping ground, wildlife watching at GLNP, village tour at Kuala Buluh subvillage, trekking at Buluh river and come back by swimming wearing life jacket, canoeing at Batang Serangan river, and traditional massage (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pijat / Kusuk</span><span class="font3">) by local therapists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tourism facilities and services were also already available at Tangkahan, but they were considered to be insufficient yet. The facilities and services were including: &nbsp;&nbsp;6 units</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accommodation (bungalow and homestay) about 42 rooms with simple facilities, 5 units restaurant / </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rumah makan</span><span class="font3"> with 25 tables, one travel agent namely Community Tour Operator (CTO) owned by Lembaga Pariwisata Tangkahan (LPT), and 11 tourist guides who can speak English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eco-tourism Tangkahan was supported by several supporting facilities, such as : a visitor centre, a traditional water-based transport made from wood and bamboo (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rakit</span><span class="font3">), elephants for elephant trekking activities, foot path for trekking in the GLNP, elephant trail, rubber tube that can be rent by tourist for </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tubing</span><span class="font3"> in the river, elephant garden which has been planted for sugar cane and grass (elephant feeds) with organic fertilizer from elephant’s manure, camping ground, and 2 units public toilets located at the back of LPT’s Office. However, there was no currency exchanger, and no electricity network by PLN and no telephone line by Telkom to the tourism area of Tangkahan. Communication can be made through seluler phone only. Parking area was also considered to be limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan has already been known by international tourists. In year 2008, there were 979 international tourists visiting Tangkahan. The number of international tourists visiting this destination has increased sharply comparing to year 2005 (316 tourists), i.e. increased in average of 69.9% per annum. The number of domestic tourists visiting this destination was much more significant than international tourists. During the year 2008, the number of domestic tourists visiting Tangkahan was 8,761 tourists. Comparing to the number of domestic tourists visiting this destination in year 2005 (6,476 tourists), it increased in average of 11.8% per annum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the survey undertaken to international tourists, it could be said that: </span><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">67% tourists got information regarding</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">website</span><span class="font3">, and 33% tourists got information from other sources (friends, travel agent and others).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The impressions on eco-tourism at Tangkahan were mostly positive, such as on environmental management (94%), people friendliness (83%), and tourism destination management (100%).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">72 % tourists visited Tangkahan for the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">first time, and 28 % tourists have visited Tangkahan for more than one time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">89% tourists suggested that souvenir shops</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">should be available at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All tourists would like to come back again to Tangkahan sometime.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">50% tourists stayed more than one day at</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan, and 94% tourists stayed in bungalow or homestay at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">67 % tourists spent their money more than</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Rp. 1,000,000 during their visit at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The employment opportunities resulted from the accommodation and restaurant at Tangkahan were estimated about 32 persons at accommodations and about 10 persons at restaurants.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Anaysis of tourist attractions and facilities</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the analysis of existing tourist attractions and facilities at Tangkahan, it could be said that:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Nature based tourist attractions at</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan were considered to be interesting up to very interesting. The uniqueness of elephant jungle trekking in the GLNP is the tourism icon of Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Culture based tourist attractions at</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan were considered to be interesting. Traditional foods, traditional medicines and local tradition were considered to be potential to be promoted as tourist attractions in order to support eco-tourism at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Man-made tourist attractions at Tangkahan were considered to be interesting up to very interesting. Camping ground, plant nursery, and agriculture plantation were potential to be promoted as tourist attractions at Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accessibility to Tangkahan was considered to be not good, particularly in term of transportation and communication facilities.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism facilities and services at Tangkahan were considered to be good</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">and sufficient, especially restaurant/ </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rumah makan</span><span class="font3">. However, accommodation and travel agent, as well as banking facility, public toilet and parking area were considered to be not sufficient yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the results of analysis of level of importance of tourist attractions and facilities, it could be said that:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There were some tourist attractions considered to be very important, namely: diversity of fauna, uniqueness of fauna, view of nature, and tourist activities available at the destination.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There were several tourism facilities and services considered to be very important, namely: restaurant / </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rumah makan</span><span class="font3"> and public toilet.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Some tourist attractions were considered to be important, namely: diversity and uniqueness of flora, handicrafts, traditional arts, traditional foods, traditional architecture, agriculture plantation, and camping ground.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Several tourism facilities and services were considered to be important, namely: accommodation, travel agent, and banking facilities (including currency exchanger).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Several accessibility &nbsp;indicators were</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">considered to be important, namely: transportation and communication facilities.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Analysis of Internal and External Factors</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Some internal factors were considered to be the strengths of Tangkahan as an ecotourism destination, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist attractions (nature, culture, and man-made)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourist activities available at the tourist destination</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism facilities (accommodation and restaurant)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Land zoning of the tourism area</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Institutions related to tourism management (community or private)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Community awareness on tourism (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sadar wisata</span><span class="font3">)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Community and tourism industry awareness on nature conservation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">On the other hand, some internal factors were also considered to be the weaknesses of Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accessibility (land transportation)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism supporting facilities (public toilet, parking area, health-care facilities)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human resources for tourism</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism marketing</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Capability of the local community to invest in tourism</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cleanliness and environmental sanitation</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Risk of accident during tourist activities.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the analysis of internal factors (IFAS), the overall internal factors at Tangkahan got score of 2.66. It means that these internal factors were considered as the strengths of Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Several external factors were considered to be the opportunities for Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interest of tourists to visit a tourism destination</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;World trend of ‘back to nature’</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Situation of politics and security (global and national)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Government role in tourism development (regency, province and central government)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collaboration with other institutions.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">However, some external factors were considered to be the threats for Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Economic situation (global and national)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Competitors from similar type of destinations</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Illegal logging</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sustainability of the tourist attraction (elephant trekking).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the analysis of external factors (EFAS), the overall external factors at Tangkahan got score of 2.60. It means that these external factors were considered as the opportunities of Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Recommendation for Ecotourism developmet</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The strategies and programs that are recommended for tourism development at Tangkahan as an eco-tourism destination, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To maintain the diversity of flora and fauna at GLNP as ecotourism &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;attractions &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To identify flora and fauna that are available at the GLNP Tangkahan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To publish a pocket book about flora &nbsp;and fauna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">available at &nbsp;the &nbsp;GLNP</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To carry out a socialization program for guides, tourists and community about conservation principles and the law of endanger species protection.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;develop &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tourist</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">attractions based on wild fauna available at the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan, such as bird and butterfly watching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To develop nature based tourism with consideration on the principles of eco-tourism and conservation.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To establish code of conduct (CoC) and standard operating procedure (SOP) for tourism activities that are available at the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To carry out training on CoC, SOP and the principles of eco-tourism for guides who work at the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To inform visitors about CoC for tourism activities at the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To improve safety measures for visitors and guides who are undertaking tourism activities at the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To provide life jackets for</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">visitors and guides who are doing tubing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To provide standard outbound equipments and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">qualified outbound guides for outbound activities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To carry out training on First Aid and providing First Aid kit for guides who work at the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To provide insurance cover for visitors and guides who are doing high risk tourism activities (such as elephant trekking, elephant jungle patrol, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tubing, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">outbound) at the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To revitalize the traditional</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">music and dances that are existed at the community of Tangkahan to become a tourist attraction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To empower the traditional dance group by providing trainers and supporting with new music instruments and costumes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) To perform the traditional music and dances with traditional foods for tourists in a package called a traditional dinner night.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To establish an effort to extend the elephant trekking attraction that has been available at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To propose a request for the continuation of the existence of the CRU and elephants at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To increase the number of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">elephants at the CRU Tangkahan, which are available for elephant trekking for tourists &nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;&nbsp;order to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accommodate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;increasing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">demand of &nbsp;the elephant</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">trekking in the near future.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To propose a request</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to obtain more elephants that are available at the CRU Tangkahan in the near future.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To organise the schedule of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">elephant trekking activities during rainy season.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To organise the schedule of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">elephant trekking activities during rainy season, therefore there will be a balance between tourism and conservation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">8)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To improve the quality and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">quantity &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accommodations available at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To improve the quality of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accommodations belong to the local community by renovating and repairing the existing accommodations, and should be supported by soft loans from government or bank.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) To increase the number of better &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;quality</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">accommodations that are available at Tangkahan by inviting investors to build a new accommodation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">9)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To establish an emergency</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">system (Search and Rescue -SAR) at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;provide &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SAR</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">equipments (rubber boat and other equipments).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) To facilitate the availability of helath-care facilities (clinic or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Puskesmas</span><span class="font3">) at the location of eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">10)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To establish a solid waste management system at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To establish a community</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">based institution for solid waste management at Tangkahan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;under</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">supervision of LPT.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To increase the availability of garbage bins at the strategic locations within the area of eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To improve the role of local government in solid waste collection by providing a truck to collect garbage at the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">11)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To develop sewarage treatment systems for accommodations and restaurants at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To build a simple sewarage</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">treatment &nbsp;plant &nbsp;that is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">suitable &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;each</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accommodation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">restaurant at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">12)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To develop land transportation facilities (particulatly roads) at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To improve the quality of roads toward the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan, especially the roads at the palm oil plantation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">13)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To improve the accesibility to the locations of tourist attractions &nbsp;within the &nbsp;ecotourism &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;destination &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To build a more permanent foot paths connecting amongst the locations of tourist attractions within the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) To build a simple hanging bridge as a mean to cross the Batang Serangan river from the back of LPT Office.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">14)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To establish a banking facility at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To establish a currency exchanger (a business unit under the LPT) in collaboration with a currency exchanger company that is existed in Medan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">15)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To build public toilets, as well as to establish a management of public toilet at Tangkahan.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To build new public toilets at several strategic places at Tangkahan, particularly at the camping ground, and near the hot spring at Buluh river.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To build new public toilets at sub-village Kuala Buluh, in order to accommodate tourists during their activities (village tour) at sub-village Kuala Buluh.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To establish a management of public toilets at Tangkahan, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;under</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">supervision of the LPT.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">16)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;&nbsp;To establish an institution to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">manage parking area at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: &nbsp;a) To establish a management</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of parking area by the local community &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;under</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">supervision of the LPT.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">17)</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy</span><span class="font3">: To establish electricity networks into the Tangkahan tourist area.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Programs</span><span class="font3">: a) To facilitate the extension of electricity networks up to the centre of Tangkahan tourist area. It is required about 10 electricity poles to reach the centre of Tangkahan tourist area from the existing electricity pole.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Conclusions</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The uniqueness of tourist attraction of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">elephant jungle trekking</span><span class="font3"> undertaken along the edge of the river and in the Gunung Leuser National Park (GLNP) was the most attractive attractions at eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan. Other attractive attractions were the nature based attractions including diversity of flora and fauna available at the GLNP. Eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan was also supported by cultural based attractions, such as traditional dances and music, traditional foods and medicines available at Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accessibility indicators in terms of transportation and communication facilities were considered to be important by the visitors, however, accessibility to Tangkahan was considered to be not good.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The availability of tourism facilities and services, such as public toilets, accommodations, travel agents, and banking facilities (including currency exchanger) were considered to be important by the visitors, however the availability and the services provided by accommodations and travel agent, as well as banking facilities, and public toilets were considered to be not sufficient yet.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based upon the results of analysis of existing tourist attractions and facilities available at Tangkahan, it could be said that Tangkahan was categorized as a developing eco-tourism destination.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based upon the results of SWOT analysis of the eco-tourism destination of Tangkahan, several strategies could be recommended for ecotourism development at Tangkahan, namely:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To develop nature based tourism with consideration on the principles of ecotourism and conservation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To improve safety measures for visitors and guides who are undertaking tourism activities at the ecotourism &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;destination &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To revitalize the traditional music and dances that are existed at the community of Tangkahan to become a tourist attraction.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To increase the number of elephants at the Community Respons Unit (CRU) Tangkahan, which are available for elephant trekking for tourists in order to accommodate an increasing demand of the elephant trekking in the near future.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To improve the quality and quantity of the accommodation available at Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(f) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To establish an emergency system (Search and Rescue - SAR) at Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(g) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To establish a solid waste management &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sewarage</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">treatment system at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(h) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To improve land transportation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">facilities (particulatly roads) at Tangkahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(i) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To improve the accesibility to the locations of tourist attractions within the ecotourism destination of Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(j) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To establish a banking facility, and to build more public toilets as well as to establish a management of public toilets at Tangkahan.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(k) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To establish electricity networks into the Tangkahan tourist area.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Acknowledgment</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">I would like to acknowledge the support of the UNESCO Jakarta’s Office for the financial funding provided to undertake this study. I also thank our colleagues, Anak Agung Gde Raka Dalem, Ida Bagus Gde Pujaastawa, and I Nyoman Madiun who were involved in this study, for their valuable contributions on this study.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>References</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Gunawan, M. P. (2008) ‘Pariwisata Indonesia Menuju Destinasi Pariwisata Berdaya Saing (Volume V)’. Bandung: Pusat Perencanaan &nbsp;&nbsp;dan Pengembangan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kepariwisataan ITB.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rangkuti, F. (1998) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis SWOT teknik membedah kasus bisnis</span><span class="font3">. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Riley, M. (1991) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Human resource management: a guide to personnel practice in the hotel and catering industries.</span><span class="font3"> Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudarto, G. (1999) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ekowisata: wahana pelestarian &nbsp;&nbsp;alam, pengembangan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ekonomi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;berkelanjutan, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemberdayaan masyarakat</span><span class="font3">. Yayasan Kalpataru Bahari bekerjasama dengan Kehati.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">8</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e-ISSN: 2407-392X. p-ISSN: 2541-0857</span></p>