---
layout: full_article
title: "Figurative Language In The Song Lyric Of Green Day’s Album Entitled “Warning”"
author: "I Wayan Juliadi Sastra, I Gede Putu Sudana, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 144 – 150</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Figurative Language In The Song Lyric Of Green Day’s Album Entitled “Warning”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I Wayan Juliadi Sastra<sup>1*</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>2</sup>, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font3"><sup>123</sup>English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University </span><span class="font0">1</span><a href="mailto:dic.co20@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">[</span><span class="font3">dic.co20@yahoo.com</span><span class="font1">]</span></a><a href="mailto:2iputugedesudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup>[iputugedesudana@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:isnu.maharani@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">isnu.maharani@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini difokuskan kepada aspek semantik dari lirik-lirik lagu di album Warning dari band Green Day. Tujuan dari studi ini dibagi menjadi dua.Pertama, studi inii bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi fitur-fitur figuratif diantaranya personifikasi, hiperbola, simile, dan ironi yang ditemukan pada lirik-lirik lagu di album Warning dari band Green Day. Kedua, studi ini bertujuan untuk menjelaskan makna kata dari fitur-fitur figuratif, diantaranya personifikasi, hiperbola, simile, dan ironi yang digunakan di dalam lirik-lirik lagu tersebut. Metode yang digunakan untuk studi ini menganalisis secara kualitatif berdasarkan teori figuratif dari Knickerbocker dan Renier(1963) dan teori makna kata dari Geoffrey Leech</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(1979)</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisis dalam teori ini menunjukkan bahwa lirik-lirik lagu dalam album Warning mengandung fitur-fitur figuratif diantaranya personifikasi, hiperbola, simile, dan ironi. Makna kata diantaranya konseptual dan konotatif, dipresentasikan di dalam fitur-fitur figuratif tersebut. Fitur-fitur figuratif dan makna kata tersebut digunakan oleh penulis lagu dengan tujuan untuk menghibur endengar dari lagu-lagu tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword : Bahasa figuratif, Makna kata, Lirik lagu, Green day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">There are plenty ways to express our feeling through language such as writing a song. Song is one of a the media used to express feeling, and it seems interesting to be analyzed because the words used is the variety is various. Combinations of vocabulary and very unique. The languages used in a song usually has different meanings from the ordinary language because the language used in the song has a specific purpose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A song was made to amuse to listener. A song is also one of the best forms of entertainment. In a song we can get the knowledge by interpreting the languages in the song lyrics while we use listening and exploring the deepest meaning of those lyrics. There are variations of language that can be found in the song such as figurative language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are several linguistic aspects of the songs such as figurative language aspect and their meanings are discussed in this study. Those figurative language aspects as personification, hypebole, simile, and irony and those meaning conceptual meaning and connotative meaning. The data that were used in this study are the song lyrics from the album </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Warning</span><span class="font4"> by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Green day</span><span class="font4"> band.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">From the explanation above there are problems that are discussed figurative language in the song lyric of green day album entitled “Warning” as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are types of figurative language found in the song lyric of Green Day’s album Entitled “Warning”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of each figurative language found in the song lyric of Green Day’s album Entitled “Warning”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This study aimed to analyze Green Day’s album entitled “Warning”. The aimed are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify figurative language the song lyric of Green Day’s album entitled “Warning”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find types of figurative language and meaning the song lyric of Green Day’s album entitled “Warning”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Data source of this study used primary data because the data are directly taken from Green Day album entitled Warning. That consists of 12 songs, namely Warning, Blood, Sex, and Booze, Church on Sunday, Fashion Victim, Castaway, Misery, Deadbeat Holiday, Hold on, Jackass, Waiting, Minority, Macy’s day parade. The method and technique in collecting data is documentation method and note taking technique. The data in this study were analyze qualitatively based on the theory of figuratie language by knickerbocker and Reninger, the theory of meaning by Leech.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into parts; analysis of figurative language such as personification, hyperbole, simile, irony and the analysis of its meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963:367) overstatement of personification is Personification gives human characteristics to an object, animal, or an abstract idea. It is a metaphor, of course, in the sense that there is an implied comparison between a non-human thing and human being. A personification is a figurative language that gives an inanimate object or abstract idea human traits and qualities, such as emotions, desires, sensations, physical gestures, and speech.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Making your mascara bleed”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In this sentence, seems to show the use of personification. I can find the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mascara</span><span class="font4">, as i know the mascara is a cosmetic for darkening and thickening the eyelashes especially it’s used by women and that is a noun. I can find the second word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bleed,</span><span class="font4"> bleed is the lose of blood from the body as a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">result of injury or illness. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Making your mascara bleed</span><span class="font4"> that is gives human characteristic to an object, it makes the mascara has a human characteristic, the mascara bleed a blood like human experience when happen in an accident.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963:367) overstatement Hyperbole is an exaggeration used for special effect It is not used to mislead the reader, but to emphasize a point. The exaggeration is deliberately used for the effect, and is not to be understood as if it were a literal description. Hyperbole may be used to evoke strong feelings or to create a strong impression, and is not meant to be taken literally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“My head is in the gutter”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">From the sentence above, it seems that the sentence exaggerated. It see use of hyperbole. it is impossible if there my head is in the gutter. Head usually the head is on the top of our body parts. But, there is no head is in the gutter and then no one put the head in the gutter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This sentence used by the song writer to a man dominate women in a sex that is a fact in relationship. But in this case the women say thank to men after they were having sex and the men ignored a women again. it is looks like contumely from the man to the women.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963:367) overstatement Simile is stated a comparison, usually comparing two essentially different objects, actions, or attributes that share some aspect of similarity, introduced by </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">as.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“My conscience beating </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">like </span><span class="font4">pulse of a drum”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The sentence above directly compared the two ideas and allowed them to remain distinct in spite of similarities by employing the words </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font4">. Pulse of a drum is beat bythe soundofthe drumthat has atightrhythm. The conscience beating that’s author feel had a same characteristic with the pulse of a drum.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Irony</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Knickerbocker and Reninger (1963:367) overstatement Irony is the statement whose real meaning completely opposed to its professed or surface meaning. It usually skewing between the meaning and the grammatical forms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Your home is a headstone”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">From the sentence above, clearly the ironic appears in “your home is your headstone”. In this sentence, home is the place where one lives permanently, especially as a member of a family or household. The writer of this song wants to describe home which has atmospherelike agraveyard and the reader and listener pf this song imagine that the situation of this song is horrible.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conceptual meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Leech (1979:13) Conceptual meaning is also called denotative meaning or cognitive meaning. It is logical and widely assumed to be the central factor in linguistic communication. The denotation of word is its agreed-upon sense-what it refers to, stands fur, or designates, apart from the feelings it may call up. Leech (1979:13) claims that the aim of the denotative meaning is to provide, for any given interpretation of a sentence, a configuration of abstract symbols, which shows exactly what we need to know if we are distinguish that meaning from all other possible sentence meanings in the language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“The catastrophic hits from yesterday”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The sentence above does not refer to any other meaning as it can be easily understood by the listener without any confusing since all the words in the sentence can be taken literally. Therefore, it can be assumed that this sentence is using a conceptual meaning as the writer literally describes the sentence without a hidden message or meaning behind it, all the meaning of the words in the sentence above is already written in dictionary. The writer of the song lyrics describes about catastrophic is a bad weather since yesterday.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">f) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Connotative meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Leech (1979:14-15), connotative meaning is the communicative value an expression has by virtue of what it refers to, over and above its purely conceptual content. Connotative meaning is indeterminate and open in the same sense as our knowledge and believe about the universe that are opened-ended. Connotations play a major role in the language of the literature, of politics, of advertising, and of music. Leech says that connotative meaning is not specific to language, but it is shared with other communicative system, such as that in music and the visual art features.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“But she looks like hell to me”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The writer describes about the sentence above is about fashion victim how pathetically brainless people can become in their attempts to perfectly follow the latest fashion. Not only do they spend incredible amounts of money on things that are &quot;in”, but very often they choose things tastelessly, without realizing that an outfit that is considered the latest fashion might not even look good on them &quot;but she looks like hell to me&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentence above contains a connotative meaning from the words “looks like hell to me”. So, what she looks like death will pick her up. She feels freak out look what happen to her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The existence of figurative language in the song lyrics such as hyperbole, personification, simile, and irony as the parts of figure of speech helps the listeners of this song to get the clear imagination about the song lyrics in their minds. On the other hand, the figure of speech which is related with the special way in using words makes the song lyrics become more interesting to the listeners. The listeners of the song lyrics will be entertained while they also get the knowledge about the figure of speech that is used in the song lyrics. Each parts of figure of speech in the song lyric has its own important roles in building the song lyric and listeners’ imagination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study also analyzes the meanings those are contained in the figurative language in the song lyrics in all of the song lyrics of the album </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“Warning”.</span><span class="font4"> The meanings those are found are conceptual meanings, connotative meaning. There are found seven conceptual meanings and eight connotative meanings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Knickerbocker, K.L and H. Williard Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting literature. </span><span class="font4">Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Leech, G.N. 1979. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font4">. Aukland: Penguin Book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">150</span></p>