---
layout: full_article
title: "O’NEIL AS FEMINIST CHARACTER IN SCOTT’S G. I. JANE"
author: "I Gst Ayu Dwityani Adhi Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 14.1 Januari 2016: 38-44</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’NEIL AS FEMINIST CHARACTER IN SCOTT’S G. I. JANE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Gusti Ayu Dwityani Adhi Pratiwi </span><a href="mailto:dwityani.nodame@rocketmail.com"><span class="font2">dwityani.nodame@rocketmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty Of Letters And Culture Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul “O’Neil as Feminist Character in Scott’s G. I. Jane” yang membahas tentang perjuangan yang dilakukan karakter utama, Letnan Jordan O’Neil, diantara budaya patriarki yang mendominasi sudut pandang masyarakat mengenai wanita dalam lingkungan milik pria. “G. I. Jane” sangatlah menarik untuk dibahas, terutama nilai feminisnya, karena film ini menggambarkan bagaimana wanita diperlakukan tidak setara dalam masyarakat yang disebabkan oleh perbedaan kelamin. Film ini menampilkan norma ganda yang dipaksakan pada wanita, bagaimana mereka harus bertindak dua kali lebih kuat untuk dianggap setengah tangguh. Data primer diperoleh dari teks pada film dengan judul yang sama “G. I. Jane”. Data untuk skripsi ini berdasarkan pada teks film yang tersedia. Kemudian, data yang terkumpul dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif yang dipakai dalam menjelaskan ciri-ciri data berdasarkan pada teori yang diadopsi dalam skripsi ini. Teori-teori yang diterapkan dalam skripsi ini adalah teori literatur yaitu struktur intrinsik film dan teori feminis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Karakter, Konflik, Masyarakat Patriarki</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Movie is used to represent the real life of people through a story. It usually has several elements including plot, setting, character, and other intrinsic elements. The issue of feminism in 18<sup>th</sup> century has become one of the prominent issues that is mostly adopted in many stories to represent the women’s movement against the men’s dominance in their life. Feminism is an ideology not only belonging to women but also to the men who feel unequally treated that might be due to skin color, race, ethnic group, etc. Therefore, feminism is one of the issues worth analyzing in this paper as an important topic. It reflects the women’s effort to achieve recognition as equal citizen in the society which is represented in a movie entitled “G. I. Jane”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What feminism spirit is reflected in the main character towards the patriarchal society depicted in “G. I. Jane” movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What social conflicts were faced and what solution was done by the main character as the result of the functioning of feminist ideology in “G. I. Jane” movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the feminism spirits of the main character in the patriarchal society depicted in “G. I. Jane” movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the social conflicts faced and solved by the main character as the result of the feminist ideology in “G. I. Jane” movie</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methodology</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Methodology used in this study is needed to determine data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In fulfilling the analysis in this study, there is one kind of source which was obtained as the primary data. This is the subtitle of the movie entitled “G.I. Jane” which was directed by Ridley Scott and released on August 22, 1997</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method of collecting data applied in this study was documentation method. It is a process of identifying the sources of the data used in this paper. The data source in this paper was taken from website accessible through internet. First, the movie was downloaded from </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font2"> in (mp4) format. However, for fuller understanding and analysis of the film, the subtitle script is used as the primary data source was downloaded from </span><a href="http://www.subtitleseeker.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.subtitleseeker.com</span></a><span class="font2"> in (.srt) format.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed by using qualitative method. It was used in explaining the characteristics of the data based on the theory adopted in this study, including the theory of intrinsic structure proposed by DiYanni (2000) and theory of feminism proposed by Beauvoir (1949).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O’Neil as Feminist Character in Scott’s G.I. Jane</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The major or main character in “G. I. Jane” is Lieutenant Jordan O’Neil, a female satellite specialist officer in Naval who was chosen to fulfill the training in U.S. Navy Combined Reconnaissance Team. During her first day of training, O’Neil immediately became subject to ridicule and discrimination from her fellow candidates and from the base's commanding colonel, who makes attempts to treat her delicately because she's a woman. However, O’Neil refuses the double standard and asking for the same treatment as the other trainees</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">“Sir, I am not looking for any special treatment.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">C. O.: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">We're not trying to change your sex, Lieutenant. You will have a separate bed, a separate head</span><span class="font2">. If you have any special medical needs, inform the infirmary. If your classmates or a superior acts in a harassing or otherwise unbecoming manner, you are to inform me immediately, so that I can deal with it immediately. </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">It may not always run smooth, but we're trying to make it as painless as possible</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">00:16:29 – 00:16:40</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “Permission to speak, sir? </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">I am not here to make some kind of statement. All I care about is completing the training and getting operational experience, just like everyone else, I suspect.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On the other hand, O’Neil also has to deal with DeHaven, a female senator, who sabotaged her training by smearing her name as a lesbian. Then, O’Neil decided to confront DeHaven face to face and threatened her to void the false charge immediately 01:37:55 – 01:39:17</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DeHaven: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">No politician can afford to let women come home in body bags, especially me.</span><span class="font2"> It was never going to happen anyway.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “Then why the fuck did you start me on all this in the first place?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DeHaven: “Truthfully? I never expected you to do so damn well</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">. I thought you'd ring out in two weeks. Bing, bang, it's over, and we're popular. In Washington, you don't even need the Ten Commandments if you're popular”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">And don't you think that I will stand idly by while anyone smears my good name. Now, you get those charges voided, Senator, and you do it today.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DeHaven: “Or what?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">“You like pissed off? Watch this</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DeHaven: “Jordan! Hell of a game of brinkmanship you play.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “I am not playing games, Senator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DeHaven: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">I gather. I will do it. Somehow, I will get you back in</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After the false charge is voided, O’Neil and the rest of the team have to complete the sudden mission in Libyan Dessert. O’Neil contributed in making the strategy, rescued the Master Chief, and led the team to accomplish the mission. Finally, O’Neil succeed to achieve her goal which is being accepted as SEAL’s officer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1:49:30 – 1:51:09</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McCool: “Sounds like Chief's running a little late.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wickwire: “We got to go. O'Neil, retrace your tracks. Cortez, pick up the rear.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cortez: “We're going back in there for body parts?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wickwire: “You're damn right we are.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Do the headwork with me. If he's on the run, he's not coming back this way to lead them to us. Right? Now look here. If we're here, and I left the Chief here, I think he's going to make his way southwest, down this wash and out to sea. If we hump it, we can get there and knock out any pursuit</span><span class="font2">”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cortez: “You work this out with the Chief ahead of time, O'Neil, or are you just clairvoyant?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil: “</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">No, but it's what I'd do</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">01:58:32 – 01:59:06</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(In the acceptance ceremony)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Urgayle: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Welcome aboard, sir.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cortez: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Thank you, Master Chief.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Urgayle: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Welcome aboard, Sergeant.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wickwire: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Thank you, Master Chief.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Urgayle: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Welcome aboard, ma'am</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Urgayle handed O’Neil the last Navy Cross and was accepted with a smile)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this movie, the main character, O’Neil, can be concluded as static character due to her steady determination as a feminist. Eventhough she was opposed by so many people because of gender difference, she keeps fighting back and shows herself as a feminist</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">O’Neil is portrayed as a brave, strong, and intelligent woman in fulfilling her life goals. It is shown how she insisted in getting the same treatment during the training as the other male trainees, determined to solve the problems with the other character, and how intelligent she was in making the strategy during the Plutonium evacuation. She could also be considered as the successful feminist who was able to fulfill her goal by facing all the obstacles during the training, breaking the false charge, and at last officially accepted in Combined Reconnaissance Team which was her final goal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This was made possible particularly by the spirit of feminism that she adopted in her life’s struggle. In her struggle she was very much dealing with such problems as being treated discriminately by the team, accused as lesbian by female Senator, and even forced to obey the rules which against her idealism as feminist. All of those problems were solved succesfully by O’Neil through her strong determination and her</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">endless effort to prove everyone that she deserved to be accepted in matters conventionally associated only to men and showed herself as a real feminist.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Asian &amp;&nbsp;Pacific Islander Institute on Domestic Violence. Copyright 2010-2011.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Patriarchy and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;San Francisco. (Resources:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://apiidv.org/violence/patriarchy-power.php)"><span class="font2">http://apiidv.org/violence/patriarchy-power.php)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Butler, Judith. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sex and Gender in Simone de Beauvoir's Second Sex</span><span class="font2">. Yale French Studies, No. 72. London: Yale University Press. (Resources: </span><a href="http://mairakubik.cartacapital.com.br/wp-"><span class="font2">http://mairakubik.cartacapital.com.br/wp-</span></a><span class="font2">content/uploads/mairakubik/sites/3/2012/06/51042202-judith-butler-sobre-el-segundo-sexo-de-simone-de-beauvoir.pdf)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">De Beauvoir, Simone. 1949. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Second Sex</span><span class="font2">. H.M. Parshley (Trans), New York: Vintage Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DiYanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: Reading Fiction, Poetry, and Drama.</span><span class="font2"> Singapore: McGraw-Hill Higher Education</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hooks, B. (2000). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Feminist Theory: From Margin To Center</span><span class="font2"> (Second edition).Cambridge MA. South End Press. Pp. 1, 3, 5.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Johnson, Allan G. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Gender Knot.</span><span class="font2"> Philadelphia: Temple University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ling, Victor Tenojaik. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sayuri as The Main Character in Arthur Golden’s Memoir of A Geisha: Psychological and Feminist Approach</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Megayanti, Ni Kadek Kristina. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Feminist Character in Trading Up Novel</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Motta, Fominaya, Eschle, Cox. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Feminism, Women’s Movements and Women in Movement</span><span class="font2">. International Feminist Journal of Politics: Volume 3 (2): 1 - 32 (November 2011). (Resources: </span><a href="http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-"><span class="font2">http://www.interfacejournal. net/wordpress/wp-</span></a><span class="font2">content/uploads/2011/12/Interface-3-2-editorial.pdf)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Myers, Gail E. and Michele. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Laboratory Approach Singapore:</span><span class="font2"> Mc Grow Hill. Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parwata, I Wayan Pande. 2012. The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Images of Women and Ideas of Feminist in Alcott’s Little Women</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Reaske, Christopher Russell. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How To Analyze Drama</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rosser., S. V. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Through the Lenses of Feminist Theory: Focus on Women and Feminism, Frontiers A Journal of Women’s Studies</span><span class="font2"> (Resources: </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feminist_theory)"><span class="font2">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feminist_theory)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saptarini, Kadek Dwi. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Feminism Reflected in Victoria as The Main Character of Steel’s Mirror Image</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Triwahyuni, Ester Nyoman. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Feminist Message in Four Lesbian Poems by American Poets</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Jonathan Cape</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">44</span></p>