---
layout: full_article
title: "The Procedure Applied in Translating Jargon in English Parliamentary Debating into Indonesian"
author: "Ni Luh Putu Krisnawati"
categories: languange
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31064 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/id-31064"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/languange/full-31064"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-variant:small-caps;">The Procedure Applied in Translating Jargon in English Parliamentary Debating into Indonesian</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Ni Luh Putu Krisnawati</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:putu_krisnawati@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">putu_krisnawati@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">At present, competition regarding English debating is a common thing. All countries are competing in the World Debating Competition either for high school or university level. The spread of this “popular culture” has made other country to adopt the English debating system and translate that system into their native language. However it cannot be denied that there are also many jargons that need to be translated into the native language without changing the meaning. This research is focused on the jargons of the English parliamentary debating and its translation into Indonesia. The aims of this study are to identify the jargons in English parliamentary debating and its equivalence in Indonesia and also to know the procedures used in translating the jargons in English parliamentary debating into Indonesia. The theory used for this study is the theory proposed by Peter Newmark (1988) regarding the procedure of translation. The findings shows that they are five procedure of translation used in translating the jargons of English parliamentary debating into Indonesia namely literal translation, functional equivalent, couplets, transference, and naturalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">translation, English parliamentary debating, translation procedure</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">At present, English parliamentary debating has become a popular culture among students in high school or university level. Through debating, students are not only required to be an educated generation but also master the problem-solving abilities. Debate culture is able to bridge the exchange of views between one another peacefully without involving any physical confrontation in it. Furthermore, a qualified debate culture will be able to bring and encourage people to think systematically and to use all their minds to compare their views and to provide enormous opportunities for concrete and rational solutions to problems. Thus, debating bring a positive atmosphere to promote peace and deliberation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The importance of English parliamentary debating system has made the Minister of Education in Indonesia aware to adopt the system and make a debating competition in Bahasa Indonesia known as Lomba Debat Bahasa Indonesia (LDBI). The rules and jargon from English parliamentary system are translated into Indonesia. Jargon is a collection of words or specific terms used by a group of people, in which the words are only understand by those who joined the group (Fromkim and Rodman, 1979).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the above explanation, this study analyzes the jargons used in English parliamentary debating and its equivalence into Indonesia and also to know the procedure used to translate those jargons.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II &nbsp;MATERIALS AND METHOD</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.1 &nbsp;T</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">RANSLATION </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">P</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ROCEDURE</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Newmark (1988:81) translation procedure are the ways used by the translator for translating SL (words, phrase, terminologies, text) into TL. They are eighteen procedure proposed by Newmark, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transference is the translations process of transferring the foreign word from SL to TL without any change at all.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naturalization is the translations procedure that adapts the SL word first to the normal pronunciation and then to the normal morphology.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural Equivalent is the translation procedure in translating a cultural word in the SL with a TL cultural word.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Functional Equivalent is the translation procedure that translates a word in the SL with a functional equivalent TL words. This procedure is applied for cultural words that require the use of culture-free word or sometimes with a new specific term.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptive Equivalent is the translation procedure that uses description in translating SL to TL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonymy is the translation procedure that uses word in SL which has the nearest equivalent in the TL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Through Translation is the translation procedure for translating common collocations, names of organizations, the components of compounds and phrases.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition is a translation procedure involving a change in the grammar form SL to TL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation is the translation procedure which changes the point of view from the SL to the TL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Recognized Translation is the translation procedure that translates the accepted translation of any institutional term.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reduction and Expansion is translation procedure used by the translator to add or omit elements in translation.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paraphrase is the translation procedure whereby the translator replaces a word in the SL by a group of words or an expression in the TL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation is translating the SL to the TL by word per word technique. Normally, literal translation should be used only when they are already recognized terms.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Couplet is a translation procedure that uses more than one procedure to deal with single problem.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compensation is a translation procedure whereby the translator solves the problem of aspects of the SL that cannot take the same form in the TL by replacing then aspects with other elements or forms in the SL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Note is the translation procedure that inserts additional information a translator may have to add to his version of TL from SL.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Componential Analysis is the translation procedure that comperes a SL word with a TL word which has a similar meaning but it is not an obvious equivalent by demonstrating first their common and then their differing sense components.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generalization and Particularization is the translation procedure which translate the SL to TL either to have more general or specific meaning.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.2 T</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">HE CONCEPT OF </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">J</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ARGON</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Jargon is defined as technical words in a particular field of knowledge used by a particular group of people, but the words are not confidential. Jargon is formed because of certain communities or groups that combine multiple languages to form a new language (Keraf, 2001: 24). The use of jargon is very limited and often cannot be understood by the general public or society outside the group.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2.3 R</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ESEARCH </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">M</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ETHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Bogdan and Taylor (1975) define a qualitative methodology as a research procedure that produces descriptive data in the form of written words. Therefore, this research is a qualitative descriptive research by using data in the form of translated text. The data source of this study was taken from the guideline book on debating for NSDC (National School Debating Competition) and LDBI (Lomba Debat Bahasa Indonesia) issued by the Minister of Education and Culture the Republic of Indonesia. The data were collected by identifying and note taking the jargons in English parliamentary debating and its translation into Indonesia. Then the collected data were compered to find the meaning of the jargons in SL and TL. Lastly, the data were analyzed by using the theory proposed about Peter Newmark (1988) in order to know the procedure used in translating the jargons.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>III &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Adjudicator</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Juri</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 1 above, the SL word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">adjudicator</span><span class="font4"> is translated into the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">juri</span><span class="font4"> in the TL. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Adjudicator </span><span class="font4">and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">juri</span><span class="font4"> both have the same meaning that is a person who judges a debate competition and gives a critical evaluation, resulting in the reward of marks. The procedure used to translate the jargon is literal translation because the SL word is recognized in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: N1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: N1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 2, the jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">N1</span><span class="font4"> in the SL is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">N1</span><span class="font4"> in the TL by means of transference procedure because there is no term for </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">N1</span><span class="font4"> in Indonesian. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">N1</span><span class="font4"> in the SL means a prospective adjudicator provide by the team joining a debate competition and must join the adjudicator accreditation to know their quality of assessing a debate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Best Speaker</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Pembicara terbaik</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">best speaker</span><span class="font4"> in the SL means the debater with the highest score in terms of manner, matter and method that comes from any team competing in the debate competition. The TL jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pembicara terbaik</span><span class="font4"> also have the same meaning as the jargon in the SL that is a debater with the highest speaker points. Since the jargon in the SL is known in the TL the translation procedure applied is literal translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Impromptu motion</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Mosi Impromptu</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data 4 above uses the couplets procedure in translating the jargon from SL to TL, namely transference and literal translation. Transference is applied in translating the word impromptu which means done without being planned or organized and literal translation is applied in translating the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">motion</span><span class="font4"> in the TL into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mosi</span><span class="font4"> in the SL, which both TL and SL means a statement, idea or policy that is disputed. Therefore both the SL and TL jargon have the meaning that is debating a statement, idea or policy without being planned.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Reply</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Pidato Kesimpulan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 5, the SL jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">reply</span><span class="font4"> is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pidato kesimpulan</span><span class="font4"> in TL. Reply in the TL means a speech that is intended to review major issues of the debate, showing both team positions and proving why your team’s arguments are superior. In TL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pidato kesimpulan</span><span class="font4"> also have the same meaning as the SL word. The translation procedure used is functional equivalent since both SL and TL have the same function in a debate competition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 6</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Motions</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Mosi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the data 6, literal translation is applied in translating the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">motion</span><span class="font4"> in the TL into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mosi</span><span class="font4"> in the SL, which both TL and SL means a statement, idea or policy that is disputed in a debate competition by both the proposition and opposition team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 7</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Time Keeper</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Time Keeper</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">time keeper</span><span class="font4"> in SL is translated by using transference procedure in the TL into also </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">time keeper</span><span class="font4">. The SL jargon is being transferred directly to the TL without any changes or known as pure borrowing. Both the SL and TL jargon have the same meaning that is a person who is responsible for keeping the time during a debate, times how long a speaker deliver their speech during a debate and also giving signals by ringing a bell or clipping to show the time starts or ends.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 8</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Chairperson</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Both the jargon in the SL and the TL have the same meaning that is a person who presides over a meeting, in the case of debating competition a chairperson will open the debate, explain the rules in conducting a debate, and introduce the speakers of both team. The procedure used to translate the SL to TL is the transference procedure because it takes the foreign terms without any change.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tabulator</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tabulator</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 9 above, the jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tabulator</span><span class="font4"> in SL is transferred directly without any change in the TL into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tabulator</span><span class="font4"> too, therefore the procedure of translation used is transference. Both the SL and TL jargon for </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tabulator</span><span class="font4"> have the same meaning that is a person who is responsible to input the scores of all speaker and team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 10</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tabulation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tabulasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Naturalization procedure is applied in translating the SL word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tabulation</span><span class="font4"> into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tabulasi</span><span class="font4"> in the TL because it adapts the word in the SL into the normal word in the TL in terms of morphology and pronunciation. Both the SL and TL jargon have the same meaning that is the results from a tournament stating everyone's scores and team and individual rankings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 11</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Chief Adjudicator</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Ketua Dewan Juri</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In SL the jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chief adjudicator</span><span class="font4"> is the person who is responsible the set the motion for the debating competition, organizing the adjudicator pool and resolve any judging dispute during the debate. In the TL, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ketua dewan juri</span><span class="font4"> also have the same function as chief adjudicator in the SL. Since </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chief adjudicator</span><span class="font4"> in SL in a word recognized in the TL as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ketua dewan juri</span><span class="font4">, thus the translation procedure applied is the literal translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 12</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Invited Adjudicator</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Juri Undangan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Both the jargon in data 12 above has the same meaning that is a judge that is being invited by the chief adjudicator to adjudicate a debate competition that are very experienced in debating or a former excellent debater and comes from different education background. The translation procedure the used to translate the jargon in SL to Tl is literal translation because it is a known concept in the TL culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 13</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Victory Point</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Poin Kemenangan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The SL word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">victory point</span><span class="font4"> is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">poin kemenangan</span><span class="font4"> in the TL. Both the SL and TL jargon have the same meaning that is the number of victory earned by a team in the preliminary round. Literal translation is applied for the procedure because the SL term is known in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Margin</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Marjin</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Margin</span><span class="font4"> is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">marjin</span><span class="font4"> in Indonesia. Both the SL and TL have the same meaning that is the amount of score which differ from one team to another. The translation procedure applied is the naturalization because it adapts the SL to the normal pronunciation in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 15</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Chair</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 15 above, the translation procedure to translate the SL jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chair</span><span class="font4"> into the TL jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chair </span><span class="font4">is the transference procedure since the word in SL is transferred directly to TL without any changes. The jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chair</span><span class="font4"> in debating means an adjudicator who is responsible for the panel of adjudicator and trainee, run the discussion between the adjudicators after the time is over, fill in the ballot, decide the winner of the debate, announce the results and provide verbal assessment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 16</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Panel</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Panel</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 16 above, the jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panel</span><span class="font4"> in the SL is translated also into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panel</span><span class="font4"> in the TL, thus the translation procedure applied in the transference procedure since the word in SL is being transfer directly to the TL without any changes. The jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">panel</span><span class="font4"> means an adjudicator that has been accredited and fulfills a satisfactory mark from the chief adjudicator. Panels are allowed to give suggestion to the chair but not allowed to make any decision regarding the winner in a debate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 17</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Trainee</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Trainee</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Transference procedure is applied in translating the jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">trainee</span><span class="font4"> in SL into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">trainee</span><span class="font4"> in TL since the SL is transferred directly into the TL without any change. Both the SL and TL jargon have the same meaning, a trainee is an adjudicator that has been accredited but do not fulfill a satisfactory mark to be a panel adjudicator. Trainees only observe and take notes about the debate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 18</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Points of Information</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Interupsi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 18, the SL jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">points of information</span><span class="font4"> is an interjection offered to the speaker by a member of the opposite team, signaled by standing up and making a noise of some sort, it can be in the form of asking a question or contributing n information. It has the same function as the act of interrupting. Thus, the SL jargon is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">interupsi</span><span class="font4"> (interruption) in the TL because when someone is conducting an interruption in the meeting they will perform the same action and body language as doing points of information. Since the functions of the word are the same, the translation procedure applied is functional equivalent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 19</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Swing team</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Swing team</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The jargon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">swing team</span><span class="font4"> in SL is also translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">swing team</span><span class="font4"> in the TL, thus it can be said that the translation procedure used is transference because the SL word is borrowed directly into the TL. Therefore, the SL and TL have the same meaning that is a team that is not eligible to break, but has instead been inserted into the competition to ensure that the total number of team is even.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 20</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Rebuttal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Sanggahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data 20 above, the jargon in SL </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rebuttal</span><span class="font4"> is translated into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sanggahan</span><span class="font4"> in TL. The jargon in SL is a known concept in the TL since it has the same meaning that is explaining and proofing that your opponent’s arguments are wrong. Therefore the translation procedure used in translating the SL to TL is literal translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>IV &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">From the above findings and discussion, it can be concluded that the procedure applied in translating the jargon of English parliamentary debating into Indonesian are literal translation, functional equivalent, couplets, transference, and naturalization.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Bogdan and Taylor, 1975 in J. Moleong, Lexy 1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font4">. Badung: Ramadja Karya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Fromkin, Victoria and Robert, R. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Language</span><span class="font4">. USA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kementrian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Republik Indonesia. 2017. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Pelaksanaan Lomba Debat Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Kementrian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Republik Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kementrian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Republik Indonesia. 2017. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Pelaksanaan National School Debating Championship</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Kementrian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Republik Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Keraf, Gorys. 2001. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Diksi dan Gaya Bahasa</span><span class="font4">. Badung: Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, Peter. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font4">. New York: Prentice Hall.</span></p>