---
layout: full_article
title: "Direct and Indirect Expressive of Illocutionary Acts in the Movie “Big Hero 6”"
author: "Luh Gede Novita Rahayu, I Nengah Sudipa, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 18.2 Pebruari 2017: 24-31</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Direct and Indirect Expressive of Illocutionary Acts in the Movie “Big Hero 6”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Luh Gede Novita Rahayu<sup>1*</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Ni Wayan Sukarini<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:novitarahayu275@gmail.com"><span class="font2">[novitarahayu275@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">[wayansukarini@yahoo.co.id]</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan Penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi jenis-jenis tindak ekspresif ilokusi dan untuk menganalisis arti ujaran yang diinterpretasikan oleh pendengar di film yang berjudul “Big Hero 6”. Sumber data diambil dari sebuah film yang bejudul “Big Hero 6” dimana banyak terdapat ujaran ekspresif didalamnya dan ujarannya mudah dimengerti. Metode deskritif kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisa data. Teori yang digunakan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis-jenis tindakan ekspresif ilokusi dikemukakan oleh Searle (1996) yang didukung oleh Yule (1996) tetapi untuk menganalisis arti dari ujaran tersebut menggunakan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Hymes (1972). Hasil penelitian ini menunjukan bahwa keenam tipe ujaran ekspresif (ujaran untuk berterima kasih, meminta maaf, memberi selamat, mengucapkan salam, pengharapn, dan untuk menyampaikan ketidakpuasan) ditemukan baik itu tindak tutur secara langsung maupun tidak langsung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: tindak tutur, tipe ujaran ekspresif, etnografi komunikasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language has existed since the earliest human life in a social circumstance and is used for communicating to each other in everyday life. Communication does not only involve the language uttered by the speakers but also the action done by them. Speech is the utterance that occurs and act refers to the action. There are three basic senses in which something is said, one is doing something, and hence three kinds of acts that are simultaneously &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;performed:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary acts (Levinson,1983:236). From those three types of speech acts, illocutionary acts is considered quite complex.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When the speaker utters something, the real meaning of the utterance often confuses the hearer because the speaker sometimes tends to utter it in indirect way. Therefore, this study was conducted to find out the problem from that phenomenon. In order to make the discussion more relevant, this study will only focus on analyzing one type of illocutionary acts, namely expressive and to analyze the meaning of the utterances interpreted by the hearers in a movie entitled “Big Hero 6”. The point of expressive illocutionary act is simply to express the sincerity condition of the speech act that states what the speaker feels, such as pleasure, joy, like, dislike, apologizing, congratulating, and thanking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As the object of this study, the movie “Big Hero 6” is very interesting to discuss because it is a very well-known movie watched over by millions of people all around the world and has a great plot. It was never discussed previously in any undergraduate theses as its object of study; therefore this movie was observed and discussed in this study. This movie is about special bond that develops between plussized inflatable robot Baymax, and prodigy Hiro Hamada as a main character, who team up with a group of friends to form a band of high-tech heroes</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the previous explanation, there are two problems appearing to be discussed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of expressive of illocutionary acts found in the movie “Big Hero</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">6”?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of the utterances interpreted by the hearers?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Every research has a specific aim or an expected objective that has to be achieved. The specific aims to be achieved in this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of expressive illocutionary acts found in the movie “Big Hero 6”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain and analyze what meaning of expressive utterances of illocutionary acts are interpreted by the hearer.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Researh Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data source was chosen in order to support the validity of the study. The data were taken from a movie entitled Big Hero 6. This movie was chosen as an object of this study because it contains a lot of illocutionary acts, especially expressive. Moreover, it was never discussed previously in any undergraduate theses as its object of the study. Ultimately, the complexity of the meaning of the utterances uttered by the speaker was very worth analyzing especially in a movie with action-adventure genre.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In conducting this study, the method used in collecting the data was observation since the data were obtained from the spoken source like film. There were five steps done in collecting the data. First, the movie was downloaded from the internet. Second, the movie was watched several times to obtain which utterances were categorized as expressive illocutionary acts. Third, from the conversation in the movie, the utterances of expressive illocutionary act were written down. Fourth, the data were identified and when there were many data found in the movie in which potentially to be inserted as data; the data were shrunk into particular one used to support the analysis. Last, the grouped data was bold-typed and classified into the types of expressive illocutionary act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in this study is the descriptive qualitative method. After collecting the relevant data; there are several steps of analyzing data. First, analyzing the direct and indirect type of expressive illocutionary acts found in movie “Big Hero 6”. The data were grouped and classified into its categorization based on the types of expressive illocutionary acts using a theory proposed by Searle (1996) supported by Yule (1996). Next, to analyze the meaning of expressive of illocutionary acts that can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">interpreted by the hearers using the theory of context of situation (S-P-E-A-K-I-N-G model) proposed by Dell Hymes (1972).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Direct of Expressive of Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this analysis, there are six conversations considered direct of Expressive of Illocutionary Act found in the movie ‘Big Hero 6”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thanking</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Data 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I know what you’re going to say. “I should be proud of myself, because</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I’m finally using my gift for something important.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tadashi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No no. I was just gonna tell you, your fly was down for the whole</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">show.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Ha-ha-ha-hilarious, What?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tadashi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Welcome to nerd school, nerd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hey, I, um... I wouldn't be here if it wasn't for you. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">So, you know,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">thanks for not giving up on me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Tadashi smiles to Hiro)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Utterance in Data 1 is identified as an expressive illocutionary act since there is a certain force that the speaker expresses by saying the utterance. That force is called expressive for thanking since the speaker does not only say the utterance but also performs an action of thanking towards the hearer’s prior action. The speaker’s utterance in Data 1 is also identified as direct speech act because the speaker utters his sentence literally and means as what he says. The meaning of the utterance is that Hiro feels so grateful that he has a kind-hearted brother like Tadashi who always motivates and supports him during his hard times; therefore, he can finish his microbot satisfactorily.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2 Congratulating</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fred</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Honey Lemon</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">:You have nothing to fear, little fellow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:He's so tense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:No, I'm not.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Honey Lemon</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Go Go</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">:</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Relax, Hiro.Your tech is amazing</span><span class="font2">. Tell him, go go.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Stop whining. Woman up. :I'm fine!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule (1996) stated that congratulating, applauding, and condoling are the kinds of expressive for congratulating. Those show the speaker’s sympathy toward what has been happening to the hearer. Data 2 is identified as expressive for applauding since Honey Lemon expresses her feeling of honour toward Hiro’s ability in inventing the microbots. It is also identified as direct speech act because the speaker utters her sentence literally as what she actually says. The meaning of the utterance is that Honey Lemon wants to praise Hiro for his ability in inventing the microbots. Moreover, she utters that utterance in order to convince Hiro before his turn to demonstrate his microbots on stage because he feels so.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Attitude</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data 3</span></h1>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">:I thought about what you said. Really inspired me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Oh, honey, that's so great.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Okay,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:special dinner tonight. I'll whip up some chicken wings. You know, with the hot sauce that makes our faces numb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Okay, sounds good.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Great! Last hug.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Hiro runs trying to stop Baymax)</span><span class="font2"> Baymax! Baymax!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(People who passes the road say “Hey!, Watch it!”)</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Baymax</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">:Baymax! Baymax! </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Are you crazy? What are you doing?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:I have found where your tiny robot wants to go.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:I told you, it's broken. It's not trying to go...</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule (1996) stated that expressive for attitude is the kind of expressive illocutionary act for criticizing, complaining, and deprecating. It shows the speaker’s feeling of disagreement or dislike with the hearer’s attitude (Yule:1996). In this case, there is only one kind of expressive for attitude that is identified from the data source. It</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">is direct complaining. Data 3 is identified as expressive for attitude since Hiro as the speaker is performing an act of disagreement with Baymax’s attitude. It is also identified as direct speech act because the speaker utters his sentence literally and the meaning is exactly as what he says. The meaning of the utterance is that Hiro disagrees with Baymax attitude that he follows the pointed direction by tiny microbot. He crosses the road carelessly which causes the cars to be braked suddenly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indirect of Expressive of Illocutionary Acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two conversations which are considered indirect of expressive of illocutionary act found in the movie Big Hero 6.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Apologizing</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Data 4</span></h1>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Prof. Callaghan Mr. Krei</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: I wouldn't trust krei tech with your microbots, or anything else. : Hiro, I'm offering you more money than any 14-year old could imagine.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Hiro</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mr. Krei</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: I appreciate the offer, Mr. krei, but they're not for sale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I thought you were smarter than that.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data 4 is identified as expressive for apologizing since Hiro does not want to sell his microbots to Mr. Krei. The utterance “I appreciate the offer, Mr. krei, but they're not for sale” is also identified as indirect speech act because the speaker has more meaning by saying the utterance. The meaning is to express his apology that he does not want to sell his microbots to Mr. Krei. However, he also says that he appreciates Mr. Krei’s offering in order to show his polite and formal attitude to the owner of the Krei Tech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2 Greeting</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 5</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Hiro Wasabi Tadashi Hiro</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">:&quot;Honey lemon&quot;? &quot;Go go&quot;? &quot;Wasabi&quot;?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: I spill wasabi on my shirt one time, people. One time!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Fred is the one who comes up with the nicknames.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">:Who's Fred?</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Fred &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">This guy, right here!</span><span class="font2"> Don't be alarmed. It is just a suit. This is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">not my real face and body. The name's Fred. School mascot by day, but by night. I am also a school mascot.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 5 is identified as expressive for greeting since Fred and Hiro meet for the first time. The result that the speaker wants to achieve is to greet the hearer by saying “This guy, right here!” That utterance is also identified as indirect speech act. It means that the speaker has more meaning by saying the utterance. The meaning of the utterance is that Fred wants to make an unforgettable first impression for Hiro because they just meet each other for the first time. He wears a dragon costume and greets Hiro suddenly making him shocked.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wishing</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Data 6</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Aunt Cass enters Hiro’s bedroom to give him food)</span><span class="font2"> Hey,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">sweetie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Hey, aunt cass.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Mrs. Matsuda's in the cafe. She's wearing something super</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">inappropriate for an 80-year-old. That always cracks you up.You should come down.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Maybe later.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Aunt Cass &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:The university called again</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">It's been a few weeks</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">since classes started. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">But they said it's not too late to register. </span><span class="font2">Hiro &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:Okay. Thanks. I'll think about it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 6 is identified as expressive for wishing. The speaker expresses what she hopes to come true as what she is expected. The utterance “But they said it's not too late to register” is also identified as indirect speech act. It means the utterance above has another meaning than what it is actually said. The literal meaning is that Aunt Cass informs Hiro that it is not too late to register yet. Meanwhile, the indirect meaning is Aunt Cass hoping Hiro to register to the San Fransokyo Institute of Technology. In this case, Aunt Cass as the speaker does not only utter the utterance to the hearer but also perform an act of wishing and expecting that it will become a reality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Expresssive as one of five types of illocutionary acts is simply to express the sincerity condition of the speech acts stating what the speaker feels. In this study, all of the six types of expressive of illocutionary acts were found in the movie “Big Hero 6” whether in direct and indirect speech acts. In order to obtain the right interpretation of the meanings behind the utterances, the hearer should consider the context of situation of the utterance. The context of situation is required since an utterance spoken by the speaker may carry more than one meaning in different context.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Hymes, Dell. 1972. Toward Ethnography of Communication: The Analysis of Communication Events. In Giglioli 1972: 22-24.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Levinson, Stephen C. 1983. Pragmatics. UK: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle, John R. 1996. Ch. 10. A Taxonomy of Illocutionaru Acts. A. P Martinich (Ed).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Philosophy of Language (pp. 141-155). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Yule, George. 1996. Pragmatics. New York: Oxford University Press</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">31</span></p>