---
layout: full_article
title: "BIOGRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF POEM “ON LOVE” BY KAHLIL GIBRAN"
author: "Pande Made Adistya Agustina"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIOGRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF POEM “ON LOVE” BY KAHLIL GIBRAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PANDE MADE ADISTYA AGUSTINA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kahlil Gibran atau Jubran Khalil Jubran adalah salah seorang sastrawan perantauan (Mahjar) beraliran romantik. Kahlil Gibran lahir pada tanggal 6 Januari 1883 di Beshari, Lebanon. Beshari sendiri merupakan daerah yang kerap di singgahi badai, gempa serta petir. Tak heran bila sejak kecil, mata Gibran sudah terbiasa menangkap fenomena-fenomena alam tersebut. Inilah yang nantinya banyak mempengaruhi tulisan-tulisannya tentang alam. Gibran sangat produktif dan hidupnya mengalami banyak perbedaan pada tahun-tahun berikutnya. Selain menulis dalam bahasa Arab, dia juga terus menyempurnakan penguasaan bahasa inggrisnya dan mengembangkan kesenimanannya. Kehidupan cinta Gibran juga sangat melankolis. Gibran meninggal dunia di Boston Amerika Serikat 10 april 1931. The Prophet (1923) merupakan salah satu karyanya yang paling terkenal dan diterjemahkan dalam 20 bahasa. Karya-karya itu adalah suatu cara agar dirinya memahami dunia renungan relijius seorang yang bijak dan dewasa. Dalam jurnal ini menggunakan teori dari Austin Warren and Wellek (1973). Dalam jurnal ini, ditemukan bahwa Kahlil Gibran menggunakan konsep cinta yang murni, disebutkan murni karena cinta dating dari dalam diri kita sendiri, dari hati kita, dan kita berserah kepada Tuhan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Kahlil Gibran, Biography, The Prophet</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literary work is an expression of human’s ideas about a lot of things conveyed creatively in the form of writing. Therefore, reading it will enrich the knowledge of the readers. An author usually creates people’s experiences in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">society and the nature of its surrounding. In expressing his ideas, the author often involves his imagination in order to enrich it with aesthetic value in his literary works. It often makes the reader feel as if we use entering into the situation which the Author describes in his work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Biography is an ancient literary genre. Biography makes no methodological distinction between statement, a general, an architect, a lawyer, and a man who plays no public role. However, insignificant it is, if truthfully told would be of interest and sound enough to be read. Biography can be judged in relation to the light it throws on the actual production of poetry; but we can, of course, defend it and justify it as a study of the man of genius, of his moral, intellectual, and emotional development, which has its own intrinsic interest, and finally, we can think of biography as affording materials for a systematic study of the psychology of the poet and the poetic processes. Biographical approach actually obscures a proper comprehension of the literary process, since it breaks up the literary tradition to substitute the life – cycle of an individual. Then, the biography approach ignores also quite simple psychological facts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">How are Kahlil Gibran’s personalities and his life experience reflected in “On Love?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To describe Kahlil Gibran’s personalities and his life experience reflected in “On Love”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The methodology used in this analysis includes the determination of data source, the technique of collecting the data, and the process of analyzing and interpreting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this writing were taken from the article in the internet, from some books and from one of the poems by Kahlil Gibran, “On Love”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from the internet taken by browsing, reading, selecting and then printing out. Meanwhile, data from book were taken by close reading, selecting, and then typing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data was then classified, analyzed, and presented descriptively according to the theory adopted; in this case the data were analyzed based on the theory of literature and the biography in order to achieve a conclusion. The other information from other sources was also used to support the analysis of the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrelation between Kahlil Gibran’s Biography and “On Love”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The Prophet is a signal that it is full spirit from Kahlil Gibran. A soul has sensitivity, enthusiasm and curiosity. The Prophet is known as human experiences in whole from annoyance until great happiness. There are gates of messages for human beings, which appear everywhere. In The Prophet, Gibran expresses life as something to be enjoyed and soaked in as many ways as possible. The Prophet does not stress the punishment of sins, but to bask in pleasure and not look back. Decadence is not suggested, but the basic purpose of Gibran’s legacy is to tell us that life is short and must be lived without regrets.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“On Love” is one of his poems in The Prophet. Essentially the prose poetry presents the idea about love. Love is life, so if we miss love, we miss life, love is needed in our life. It is so hard for us to give the actual meaning of love. We know</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">how it feels but we do not know how to explain it. In particular, the theme of the poem is love.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Through “On Love”, we know how Kahlil Gibran’s ideas about love are conceptualized. It may be, inspired by his relation with Mary Haskell, Josephine Peabody and other woman in his life. As we know the literary work is influenced by the writer’s experience. So in this case, the experiences of Kahlil Gibran have great influence on the poem “On Love”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The poem shows how Kahlil Gibran can survive because of love. He does everything for love even he has to leave his dreams. Love here means how Kahlil Gibran follows his heart to make better future and find his path and his true love, free for life or choose something. The other side, we know that his experience in life is reflected in “On Love”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the explanation above, we can get some idea about love. As a human, we cannot get away from love. Romantic love is important to us because it is the way in which individuals can make a refuge of the natural within society. Marriage, however, is suspect because it is the way in which society controls and warps the pure and natural realm of sexual romantic love. Gibran believed that the bonds of love, devotion and friendship would bring together these endlessly reborn beings. In the same manner, animosity, evil and hatred have the same effect of reassembling groups of entities from one cycle to another.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Like the Master, Jesus, Gibran taught eternal life in parable and metaphor. In “On Love”, Gibran writer:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">When you love you should not say, “God is in my heart,”but rather, I am in the heart of God.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the analysis above, it can be concluded that biography has an important role in understanding a literary work. The period and society in which the author lives, and the world of other writers, all influence the author’s. Many literary creation contributions to literature have resulted from an author’s reaction to social conditions. In his work, Kahlil Gibran is influenced most by his culture of origin from his land, his relationship and his friends. His writing is mostly influenced by Arabic Literature. He is widely regarded as a man of the East who brought a much needed element of spirituality to the West.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In “On Love”, Kahlil Gibran shows his ideas about love. The theme of this prose poetry is love, which is although present in different forms, is nonetheless still love. Gibran supports this theme by providing many examples of different types of love and how we should deal with love. He just states how it is. He only gives examples of how and where it is. Throughout all of Gibran’s writing in The Prophet he plays the role of a moderator, one is able to see both sides of an issue, but never openly admitting his own. In his life Gibran was his own moderator as he tried to find a balance between his hate for organized religion and his love for his god. As a result, his love theme was plainly reflected in his writing. It can be concluded that the type of love conceptualized by Kahlil Gibran is pure love, about growth of our soul. It is pure love because love comes from ourselves, from our hearts, from our deep willing and we surrender to the God for our better life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene; Warren, Austin. 1973. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> London: Lowe &amp;&nbsp;Brytone.Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gibran, Kahlil (1883 – 1931) – </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gibran/Jibran – Khalil/Kahlil, Arabic name Jubran Khalil Jubran.</span><span class="font1"> Available from: </span><a href="http://www.kijarto.sci.fi/gibran.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.kijarto.sci.fi/gibran.htm</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gibran, Kahlil. 1969. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Prophet.</span><span class="font1"> New York. Alferd A. Knopf, Inc.</span></p>