---
layout: full_article
title: "LEXICAL COHESION OF THE ARTICLE “A TALE OF A BALINESE BRIDE” IN BALI AND BEYOND MAGAZINE"
author: "Ni Nyoman Dian Trisusanti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LEXICAL COHESION OF THE ARTICLE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“A TALE OF A BALINESE BRIDE”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN BALI AND BEYOND MAGAZINE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Nyoman Dian Triastuti</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra)</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Artikel adalah karangan faktual secara lengkap dengan panjang tertentu yang dibuat untuk dipublikasikan baik melalui koran, majalah, atau buletin. Artikel yang terdiri dari beberapa paragraf yang terikat oleh suatu ikatan makna dan membentuk satu kesatuan yang utuh sebagai sebuah teks. Ikatan makna dari kalimat yang satu dengan kalimat yang lain dihubungkan oleh perangkat kohesif yang terdiri dari kohesi gramatikal dan kohesi leksikal. Kohesi gramatikal terdiri dari referensi, substitusi, elipsis dan konjungsi, sedangkan kohesi leksikal terdiri dari reiterasi dan kolokasi. Berkaitan dengan penggunaan perangkat kohesif, tulisan ini bertujuan untuk menganalisa kohesi leksikal yang terdapat di dalam artikel “Sebuah Kisah tentang Pengantin Bali” yang merujuk kepada teori leksikal yang dikembangkan oleh M.A.K Halliday dan Ruqaiya Hasan dalam bukunya yang berjudul Cohesion in English (1976).Berdasarkan hasil penelitian, dapat disimpulkan bahwa artikel tersebut mengandung kohesi leksikal yang ditunjukkan dengan penggunaan reiterasi dan kolokasi di dalam teks. Penggunaan kohesi leksikal tersebut berfungsi untuk memperjelas ikatan makna dan hubungan antar tiap kalimat di dalam teks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : artikel, kohesi gramatikal, kohesi leksikal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Every text has a structure. The structure refers to how the information within a written text is organized. The parts that make up the text are related in a meaningful way to each other. Recognizing the way in which a text has been organized will help us understand it better. In order to understand the text, it is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">necessary to understand how the sentences are related. The sentences are related to each other due to the use of connector which appear in a different sentence within a text. And the sentences are connected by the devices called cohesive devices.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the theory of Halliday and Hasan (1985), cohesive devices distinguish grammatical from lexical cohesion. Grammatical cohesion can be divided into four classes: reference (personal, demonstrative, and comparative), substitution (nominal, verbal, and clausal), ellipsis (nominal, verbal, and clausal) and conjunction (additive, adversative, causal, and temporal). Then lexical cohesion can be divided into two classes: reiteration (repetition, synonym, nearsynonym, superordinate, and general words) and collocation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In order to determine the coherent or discourse structure and the larger meaning of a text, it is very important to understand the lexical cohesion used in the text. Related to those reasons, this thesis is focused on analyzing the lexical cohesion and context of situation of the information or message from an article in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine</span><span class="font1"> entitled “A Tale of A Balinese Bride” as a written text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">What types of lexical cohesion are used in the article “A Tale of A Balinese Bride” in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine</span><span class="font1"> ?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To describe the types of lexical cohesion used in the article “A Tale of A Balinese Bride” in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source means the source from which the data are obtained. The primary data in this study were taken from the English</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">written text in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine</span><span class="font1"> in a special article called Craft &amp;&nbsp;Culture entitled “A Tale of A Balinese Bride” published on October 2011 volume 13 no. 137.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This is a qualitative research in which all of the data were collected through library research method. And there are some steps in collecting the data; firstly, searching the data from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine </span><span class="font1">continued by reading through the written text carefully and were takes the sentences which contains cohesive device (lexical cohesion) and the relation between the meaning and the sentence before or after it was found. Finally, the data were saved in the computer system.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed using descriptive – qualitative method based on the theory of cohesion proposed by Halliday and Hasan in their book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English (1976)</span><span class="font1">. And there are some steps used to analyze the data; first the lexical cohesions and non-lexical cohesions were classified. In this case, non-lexical cohesions were ignored and the lexical cohesion items were signed with bold mark. Second, the relation between a sentence with another through the cohesive devices applied in the text was found.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Cohesion and Context of Situation of the article “A Tale of A Balinese Bride” in Bali and Beyond Magazine</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This Chapter is concerned with the analysis of the data taken from the text of the article in Bali and Beyond Magazine entitled “A Tale of a Balinese Bride”. This text was analyzed through the analysis of the lexical cohesion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reiteration</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Repetition occurs where words or their different forms are repeated in the text.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Data:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">That day the groom to be, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">his family </span><span class="font1">and several other relatives came to propose, referred to as “ngidih” in the local Balinese social-lingo, which roughly can be translated as to ‘ask for’ or to ‘acquire’ rather than ‘pop the question’. When the man and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">his family </span><span class="font1">pay a visit to ‘ask for’ the family’s girl – this means something for sure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data of paragraph 1, it can be found that there is repetition in the word ‘his family’ which refers back to ‘his family’ in the previous sentence without any change. And the occurrence of that word makes a relation between the first sentence with the following sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonymy or Near-synonymy</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Synonymy or near-synonymy mean using the different word class which has related meaning or has nearly the same meaning as another or has close meaning to each other.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Data:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">She asked me to accompany her to the bale daja, the household pavilion which often serves as a meeting place to discuss </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">family </span><span class="font1">and social matters, as my other brothers and sisters were busy helping outside attending to arriving guests. That day the groom to be, his family and several other </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">relatives </span><span class="font1">came to propose, referred to as “ngidih” in the local Balinese social-lingo, which roughly can be translated as to ‘ask for’ or to ‘acquire’ rather than ‘pop the question’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data of paragraph 1, it can be found that the word ‘family’ is near-synonymy of the word ‘relative’ in which ‘family’ means</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">a group consisting of one or two parents and their children and ‘relative’ means a person who is in the same family as somebody else.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superordinate</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Superordinate, is a word with a general meaning that includes the meanings of other particular words.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Data:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">My cousin was 25 </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">years </span><span class="font1">old at that time. This </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">age </span><span class="font1">is widely referred as the ripe age to get married and start a family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There is a relation between the word ‘years’ with the word ‘age’ in paragraph 3 as a superordinate. The word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">age</span><span class="font1">’ is a superordinate of ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">years</span><span class="font1">’- that is, a name for a more general class.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;General Word</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">General words correspond to major classes of lexical items. They are on the borderline between lexical items and substitutes.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Data:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Anyway, back to </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">my cousin</span><span class="font1">. I remembered that day </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">she </span><span class="font1">appeared significantly nervous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word ‘my cousin’ and ‘she’ in paragraph 5 can be classified as a general word in which ‘she’ is the general word of ‘my cousin’. The word ‘she’ is used to avoid repeating the same word in the preceding sentence so the word ‘she’ refers back to ‘my cousin’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Collocation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Collocation is some words which are most commonly found paired with other words or it is concerned with the way words occur together in English. Collocation is often related by the sense of meaning to build up the lexical relations.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Data:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">She ‘escorted’ her daughter to join in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the forum</span><span class="font1">. That day in front of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the circle </span><span class="font1">she was formally proposed to, to which she answered, “I do”. Not long afterwards, they </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">proceeded </span><span class="font1">towards the family temple or sanggah, a place of ancestral worship for each Balinese Hindu family compound in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Collocation that was found in paragraph 7 could be seen in the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the forum</span><span class="font1">’ with the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the circle</span><span class="font1">’ and ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">proceeded</span><span class="font1">’. In this case, the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the forum</span><span class="font1">’ refers to the meeting in which the proposing event being talked, then the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">circle</span><span class="font1">’ refers to the group of people who attend the proposing event while the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">proceeded</span><span class="font1">’ refers to the next step after the proposing event. So it can be seen that they are related to each other as one sequence of the event which has happened.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Lexical cohesion in the text is built by a number of repetition, synonymy, near-synonymy, superordinate, general word and collocation. In term of reiteration, there are repetitions in; ‘family’, near-synonym in; ‘family – relative’, superordinate in; ‘years – age’, general word in; ‘my cousin – she’ and collocation in; ‘the forum – the circle – proceeded’. The article is well organized and the sentence is coherent. The lexical cohesion as one of cohesive devices plays an important role in the text in order to make the text cohesive and coherent.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, Gillian, and George Yule. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Group, MRA Media. October 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bali and Beyond Magazine: Craft and Culture</span><span class="font1">. Bali: PT Bumi Dian Kusuma.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K., and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English.</span><span class="font1"> London and New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advance Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nunan, David. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. London: Penguin Books Ltd.</span></p>