---
layout: full_article
title: "The Mapping of Meaning Components of Phrases  about Plants in Indonesian and English Translation"
author: "I Gede krisna Wedhana C, I Made Rajeg, I Nengah Sudipa"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-67412 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-67412"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-67412"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i01.p02"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i01.p02</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Mapping of Meaning Components of Phrases about Plants in Indonesian and English Translation</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Gede Krisna Wedhana. C.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Email:</span><a href="mailto:krisnawedhana94@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">krisnawedhana94@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>I Nengah Sudipa</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar-Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Email:</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>I Made Rajeg</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Email:</span><a href="mailto:made_rajeg@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">made_rajeg@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span><span class="font3">-- This research aims at finding the types of procedures applied in translating Indonesian phrases about plants into English, as well as analyzing the mapping of meaning components of the phrases from the source language to the target language. The data source is a bilingual biology textbook for senior high school students. The data in this study is in the form of two-word noun phrases about plants. The data was collected using observation method, reading technique, and note-taking technique. The data was analyzed by using theories of translation procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet and Natural Semantic Metalanguage. The result showed that the types of translation procedures applied were transposition and literal translation. The meaning components of the phrases of the source language are mostly transferred to the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: Translation, Procedure, Mapping</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstra</span><span class="font3">k-- Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menemukan jenis-jenis prosedur yang diterapkan untuk menerjemahkan frase-frase tentang tanaman dalam bahasa Indonesia ke bahasa Inggris, serta menganalisis pemetaan komponen maknanya dari bahasa sumber ke bahasa sasaran. Sumber data penelitian ini adalah buku pelajaran biologi dwibahasa untuk peserta didik SMA. Data dalam penelitian ini berbentuk frase mengenai tanaman yang terdiri dari dua kata. Data dikumpulkan menggunakan metode pengamatan, teknik membaca, serta teknik catat. Data dianalisis menggunakan teori prosedur penerjemahan yang diusulkan oleh Vinay dan Darbelnet serta Metabahasa Semantik Alami. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa jenis prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan adalah transposisi dan penerjemahan harfiah. Sebagian besar komponen makna frase pada bahasa sumber tersalurkan ke bahasa sasaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: Penerjemahan, Prosedur, Pemetaan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">One important thing to be noticed in translating the source language (SL) to target language (TL) is meaning. The basic meanings or explanations of words are usually compiled in dictionaries or encyclopedias, however, sometimes meanings of words depend on particular context of situation. Beside literal meaning and meaning that is based on situation, there is special meaning as well, such as idiomatic meaning. Difficulties in knowing and understanding the meaning of a language usually appear in units of language that have special meanings because the meaning cannot be predicted literally (Setiawan 2019: 1). People should be careful in interpreting the meaning of word, especially words in foreign languages. This should be noticed especially when dealing with translation because the translation product should be acceptable to the target readers. One example of the difficulties that has to be considered by translators when translating SL text into TL is that a language can have some lexicons with very similar meanings, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">buy</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">purchase</span><span class="font3"> in English, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pintar</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pandai</span><span class="font3"> in Indonesian (Sudipa et.al 2018: 156).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The basic principle of translation is transferring the meaning in SL to TL (Suryasa, et.al 2019: 113). Therefore, meaning becomes an important aspect in translation field. There are two main kinds of translation, namely form-based and meaning-based translation (Larson in Yanti 2017: 49). Form-based translation attempts to follow the form of the SL and is known as literal translation. Meaning-based translation makes every effort to communicate the meaning of the SL text in the natural forms of the TL. Translation enables the dissemination of information to a wider reading society because this intellectual activity links different languages by rendering the meaning from an SL text into a TL text (Umbas 2017: 97). In the translation process, the meaning must be held constant and must not be changed. The information contained in texts must be maintained, however, sometimes, the meaning components of SL and TL texts can be different because there is no equivalent</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">for the SL in the TL which has exactly the same meaning components. The goal of translators is to keep the meaning constant (Sayani 2018: 7). Translators can merely use the closest natural equivalent of the SL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nowadays, many texts and books in one language are translated into other languages in order to make the information able to be delivered to people in many different countries. As an international language, most texts and books are translated into English. It is made as well bilingual books presented in English and another language depending on in which country the books are published. This is to enlarge the knowledge of the readers about English language, such as the vocabulary and sentence structures. Here, translation plays an important role not only in reaching more people who speak different languages to make them understand more about certain information (Jaya 2019: 138). In Indonesia, for example, there are several textbooks for high school presented bilingually, in English and Indonesian languages. The translators have to translate the material in the book carefully because it is used for academic purposes. Translators should use particular translation procedures to make translation result that can be accepted by the target readers. The other important thing is translators who translate important texts such as legal and academic texts should be experienced enough or professional.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Some studies have analyzed about translation and translation procedure. Aryani, et.al (2019) conducted research about problems in translating scientific terms about animals in English into Indonesian language and she found out that some data in SL and their translation products in TL are not equivalent. She claimed that revision is important in order to obtain a better result of translation and avoid misunderstanding of terms for target readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Susanthi, et.al. (2019) analyzes phenomena found in translating medical abbreviations and found out that SL abbreviations can be still in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">form of the same abbreviations in TL or in the different form, such as phrases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jayantini (2018) analyzed translation procedure, especially naturalization (a procedure proposed by Molina and Albir) and adaptation in the translation of English medical texts into Indonesian. She found that these two procedures were applied in translating medical texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sunny (2017) analyzed the translation of English slang words in a novel into Indonesian. She stated that some people use slang words in daily communication for certain purposes and eventually replaces the use of standard language. Therefore it is difficult to translate slang words. She described that certain approaches are needed to analyze slang words in the translation process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Those previous studies found out that translating both academic and non-academic texts is not easy and needs procedures to get results that can be accepted by the target readers. In relation to those studies, this study analyzes translation procedures applied by the translator in translating noun phrases about plants from Indonesian into English and the meaning components of SL and TL terms to see how the meaning is transferred from SL to TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, the data source is a bilingual biology textbook for senior high school entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Application of Biology</span><span class="font3"> and the data is two-word noun phrases about plants in the first and second chapters of the book. The translation procedures applied in translating the phrases from Indonesian language to English are analyzed by using the theory of translation procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (in Erfiani 2018: 37-39) which consists of seven procedures, they are borrowing, calque, literal translation, transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation. Here is the explanation:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This procedure is considered as the simplest of all procedures to solve discrepancy, usually something which is metalinguistic (for example: a new technical process, unknown concept).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Translators adopted this procedure to introduce the flavor of SL in translation. In other words, in translating SL terms into TL, foreign terms may be used. This usually happens without changing either the form or the meaning. Salum (2019: 131) stated that borrowing refers to the case where a word or an expression is taken from the SL and used in the TL but in naturalized form, for example the English verb ‘mail’ becomes </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mailer</span><span class="font3"> in Canadian-French utterance. The French suffix “er” is added to English verb ‘mail’ to conform to the French rules of verb formation (Harding &amp;&nbsp;Riley in Salum 2019: 130).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Haugen (in Herman 2019: 8), there are some possibilities that may occur in borrowing procedure. The first one is borrowing with no change in form and meaning (pure loanwords). The second one is borrowing with changes in form but without changing the meaning (mix loan). The third one is borrowing when part of them is native and the other part is borrowed, but the meaning is fully borrowed (loan blends). Examples:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing with no change in form and meaning (pure loanwords)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Supermarket &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Supermarket</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Charger &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Charger</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Radio &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Radio</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing with a change in form but without changing the meaning (mix loanwords)^</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Inflation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inflasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Business &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bisnis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loan blend (borrowing when part of the term is native and the other part is borrowed)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">National debt &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hutang nasional</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Calque</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This procedure is a special kind of borrowing; a language borrows an expression from another language and then translates each of its elements literally. In other words, calque refers to the case where the translator imitates in his translation the structure of expression of the ST (Salum 2019: 131). According to Herman (2019: 8), one example of calque application is when phrase borrowed from another language and translated literally word for word. Calque is categorized into two types: lexical calque and structural calque. Lexical calque (first example) values syntactic structure of TL while introducing a new expression mode. Structural calque (second example) introduces new construction into TL. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Crisis management &nbsp;Manajemen krisis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bali Post &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali Post</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal (word-for-word) translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This procedure works by translating directly SL text grammatically or idiomatically in accordance with TL text. By applying this procedure, the translator focuses predominantly on adhering to the linguistic rules of the TL (Salum 2019: 131) Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">All the mice</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is a translation process that replaces one word class with another without changing the meaning. It deals with grammatical changes in translation (Salum 2019: 131). Transposition is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">also a change in the grammar from SL to TL (singular to plural; the position of adjective; etc.) (Herman 2019: &nbsp;9). There are two kinds of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">transposition: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;obligatory &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;optional</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">transposition. Obligatory transposition is applied</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Semua tikus</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mahasiswa kedokteran</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kata sandi</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">when TL has no options because of the different language systems. ^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tall grass &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rerumputan yang tinggi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Optional transposition is chosen by translator for the sake of language style and if it fits better into the utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Medical student Password</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is a translation process characterized by the variation of message form. The variation happens because of different point of view. As the same with transposition, modulation is divided into two: optional or free and obligatory or fixed. Optional/ free modulation is generally adopted because of nonlinguistic reasons (Herman 2019: 9). This modulation is usually applied in order to stress the meaning or to find out the natural form in the TL.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Black and blue &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lebam</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He was killed in the war &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dia gugur dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">perang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Obligatory/ fixed modulation is applied if SL words, phrases, or structures cannot be found in TL. When an active sentence is translated into passive, it is an example of this type of modulation. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I grew up in Jakarta Saya dibesarkan di Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Equivalence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This procedure is applied when there are two texts with the same context of situation but totally different method, style, and structure. This procedure is the ideal method when the translator has to deal with proverbs, idioms, the onomatopoeia of animal sounds, etc (Salum 2019: 131). This procedure means that the process of translating SL into TL that emphasizes on closest natural meaning (Herman 2019: 9).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cock-a-doodle-do &nbsp;&nbsp;Kukuruyuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bookworm &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kutu buku</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This procedure is adopted if the message of SL texts is unknown in TL culture. Salum (2019: 132) stated as well that adaptation refers to the changing of the cultural reference when a situation in the source culture does not exist in the target culture. In this case, translators have to create a new situation that can be considered equivalent Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Your Sincerely &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dengan Hormat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Your Majesty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yang Mulia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this research, it is also analyzed as well how the meanings of each phrase in the SL are mapped to the TL by using the theory of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) approach proposed by Goddard and Wierzbicka (2014). The formal mode of meaning representation in the NSM approach is the semantic explication. The meanings of each phrase can be mapped by making explication using a list of words called semantic primes. It can be seen the similarity and the difference of meaning components between the phrases in the SL and TL. List of words belonging to semantic primes is as follows:^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. List of semantic primes (Goddard and Wierzbicka 2014: 12)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Category</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Primes</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">I~ME, YOU, SOMEONE,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Substantives</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">SOMETHING~THING, PEOPLE, BODY</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Relational</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">KIND, PARTS</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">substantives</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">THIS, THE SAME,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Determiners</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">OTHER~ELSE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ONE, TWO, SOME, ALL,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Quantifiers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">MUCH~MANY, LITTLE~FEW</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Evaluators</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">GOOD, BAD</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Descriptors</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">BIG, SMALL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">THINK, KNOW, WANT,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Mental predicates</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">DON’T WANT, FEEL, SEE, HEAR</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Speech</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">SAY, WORDS, TRUE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Actions, Events,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">DO, HAPPEN, MOVE,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Movement</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">TOUCH</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">BE (SOMEWHERE), THERE IS, BE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Existence,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Possession</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(SOMEONE)’S, BE (SOMEONE/ SOMETHING)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Life and Death</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">LIVE, DIE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">WHEN~TIME, NOW, BEFORE, AFTER, A LONG</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">TIME, A SHORT TIME, FOR SOME TIME, MOMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">WHERE~PLACE, HERE,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Space</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">ABOVE, BELOW, FAR, NEAR, SIDE, INSIDE NOT, MAYBE, CAN,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Logical concepts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">BECAUSE, IF</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Intensifier,</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">VERY, MORE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">augmentor</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Similarity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">LIKE~AS~WAY</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The source of data in this study is a bilingual biology textbook entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Application of Biology</span><span class="font3"> and published in Indonesia. This book is chosen as a data source because this book is made for academic purposes and the contents are promising for this study. Biology is an important science about living organisms. There should be good consideration and intellectual thinking in translating such academic materials. The data is in the form of two-word noun phrases about plants. The data is taken from the first and second chapters of the book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Documentation method, reading technique, and note-taking technique were applied in collecting the data. The data was collected through some steps: preparing all the equipment needed to collect the data such as pen or pencil, papers, highlighter, and laptop, reading the data source, and marking and typing the data. The data was typed by using a laptop in the form of tables.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, qualitative method and paraphrasing technique were applied in analyzing the data. The classified data was analyzed based on the theory of translation procedures proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet and the theory of NSM proposed by Wierzbicka and Goddard.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this part, it is presented the result and discussion of the analysis of types of translation procedures applied in translating phrases about plants as well as the mapping of meaning components of the phrases from the SL into the TL. The English data was presented in bold type, meanwhile the Indonesian data was presented in bold and italic type.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Amatilah lima</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Observe five </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">roses</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tanaman mawar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Rosa sp</span><span class="font3">.) of the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rosa sp.</span><span class="font3">) berjenis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">same kinds in a</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">sama yang ada di</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">mountain range.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">daerah pegunungan. (p10)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">(p10)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-1), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">roses</span><span class="font3">. The translation procedure applied here is transposition because there is a replacement of one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message (Vinay and Darbelnet in Erfiani 2018: &nbsp;38).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> is a phrase and it becomes a word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mawar</span><span class="font3"> in TL. However, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">roses </span><span class="font3">literally are not obviously referred to the plants. It can be only the flowers. Perhaps the translator should translate the word plant as well, so it is clear that the meaning refers to the whole plant and not just the flower.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> can be meant as shrub plants covering many species, growing upright or climbing, having spiny stems as well as colorful and fragrant flowers. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Roses </span><span class="font3">can be defined as a bush of thorns that produce flowers with sweet smell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> “roses”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one kind of thing (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing lives inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are bad parts of this thing (stems with thorns)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">If people touch the parts, something can happen (getting hurt)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people do not want to touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are good parts of this thing (colorful, fragrant flowers)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people want to see and touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">roses</span><span class="font3"> “tanaman mawar”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be one kind of thing (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be one part of thing (flower)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be inside something (soil or other places)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There can be bad parts of this thing (stems with thorns)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">If people touch the parts, something can happen (getting hurt)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people do not want to touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There can be good parts of this thing (colourful, fragrant flowers)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people want to see and touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-1), both </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">roses </span><span class="font3">are living things. Both of them are visible and touchable because their sizes are not very small. They have stems with thorns, so people avoid touching this part. They have fragrant and colorful flower, that is why people want to see and touch this part. The meaning components of the phrase of SL are mostly mapped into TL. However, there is a little difference in the meaning components. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tanaman mawar</span><span class="font3"> has to be referred to as rose plant, meanwhile </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">roses </span><span class="font3">is ambiguous because it can be referred to as either rose plant or merely the flower. The translator should translate </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tanaman</span><span class="font3"> as well into English, so it becomes </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rose plant.</span><span class="font3"> Therefore, the meaning will be clearer and misunderstanding can be avoided.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-2)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Pilih kacang hijau yang memiliki penampilan baik, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">biji bulat</span><span class="font3">, dan kulit halus. (p18)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Choose green bean with good appearance, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">round seed </span><span class="font3">and fine peel. (p18)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-2), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">biji bulat</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">round seed</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The translation procedure applied here is transposition because there is a grammatical change in SL text when it is translated into TL. The position of head and modifier of the phrase is changed in the translation process. The grammatical structure is different but the meaning is maintained.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Biji bulat</span><span class="font3"> means a round-shaped content of a fruit that can grow to be a new plant when it is planted in appropriate medium and condition. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Round seed </span><span class="font3">means small hard part of a plant from which a new plant can grow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">biji bulat</span><span class="font3"> “round seed”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is inside other part of something (fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (become a new plant) This part can do this if this part is in one good place (suitable place)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part if something happens (it is not very small)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">round seed</span><span class="font3"> “biji bulat”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is inside other part of something (fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (become a new plant) This part can do this if this part is in one good place (suitable place)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part if something happens (it is not very small)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-2), the meaning components of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">biji bulat</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">round seed </span><span class="font3">are the same. The meaning components of the phrase of SL are totally transferred to TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">fully transferred to TL. There is no difference in their meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Pilih kacang hijau</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Choose green bean</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">yang memiliki</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">with good</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">penampilan baik,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">appearance, round</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">biji bulat, dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">kulit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">seed and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fine peel</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">halus. </span><span class="font3">(p18)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(p18)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-3), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kulit halus</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fine peel</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Transposition is applied in translating the phrases because there is a grammatical change in the position of head and modifier of SL phrase when it is translated into TL. It has to be adjusted with the TL linguistic system. Although the position of the head (noun) and modifier (adjective) of SL and TL phrases are different, the meaning is maintained and not changed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kulit halus</span><span class="font3"> can be meant as soft seed wrapper, meanwhile </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fine peel </span><span class="font3">means delicate skin of fruit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kulit halus</span><span class="font3"> “fine peel”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is near something (plant seed)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is good (delicate)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (protecting plant seed) People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fine peel</span><span class="font3"> “kulit halus”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is near something (plant seed)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is good (delicate)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (protecting plant seed) People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-3), it is shown that the meaning components in SL text are</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-4)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Dalam pengamatan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">In observing </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">rose</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">bunga mawar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rosa sp.</span><span class="font3">), a</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rosa sp</span><span class="font3">),</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">diameter and</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">dilakukan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">corolla’s length</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">pengukuran</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">measurement is</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">diameter dan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">performed … (p24)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">panjang mahkota. ,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">… (p24)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-4), noun phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">rose</span><span class="font3">. Transposition is applied in translating SL phrases to TL because there is a grammatical change in the TL. SL phrase is translated into merely one word. The grammatical category between SL and TL is different, but the meaning is maintained and not changed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> can be meant as a beautiful, colorful, and fragrant part of a thorny bush that grows upright or climbs. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Rose </span><span class="font3">means bush with thorns producing a flower with a sweet smell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> “rose”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part (flower) of something (rose plant) The thing is inside something (soil) This part is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is good (fragrant and colourful)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people want to see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rose</span><span class="font3"> “bunga mawar”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be one part of something (flower)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There can be parts of this thing (stems with thorns) If people touch the parts, something can happen (getting hurt)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people do not want to touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There can be other parts of this thing (flowers) The parts are good (colourful and fragrant) Because of this, people want to see and touch the parts</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-4), it can be seen that </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">rose </span><span class="font3">has some meaning components that </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> does not have. It is because </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">rose </span><span class="font3">are more general and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> is more specific. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Rose </span><span class="font3">can be referred to as a kind of flower or the plant of that flower, meanwhile </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bunga mawar</span><span class="font3"> merely refers to the flower. Based on this case, the translator should be careful in translating texts from general into more specific words. In order to avoid misunderstanding, the translator should translate the word flower as well, so it becomes rose flower</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> There should be supporting information that can describe whether the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">rose </span><span class="font3">refers to merely the flower or the flower and the plant as well.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-5)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Dalam pengamatan bunga mawar (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rosa sp</span><span class="font3">), dilakukan pengukuran diameter dan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">panjang mahkota</span><span class="font3">. , … (p24)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">In observing rose (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rosa sp.</span><span class="font3">), a diameter and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">petal’s length </span><span class="font3">measurement is performed … (p24)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-5), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">panjang mahkota</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">petal’s length</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The procedure of translation applied is transposition because there is a grammatical change in the translation process. The position of the head and modifier of SL phrase is head + modifier (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panjang + mahkota</span><span class="font3">) but the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">phrase structure of its translation in TL is modifier + head (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">corolla’s + length).</span><span class="font3"> Translator changes the structure so that the translation can be accepted by target readers. Although the structure is changed, the meaning of SL is maintained.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Panjang mahkota</span><span class="font3"> means the length (longitudinal distance from one end to another end) of the beautiful and colorful part of a flower. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Petal’s length </span><span class="font3">can be meant as the size or measurement of the ring of flower petal from one end to the other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panjang mahkota</span><span class="font3"> “petal’s length”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is something (length/ longitudinal distance from one end to another end)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is one part of something (flower’s petal/flower)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People cannot see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can do something to this part (measuring the length)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">petal’s length</span><span class="font3"> “panjang mahkota”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is something (length/ measurement from one end to another end)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is one part of something (flower’s petal/flower)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People cannot see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can do something to this part (measuring the length)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-5), the meaning components of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">panjang mahkota</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">petal’s length </span><span class="font3">are the same. It can be seen that there is one difference between the meaning components of SL and TL phrases. In SL phrase,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">panjang</span><span class="font3"> means longitudinal distance, meanwhile in TL phrase, length means size or measurement. Longitudinal distance can be measured, so that longitudinal distance and size/ measurement refer to something that can be measured. The meaning components are fully transferred from SL to TL.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-6)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Namun, Anda juga dapat melihat bahwa dalam satu kotak yang berisi </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">buah jeruk</span><span class="font3">, antara jeruk yang satu dengan yang lain memiliki kemiripan. (p27)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">However, you can see also in a box of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oranges</span><span class="font3">, there are similarities among them. (p27)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-6), phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oranges</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Transposition is applied in translating this phrase because there is a change in the grammatical category. Phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buah jeruk </span><span class="font3">becomes a single word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oranges </span><span class="font3">in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> means a kind of fruit of Citrus plant consisting of several sections inside and the taste can be sour and sweet. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Oranges </span><span class="font3">can be meant as a round citrus fruit with thick reddish-yellow skin and a lot of sweet juice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> “oranges”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part (fruit) of something (citrus plant) This thing lives inside something (soil) This part can be small This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There is something good inside this part (sweet and sour content)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people can do something (eat the fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">oranges</span><span class="font3"> “buah jeruk”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be one part (fruit) of something (citrus plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This can be other thing (a colour)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">If this is one part of something (citrus fruit), this thing lives in something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There is something good (sweet and sour content) inside this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people can do something (eat the fruit)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">If this is not one part of something (colour), this thing can be inside other places</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can touch this thing for some time</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-6), there are differences between the meaning components of SL and TL phrases. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> are fruits of citrus plant living in soil. The size can be small or big. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buah jeruk </span><span class="font3">has sweet and sour content, visible, touchable, and edible. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Oranges </span><span class="font3">can be meant as the same as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> but it can be meant as a colour as well. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buah jeruk</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oranges </span><span class="font3">can be equivalent to each other or not depending on the context.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-7)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Jika &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;membran</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">selnya tersusun atas selulosa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;maka</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">makhluk &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hidup</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">tersebut dikelompokkan dalam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">sel</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tumbuhan</span><span class="font3">. (p31)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">If the cell membrane is composed of cellulose, it is grouped into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant cell</span><span class="font3">. (p31)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-7), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sel tumbuhan</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant cell</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The translation procedure applied here is transposition because there is a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">grammatical change in the translation process. The position of the head and the modifier of SL phrase is changed when it is translated into TL. For SL phrase, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sel</span><span class="font3"> is the head of the phrase and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tumbuhan </span><span class="font3">is the modifier. For TL phrase, plant is the modifier and cell is the head.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sel tumbuhan</span><span class="font3"> can be meant as the smallest and basic unit of life of organisms in Kingdom Plantae. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Cell plant </span><span class="font3">has the same meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sel tumbuhan</span><span class="font3"> “plant cell”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is inside something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People cannot see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people do something (using microscope/ special equipment)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After people do something, people can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">plant cell</span><span class="font3"> “sel tumbuhan”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part is inside something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People cannot see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, people do something (using microscope/ special equipment)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After people do something, people can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sel tumbuhan</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant cell </span><span class="font3">have the same meaning components. The meaning components are totally transferred from SL to TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Tumbuhan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tidak Plant</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">without</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">mempunyai </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">bunga perfect</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">flower</span><span class="font3">,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">sejati</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tumbuhan plant with</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">spore</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">berspora (Golongan (Group I =</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Ferns)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">I = Paku-pakuan) (p34) (p34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-8), </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bunga sejati</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">perfect flower</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Transposition is applied in translating the SL phrase into TL phrase because there is a grammatical change in the translation process. The structure of SL phrase is head + modifier (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bunga + sejati),</span><span class="font3"> meanwhile the structure of TL phrase is modifier + head (perfect + flower</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bunga sejati</span><span class="font3"> means a type of flower that has two genital organs (male and female organs) in one flower/ individual. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Perfect flower </span><span class="font3">is a flower in which both male and female reproductive structures are present.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bunga sejati</span><span class="font3"> “perfect flower”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is inside some places (soil/ other places) This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two parts of this part (male and female reproductive structures)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, this part can do something (producing fruits and seeds without any involvements of other flowers/ organisms)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part if something happens (the size is not too small)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">perfect flower</span><span class="font3"> “bunga sejati”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is inside some places (soil/ other places) This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two parts of this part (male and female reproductive structures)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, this part can do something (producing fruits and seeds without any involvements of other flowers/ organisms)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part if something happens (the size is not too small)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It can be seen from the explication of data (58) that the meaning components of SL phrase are totally transferred to the TL phrase. SL and TL phrases are naturally equivalent to each other.^</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-9)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Tumbuhan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">tidak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Plant</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">without</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">mempunyai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">bunga</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">perfect</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">flower,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">sejati, &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tumbuhan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">berspora</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Golongan I = Paku-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant with </span><span class="font3">(Group I = (p34)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">spore</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ferns)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">pakuan) (p34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data (5-9) shows that phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tumbuhan berspora</span><span class="font3"> is translated literally into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant with spore. </span><span class="font3">Therefore, the translation procedure applied is literal translation. SL texts are translated literally word by word into TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tumbuhan berspora</span><span class="font3"> literally means plants that have spore. The meaning is the same as its translation (</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant with spore</span><span class="font3">). Spores are a kind of plant reproductive medium that is very small and light in weight. If spores are carried out by the water, wind, or other organisms and fall down in a suitable place, they can grow into new organisms.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tumbuhan berspora</span><span class="font3"> “plant with spore”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is somehing (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing lives inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are parts of this thing (spores)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of the parts, this thing can do something (reproduce new individual)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">plant with spore</span><span class="font3"> “tumbuhan berspora”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing lives inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing is not very small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are parts of this thing (spores)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of the parts, this thing can do something (reproduce new individual)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-9), the meaning components of SL phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tumbuhan berspora</span><span class="font3"> is totally transferred to TL. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tumbuhan berspora</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">plant with spore </span><span class="font3">are naturally equivalent to each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-10)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Terdapat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">alat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">There is </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus</span><span class="font3">,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">pembelit</span><span class="font3">,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">most &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">kebanyakan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">climbing &nbsp;plants</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">tumbuhan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(Group 2 = plant</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">memanjat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">with</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">(Golongan 2 &nbsp;=</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">cirrus/tendrils)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Tumbuhan dengan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;alat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">pembelit) (p34)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(p34)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-10), it can be seen that a phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> is translated into single word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus</span><span class="font3">. The translation procedure applied is transposition because there is a change in grammatical category (from a phrase to a word).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> in terms of plant means parts of a plant that is usually in spiral-like form and can wrap around things that are touched. The purpose of this part is to support the plant by getting handles to be wrapped around, so that the plant will be strong enough to maintain its position and grow upwards. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Cirrus </span><span class="font3">basically has the same meaning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">with transposition. The difference is that </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> is more general than </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Alat pembelit </span><span class="font3">does not merely refer to plants but it can also refer to general tools that are used by wrapping them around particular things. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Cirrus</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> unlike </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> specifically refers to a part of plant.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> “cirrus”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant or other things)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can live (part of an organism)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part cannot live (nonliving thing)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (wrapping around other things by itself)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part does this because of something (the plant needs support to maintain its position)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can use this part (wrapping this part to something)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People do this because of something (certain purposes)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">cirrus</span><span class="font3"> “alat pembelit”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is one part of something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part can do something (wrapping around other things by itself)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part does this because of something (the plant needs support to maintain its position)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this part</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-10), it is shown that </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> has more meaning components than </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> is basically more general than </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus</span><span class="font3">, so that this thing does</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">not merely belong to plants but it can be the other things with similar functions (wrapping around other things for certain purposes). </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Cirrus </span><span class="font3">is a specific term for certain parts of plants. The translator translates the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">alat pembelit</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">cirrus </span><span class="font3">to make the meaning clearer for the readers that it is a specific part of plants and not the others.^</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(5-11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SL &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TL</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Terdapat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;alat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">There is cirrus,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">pembelit,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">most &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;are</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">kebanyakan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">climbing plants</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">tumbuhan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(Group 2 = plant</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">memanjat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">with</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(Golongan 2 &nbsp;=</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">cirrus/tendrils)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Tumbuhan dengan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;alat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">pembelit) (p34)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">(p34)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Based on data (5-10), SL phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tumbuhan memanjat</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">climbing plants</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The translation procedure applied is transposition because there is a grammatical change of the phrase structure. The structure of SL phrase is head + modifier (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tumbuhan + memanjat</span><span class="font3">) meanwhile the structure of TL phrase is modifier + head (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">climbing + plants</span><span class="font3">). Translator has to change the structure so that the translation result can be accepted by target readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tumbuhan memanjat</span><span class="font3"> means a kind of plants that needs stronger structures (such as trees) as climbing medium to help them getting sun light. This kind of plants attach to supporting medium because their stems are not strong enough to stand by its own. Therefore, this kind of plant usually has supporting organs to help them climbing, such as cirrus/ tendrils. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Climbing plant </span><span class="font3">means a kind of plants that attach themselves to something as it grows up it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">tumbuhan memanjat</span><span class="font3"> “climbing plants”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing lives inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing cannot do something (growing up by its own)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, this thing does something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(getting attached to stronger mediums)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can do something because of one part of this thing (parts that attach to the medium)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">climbing plants</span><span class="font3"> “tumbuhan memanjat”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This is something (plant)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing lives inside something (soil)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be small</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can be big</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing cannot do something (growing up by its own)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, this thing does something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(getting attached to stronger mediums)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This thing can do something because of one part of this thing (parts that attach to the medium)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">People can see and touch this thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the explication of data (5-11) it can be seen that the meaning components of the SL phrase are totally transferred to TL. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tumbuhan memanjat</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">climbing plants </span><span class="font3">are naturally equivalent to each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis, the types of translation procedures applied in translating noun phrases of plants are transposition and literal translation. Related to the mapping of meaning components, the meaning components of the SL phrases are mostly mapped to the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>References:</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Aryani, I Gusti Agung Istri et.al. Problematic of Languages in the Translation of Animal Science Terms. eJournal of Linguistics, [S.l.], v. 13, n. 1, p. 159-173, june 2019. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/47220"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/47220&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: &nbsp;&nbsp;05 oct. 2019. doi:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.v13i1.47220"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.v13i1.47220</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Erfiani, Ni Made Diana. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Apokaliptik: Menyingkap Makna Simbol Kitab Wahyu dari Sudut Pandang Penerjemahan.</span><span class="font3"> Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goddard, Cliff and Wierzbicka, Anna. 2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Words and Meanings; Lexical Semantics across Domains, Languages, &amp;&nbsp;Cultures.</span><span class="font3"> United Kingdom: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Herman, Juniyati Rajagukguk. An English Oblique Translation Analysis of “Twitter” Social Networking Website into Indonesian: An Applied Linguistics Study. International and Public Affairs. Vol. 3, No. 1, 2019, pp. 6-12. Data accessed: 16 nov. 2019. doi: 10.11648/j.ipa.20190301.12</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jaya, I Putu Aryadi. Translation Procedures Applied in Localized Websites. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 26, n. 2, p. 138--147, sep. 2019. ISSN 26566419. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/53413"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/53413&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019. doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2019.v26.i02.p06"><span class="font3"> https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2019.v26.i02.p06.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jayantini, I Gusti Agung Ayu Sri Rwa. Naturalization and Adaptation Taking Place in the Translation of Medical Texts from English into Indonesian. e-Journal of Linguistics, [S.l.], v. 12, n. 1, p. 25-36, jan. 2018. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/38245"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/38245&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Salum, Japhari, “Translation of the Book titled “Authentication of Hadith: Redefining the Criteria” from English into Swahili: An Analysis of Translation Procedures” (2019). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Linguistics, Literature, and Translation (IJLLT),</span><span class="font3"> v. 2, n. 4, p. 130-136</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3"> july 2019. ISSN 2617-0299. Available at: </span><a href="http://www.ijllt.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Paper-12-2019.2.4-Translation-of-the-Book-titled-%e2%80%9cAuthentication-of-Hadith-Redefining-the-Criteria%e2%80%9d-from-English-into-Swahili-An-Analysis-of-Translation-Procedures.pdf"><span class="font3">http://www.ijllt.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Paper-12-2019.2.4-Translation-of-the-Book-titled-“Authentication-of-Hadith-Redefining-the-Criteria”-from-English-into-Swahili-An-Analysis-of-Translation-Procedures.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sayani, Ni Made Nunik. Translation Shift From Balinese Into English in the Puppet Shadow Script Lubdaka. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 25, n. 1, p. 7-14, mar. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2018. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ISSN &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2656-6419. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/38112"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/38112&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019. doi: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2018.v25.i01.p02"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2018.v25.i01.p02.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setiawan, Luh Gede Inten Purnama Sari. Meaning of Phrasal Verb ‘Pick up’ Subtype Do/Happen: A Natural Semantic Metalanguage Approach. e-Journal of Linguistics, [S.l.], v. 13, n. 2, p. 347--356, july 2019. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/50004"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/50004&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 06 oct. 2019. doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/e-JL.2019.v13.i02.p13"><span class="font3"> https://doi.org/10.24843/e-JL.2019.v13.i02.p13</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sudipa, Made Henra Dwikarmawan, et.al. Struktur Semantis Verba ‘Naik’ dalam Bahasa Jepang. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 25, n. 2, p. 156--163, sep. 2019. ISSN 2656-6419. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/50651"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/50651&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019. doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2018.v25.i02.p09"><span class="font3"> https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2018.v25.i02.p09.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sunny, Ni Putu Wintia. Three Approaches of Word Sentence Meaning in Translation of EEnglish Slang Word into Indonesian in The Novel “The Adventure of Oliver Twist”. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 24, n. 1, p. 59-71, mar. 2017. ISSN 2656-6419.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34659"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34659&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suryasa, I Wayan et.al. Application of transposition procedure to the translation of emotive words in Krsna text. e-Journal of Linguistics, [S.l.], v. 13, n. 1, p. 113-124, jan. 2019. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/49070"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/49070&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: &nbsp;&nbsp;13 nov. 2019. doi:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.v13i1.49070"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.v13i1.49070.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Susanthi, I Gusti Ayu Agung Dian, et.al. The Procedures of Translating Abbreviations in English Medical Texts into Indonesian. e-Journal of Linguistics, [S.l.], v. 13, n. 1, p. 1-12, jan. 2019. ISSN 2442-7586. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/45906"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eol/article/view/45906&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 05 oct. 2019. doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.2019.v13.i02p01"><span class="font3"> https://doi.org/10.24843/e-jl.2019.v13.i02p01.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Umbas, Ronald. Photography Terms In Understanding Exposure And Their Translations. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 24, n. 1, p. 97-106, mar. 2017. ISSN 2656-6419. Available at: &nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34664"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34664&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">accessed: 13 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yanti, Ni Made Arnita. The Ethnography of Communication with Special Reference To Indonesian-English Translation of Lontar Tantri Carita. Linguistika: Buletin Ilmiah Program Magister Linguistik Universitas Udayana, [S.l.], v. 24, n. 1, p. 49-58, mar. 2017. ISSN 2656-6419. Available at: </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34657"><span class="font3">&lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/article/view/34657&gt;</span></a><span class="font3">. Date accessed: 13 nov. 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">28</span></p>