---
layout: full_article
title: "THREE DIMENSIONS OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN LEE’S TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD"
author: "Nadina Priscilla Novembrica"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: 96-102</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">THREE DIMENSIONS OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN LEE’S </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TO KILL A</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">MOCKINGBIRD</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Nadina Priscilla Novembrica</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">email:</span><a href="mailto:nadintnadint@rocketmail.com"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> nadintnadint@rocketmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;Tiga Dimensi Dalam Karakterisasi Tokoh Utama Dalam Novel Karya Lee yang berjudul To Kill A Mockingbird&quot;. Penelitian ini berkaitan dengan metode karakterisasi berdasarkan tiga dimensi dari tokoh utama dalam novel. Tujuan utama dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui bagaimana penulis menyajikan tokoh utama dalam tiga dimensi yang terdiri dari dimensi fisik , dimensi sosial dan dimensi kejiwaan. Sumber data penelitian ini adalah novel yang berjudul To Kill A Mockingbird oleh Harper Lee (1960). Penelitian ini didasarkan pada penelitian kepustakaan yang digunakan dalam pengumpulan data. Kemudian, data yang terkumpul dianalisis secara deskriptif dengan menggunakan metode deskriptif kualitatif. Beberapa teori karakterisasi yang digunakan seperti Teori Karakterisasi oleh Kenney (1966) dan teori Dimensi Karakter oleh Egri (1960) .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : metoda karakteristik, tiga dimensi, tokoh utama</span><span class="font2"> .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Literary work is imaginative or creative writing. Several examples of literary works are novels, short stories, dramas, and poetries. Analyzing a literary work is to identify the separate parts that make it up, to determine the relationship among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole (Kenney, 1966: 5). Intrinsically, the analysis can include various points of study such as: theme, setting, character, plot, and point of view, while extrinsically it can include social and cultural status, moral values, someone’s experience with life and language, author biography, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Character as a part of intrinsic elements is one of important aspects because it carries the author’s message that can bring various values in human life such as</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">morality, education, and many others. In order to understand the character’s attitude and behavior, it is important to understand physiology, psychology, and sociology aspect of the character itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of the main character is one of the important aspects of fiction and through character the author’s thought is expressed. From the character analysis, various kinds of human temperance, human rights, personalities, and attitudes can be observed and studied as being potential in daily life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based upon the above explanation, the problem under observation are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the method of characterization used by the author to present the main character in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the main character created based on the physiological, sociological and psychological aspects in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The aims of this study are focused:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the method of characterization used by the author to present the main character in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the main character based on the physiological, sociological and psychological aspects in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study focused on the method of characterization and three dimensions of the main character in the novel entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird</span><span class="font3"> by Harper Lee (1960). The novel was published in New York in 1960 (first mass market edition in 1982 and reissued in 2010) and consists of 31 chapters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Tehnique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study used library research to collect the data by note taking. The working procedure was divided into several steps. The first step was reading the novel repeatedly and intensively. Comprehensive reading was needed to understand the content of the novel and also to identify the character of the main character. Then, the second step was reading the theory book and browsing to the internet, in order to get more information that are relevant to the topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Tehcnique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were analyzed using qualitative method. The analysis of the data used the qualitative method and descriptively analyzed. The first step of analyzing data was sorted and classified. Then, the data were analyzed by using the theory of literature, such as, method of characterization by Kenney (1966) and three dimensions by Egri (1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of The Three Dimensions and Method Characterization</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological Dimensions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Physiological dimension is anything that you can look at the outside physically such as gender/sex, age, height/weight, posture, appearances, defects, heredity, hair color, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Age</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the story </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird,</span><span class="font3"> Scout as the main character was described as a kid of six years old younger about four years than her brother, who played only near Mrs. Dubose’s house. In this quotation, Scout was described about her age in discursive method. The author told the reader directly that Scout was almost six years old and her brother was nearly ten years old.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">When I was almost six and Jem was nearly ten</span><span class="font3">, our summertime boundaries (within calling distance Calpurnia) were Mrs. Henry Lafayette Dubose’s two doors to the north of us, and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Radley Place three doors to the south. (Lee, 1960:7)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Her uncle named Jack Finch told her that she was more like Atticus than her mother. This quotation tells the reader that the author used characters on the others characters. Because the other character described the appearance of the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">He slapped his thighs for me to come sit on his lap. I liked to smell him: he was like a bottle of alcohol and something pleasantly sweet. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">He pushed back my bangs and looked at me. “You’re more like Atticus than your mother,” he said</span><span class="font3">. “You’re also growing out of your pants a little.” (Lee, 1960: 105)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological Dimensions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Sociological aspect is anything from the environment which gives some feedback to the development of one’s characters such as social class status, education, occupation, religion, home life, race nationality, political affiliation, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">etc</span><span class="font3">. This dimension is a background in characterizing behavior, thinking and the way someone reacts to all sorts of problems.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Environment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Scout was described as the youngest daughter of two siblings in her home family. She had a father, but grew up without her mother’s care anymore because when she was two years old, her mother was died. Her father was a widower which took care of two children by himself. The mixing method was used in characterizing Scout in this quotation. The author used the dramatic method to describe Scout as the youngest daughter in her home family. Then the discursive method was used by the author to describe Scout’s mother was died when she was born.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Jem was the product of their first year of marriage; four years later, I was born, and two years later our mother died from a sudden heart attack. </span><span class="font3">(Lee, 1960:7)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human Relation (Relation with Boo Radley)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In the beginning of the story, Scout was scared of Boo. In Scout’s mind, the whole world becomes dangerous, every sound signaling a threat. And later, Scout realizes that it was Boo who brought her a blanket. As time passes and Scout faces down more real threats, Boo stops seeming so scary. He lurks in her imagination not as a monster but as a neighbor, who feel familiar even though she was never actually laid eyes on him. When finally Scout met Boo, it made Scout saw herself differently. And she was not necessarily happy about it. Atticus might have been right that putting yourself in another person’s shoes allowed you to understand the better. The relationship Scout and Boo Radley was good. The contextual method was used in this quotation above. The author wanted to make the reader concluded that Boo was a good neighbor. He saved Scout and Jem’s life in the almost ending story and it could be seen in the quotation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Neighbors bring food with death and flowers with sickness and little things in between. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Boo was our neighbor. He gave us two soap dolls, a broken watch and chain, a pair of goodluck pennies, and our lives</span><span class="font3">. But neighbors give in return. We never put back into the tree what we took out of it: we had given him nothing, and it made me sad. (Lee, 1960: 373)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Dimensions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Psychological dimension interests in everything that the character does and experiences. Psychological aspect is anything which related to the psychological condition of the character or stated as the inside things in human being such as abilities, qualities, temperaments, attitude toward life, complexes, introvert/extrovert, ambitions, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. Ambitious and Dreamer</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">She was an ambitious and dream girl. Jem told her that she was being a girl that girl always imagined things. And he was so generous bought her a real baton on his twelve birthday. She had dream and ambition being one of the Maycomb County High School band, having developed her talent. She felt that she could overcome that defect with a real baton. The dramatic method was used in this quotation. It can be found in the action that she was with her stick in her hand wanted to be a real baton developed her talent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I had long had my eye on that baton: it was at V. J. Elmore’s, it was bedecked with sequins and tinsel, it cost seventeen cents. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">It was then burning my ambition to grow up and twirl with the Maycomb County High School band. Having developed my talent to where I could throw up a stick and almost catch it coming down, I had caused Calpurnia to deny me entrance to the house every time she saw me with a stick in my hand. I felt that I could overcome this defect with a real baton, </span><span class="font3">and I thought it generous of Jem to buy one for me. (Lee, 1960: 134)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">It can be concluded that Scout Finch is the main character and protagonist. Based on Kenney’s theory, all of the methods of characterization were used in presenting the character. Lee, the author, combined the discursive, dramatic, character on the other characters, contextual and mixing methods. But among those methods, the dramatic method is used most frequently. Based on Egri’s theory, the main character can be described in terms of age and appearance from physiological dimension. Sociologically, the main character can be described in terms of her environment, education, religion and human relationship. The main character is boyish, curious, ambitious, and she is also a dreamer. On the other hand, she is an intelligent person whose negative traits are represented by her being impolite, bad temper, and inability to associate herself with other people. Those are the traits of the main character from the psychological dimension.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The result of this study shows that there is a relation between the characterization method and the three dimensions under concern. The relation itself also has an impact to the character’s personality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Agustini, Rai.2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychoanalysis of Main Character in John Grisham’s Novel Entitled The Pelican Brief</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dewi, Ni Luh Made Dianiary.2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychoanalysis of Nanny in Kraus and McLaughlin’s The Nanny Diaries</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Egri, Lajos. 1960. ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Art of Dramatic Writing</span><span class="font3">’. New York: Simon &amp;&nbsp;Schuster, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A.S. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font3">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kenney, William. 1966.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font3">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lee, Harper. 1960. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill A Mockingbird</span><span class="font3">. New York: Grand Central Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Papadopoulos, Dimitris. 2008. In the Ruins of Representation: Identity, Individuality, Subjectification. British Journal of Social Psychology, Vol 47., (cited 2014 Nov. Available from : </span><a href="http://www.citeulike.org/article/2446122)"><span class="font3">http://www.citeulike.org/article/2446122)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Putri, Chandra Eka Sari. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Main Character in Jules Verne’s Around the World in Eighty Days</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene &amp;&nbsp;Austin Warren. 1955. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Concept of Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene &amp;&nbsp;Austin Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">, (3rd Ed.). New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yulie. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of the Main Character in Danielle Steel’s No Greeter Love</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">102</span></p>