---
layout: full_article
title: "SPATIAL ALTERATION AT UBUD TRADITIONAL VILLAGE, GIANYAR, BALI IN THE GLOBALIZATION ERA: A CULTURAL STUDY"
author: "Tjokorda Oka Artha Ardhana Sukawati, Sulistyawati -, I Gde Parimartha, I Made Suastika"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3575 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3575"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3575"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SPATIAL ALTERATION AT UBUD TRADITIONAL VILLAGE, GIANYAR, BALI IN THE GLOBALIZATION ERA: A CULTURAL STUDY</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tjokorda Oka Artha Ardhana Sukawati<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0"><sup>s</sup></span><span class="font3">, Sulistyawati<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I Gde Parimartha<sup>3</sup>, I Made Suastika<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduate Study, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Engineering, Udayana University </span><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:acebali@royalpitamaha-bali.com"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">acebali@royalpitamaha-bali.com</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In the era of globalization much spatial alteration has taken place at Ubud Traditional Village, Gianyar Regency, Bali as the consequence of fast development of tourism. The aspects which have changed, as the result of the shift from agricultural culture to tourism culture since 1970, include the spatial relationship between man and God (parhyangan), the spatial relationship between man and his environment (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2">), and the spatial relationship between man and his fellow being or the three things which cause physical and spiritual prosperity among human beings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This research in cultural studies was conducted to reveal the spatial alteration which had taken place at Ubud Traditional Market in the globalization era especially since 1970 as the consequence of the fast development in tourism. The data were analyzed by applying qualitative analysis technique, eclecticism of the theory of change, the theory of space, the theory of hegemony, and critical and practical theories. The research was conducted by employing qualitative method which features cultural studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results of the research show that the increase in population and in what is needed by tourism has led to the spatial alteration in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> in the village and home levels. The spatial alteration in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> as a unity of membership (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">krama</span><span class="font2">) does not take place and the spatial alternation in families does not either. This indicates that Ubud Traditional Village is getting more complex in facing modern and global condition with its commercial culture. Its tradition, agricultural culture and nature have contributed to the development of tourism. In regard to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">catus patha</span><span class="font2"> has not been the only center of orientation any more. The settlement of the population has followed the development of tourist facilities. Tourism has also altered the land usefulness causing zero-settlement based on groups of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">banjar</span><span class="font2"> (neighborhood under a traditional village) to be irrelevant. In regard to the patterns of space occupied by families, the walls built to separate one family from another have been demolished; the buildings (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bale</span><span class="font2">) have been rehabilitated, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">teba</span><span class="font2"> (the unoccupied part of a compound where animals raised for sale are usually kept and rubbish are usually gathered) has been exploited. The change in people’s behavior from being non commercial into commercial has blurred the layout and function of the buildings built in the zones of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">madya</span><span class="font2"> (immediate level) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nista</span><span class="font2"> (lower level).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Key word: spatial alteration, globalization, tourism, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font2">, Ubud Traditional Village</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Physically and geographically, Ubud Traditional Village is an agricul tural village with its agricultural culture, as the other villages in Bali in general. The rice fields on which the villagers’ income depends on are not fully flat, especially those which are located along where the rivers bend. Such rice fields are close to the river banks or the hilly areas, making the roads bend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The development of tourist industry at Ubud Traditional Village especially since 1970s has caused the spatial patterns to change significantly, adapting to what is needed by the development of tourism. The increase in the number of tourists coming to Bali from year to year has led to the increase in the availability of tourist infrastruc ture and facilities which has needed more and more space, and has caused newcomers to come. The shift in function of the land cannot be avoided. In other words, the development of tourism has resulted in spatial alteration both in the village and residence levels. Such spatial changes can be noticed in the aspects of local genius </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hata Karana</span><span class="font3">. Those aspects include spatial alteration in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3"> (the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">relation ship between man and God), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3"> (the relationship between man and his nature), and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font3"> (the relationship between man and his fellow being).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The problems in this study are formulated in the forms of questions about how the spatial alteration has taken place in regard to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan, pawongan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3"> and its effect on Ubud Traditional Village in the globalization era. The data were analyzed using qualitative analysis technique through eclecticism of the theory of change, the theory of space, the theory of hegemony, and critical and practical theories.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The spatial alteration at Ubud Traditional Village, Gianyar Regency in the era of globalization of tourism which has taken place so fast since 1970s can be viewed from the aspects of local genius </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">. The changing aspects include spatial alteration in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan </span><span class="font3">(the relationship between man and God, spatial alteration in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font3"> (the relationship between man and his fellow being), and spatial alteration in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3"> (the relationship between man and his nature). Such changes match the theory of change, the theory of space, the theory of hegemony, and critical and practical theories.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The results of the research show that the increase in the number of population and in what is needed by tourism has resulted in spatial changes in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3"> in the levels of village and residence. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mandala Pura Kahyangan Tiga</span><span class="font3"> (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mandala</span><span class="font3"> refers to a particular arena made available at every temple in Bali; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kahyangan Tiga</span><span class="font3"> means the main three temples built at every traditional village in Bali) is widened but its original form is maintained. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sanggah /pamerajan</span><span class="font3"> (family temple), and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palinggih</span><span class="font3"> (a kind of shrine) are renovated and altered with bigger ones which are made of better materials with better ornaments. The change in the form of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palinggih</span><span class="font3"> does not much influence the space of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sanggah /pamerajan</span><span class="font3"> but changes its spatial value.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The spatial alteration in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawo ngan</span><span class="font3"> indicates that tradition is main tained in the modernity of tourist industry undergone. The community life as a unity of membership (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">krama</span><span class="font3">) does not change and the family life does not either. Such a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">spatial alteration means that Ubud Traditional Village is getting more complex in facing the global-modern condition with its progress in commercial culture. The existing tradi tion, including the agricultural culture, the natural capital and the arts, has greatly contributed to the development of tourism. A meaningful “globalize tion” has taken place because the local community has lived a global and local life. This has caused the villagers to be “subject and object of development” making them prosperous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The spatial alteration in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pale mahan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">catus patha</span><span class="font3"> has not been the only center of orientation. Even the people’s residence has followed the development of tourist facilities. Tour ism has also changed the usefulness of land making the zone for residence based on the groups of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">banjar</span><span class="font3"> (a neighborhood under a traditional village) not dominant any more. Related to the patterns of compound, the walls surro unding the compound have been demolished, the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bales</span><span class="font3"> (buildings) have been rehabilitated, and the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">teba</span><span class="font3"> (unoccupied part of the compound where animals kept for sale are usually kept and rubbish is usually gathered) has been exploited. The change</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">banjar</span><span class="font3"> members’ behavior from being non commercial into being commercial has blurred the layout and function of the buildings in the zones of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">madya</span><span class="font3"> (immediate level) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nista</span><span class="font3"> (the lower level). The shift in building pattern has resulted from the absence of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">jempeng</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">jineng</span><span class="font3"> (buildings where rice is usually stored) in many houses. The new buildings with their commercial functions have been oriented toward the market. And the buildings for rent are not generally oriented toward </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">natah</span><span class="font3"> (the yard).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The consequence is that there has been a harmonious synergy between tradition and modernity of global tourism which has resulted in prosperity for the local community. To the local community, the changes mentioned above indicate that the village is getting more complex in facing the global modern condition. Such a phenomenon has not only affected the traditional community as a unity of the village membership (</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">karma</span><span class="font3">) but also the families and the individuals within the families, although the local tradition has not disappeared. The community recognizes that the existing tradition, the agricultural culture,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the natural capital and the arts have contributed to the development of tourism. In other words, a meaningful “globalization” has taken place as they have lived a local and global life. This has caused the local community to be the “subject and object” of development. As implied and requested by Perda Bali No. 3 (Local rules and regulations) concerning tourism that there should be a harmony between the development of tourism on one hand and the culture and community as the owner on the other. Such a relationship should mutually support and benefit each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The research findings concer ning the spatial alteration at Ubud Tradi tional Village in the era of globalization of tourism are related to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">, that is, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font3">, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3">. The three findings are as follows: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the first one</span><span class="font3"> is related to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3"> , that is, there has been a shift in appropriateness. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the second one</span><span class="font3"> is related to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font3">, that is, there as been a rise in social entity fanaticism. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The third one</span><span class="font3"> is related to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3">, that is, there has been a decrease in the belief in the religious values of space.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">It can be concluded that the spatial changes in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawo ngan</span><span class="font3">, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3"> have not changed the essence of Ubud Traditional Village as an entity of traditional area with its agricultural culture, tradition, religion and arts in spite of the develop ment of the modernity of tourism in the era of globalization. Moreover, the traditional and cultural capital can be converted into the economic capital, that is, the tourist capital for the local community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Therefore, all the parties which are involved such as the government (the political aspect), entrepreneurs (the economic aspect), and the community (the cultural aspect) should work together for the development of Ubud Traditional Village in accordance with what has been implied by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font3">. The </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">first </span><span class="font3">suggestion is that the government should be aware that the development of tourism ought to be under control as what has been done so far so that there will be no change in the identity of Ubud Traditional Village as a unified system of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pawo ngan</span><span class="font3">, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font3">. The </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">second</span><span class="font3"> sug gestion is that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">entrepreneurs in tourism are obliged to preserve the local interests. This can be done by giving wide opportunities to the local human resources to be the landlords/landladies in their home land. The </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">third</span><span class="font3"> suggestion is that the community of Ubud Traditi onal Village is expected not to be easily made to change the space of its village due to the temptation of the tourist commercialism. It should be strongly stressed that land and space belong to the Balinese culture.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">I wish to thank the Rector of Udayana University and the Director of Postgra duate Program Udayana University for the facilities and opportunity provided to join the Doctorate Program at Udayana University. I would also like to express my appreciation to Promotor: Prof. Dr. Ir. Sulistyawati, M.S., Co-Promotor I: Prof. Dr. I Gde Parimartha, M.A., and Co-Promotor II: Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U. Their guidance and advice are greatly helpful in the process of writing this dissertation. Finally, I am</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">greatly indebted to the other parties who have assisted the process of the research.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Adi, Rasmen. 1992. ”Respon Masya rakat Bali terhadap Pola Rumah Tradisional Bali”, penelitian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Agger, Ben. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sosial Kritis: Kritik, Penerapan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dan Implikasinya </span><span class="font2">(Penerjemah Nur hadi). Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Appadurai, Arjun. 1993. “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Culture Economy” dalam Mike Featherstone (Ed.) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Global Culture, Nationalism, Globaliza tion, and Modernity</span><span class="font2">. London: SAGE Publications Ltd., hal. 295-310.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah. 1980.“Kebudayaan Bali dalam Manusia dan Kebudayaan di Indonesia” dalam Koentjaraning rat (Ed.) Manusia dan Kebuda yaan di Indonesia (Cetakan V). Jakarta: Djambatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bagus, I Gusti Ngurah. 1980. “Masalah Tanah dalam Perubahan Sosial”, makalah Seminar Fenomena Permasalahan Tanah Adat dan Budaya (Bali), Diselenggarakan oleh YLBHI-BLH, Bali di Denpasar, 27 Januari 1996.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Barker, Chris. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice</span><span class="font2">. California: SAGE Publications, Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gelebet, Nyoman. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengertian Arsitektur Tradisional Bali. </span><span class="font3">Denpasar: Fakultas Teknik Unud Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gramsci, Antonio. 1968. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prison Notebooks</span><span class="font2">. London: Lawerence &amp;&nbsp;Wishart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Selections from Prison Notebooks</span><span class="font2">. New York: International Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Harker, Richard, Cheelen Mahar, dan Chris Wilkes (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Eds</span><span class="font2">.). 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Habitus X Modal) + Ranah = Praktik, Pengantar Paling Komprehensif kepada Pemikiran Pierre Bourdieu </span><span class="font2">(terjemahan). Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bourdieu, Pierre. 1971. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Outline of a Theory of Practice</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Polity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kaler, I Gusti Ketut. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Panglemo Kosala Sabha</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Dit Jen Cipta Karya Dept. PUTL Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MacRae, Graeme S. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Acting Global</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thinking Local</span><span class="font2">. University of Auckland.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mantra, IB. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Masalah Sosial Budaya dan Modernisasi</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Upada Sastra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McKean, Phillip Frick. 1973. “Cultural Involution: Tourist, Balinese, and the Process of Modernization in an Anthropological Perspec tives”, disertation, Department of Anthropology, Brown Univer sity, USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlas, Nicanor. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Shapping Globalization Civil Society, Cultural Power and Threefol ding</span><span class="font2">. New York: CADI and Global Network for Social Threefolding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Picard, Michael. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Tourism and Touristic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Culture</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Singapore:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Archipelago Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dunia yang Dilipat, Tamasya melampaui Batas-batas Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p>