---
layout: full_article
title: "STYLISTIC ANALISYS IN JANET DAILEY’S NOVEL TANGLED VINES"
author: "Ni Nyoman Martini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">STYLISTIC ANALISYS IN JANET DAILEY’S NOVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TANGLED VINES</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NI NYOMAN MARTINI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">0918351084</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NON-REGULAR PROGRAM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul, “Analisa Stylistic Dalam Novel Janet Dailey Yang Berjudul Tangled Vines.” Penelitian novel ini di tekankan pada elemen stylistic yang dipakai oleh penulisnya. Data penelitian ini diambil dari novel itu sendiri dan penelitian di mulai dengan membaca dan menelaah novel yang dipilih dengan menekankan pada unsur stylistic yang di pakai. Setelah itu mengklasifikasikan berdasarkan lima elemen stylistic dari masing – masing kalimat tersebut. Kelima elemen stylistic di analisa menggunakan teori K. Morner dan R. Rausch (1998), metode yang di gunakan yakni kualitatif dan deskriptif untuk menemukan jenisjenis stylistic di antaranya : pattern of sound device, sentence structure, word of use, elements of rhetoric atau symbolism. Dan yang terakhir mencoba menafsirkan makna yang yang ingin di sampaikan oleh penulisnya yaitu makna sebenarnya dan makna kiasan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : analisa stystic, elemen, makna</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Morner and Rausch (1998: 214-215), the stylistic is a term currently used to identify any several analytical studies of literature that apply the techniques and concepts of modern linguistic. The stylistics employs concepts from linguistics to identify, classify, and count the stylistic features characteristic of a given work, author, literary movement, or period. These features included: pattern of sound devices, sentence structure, word of use, element of rhetoric and symbolism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the background described above, the problem of study will be limited as follows:. What stylistic element occurs in the Tangled Vines novel by Janet Dailey and also how the stylistic elements support the meaning.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3Aims of the Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background and problems stated above, the aims of the study will be formulated to analyze the stylistic element that occurs in the Tangled Vines novel by Janet Dailey and to find out how elements support the meaning.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Research Methods</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Qualitative and descriptive method were used is the present study, by searching some sources from internet and using library research. In this writing there are three sub sections as follows : There are Data Source, Method and Technique of Collecting Data and Method and Technique of analyzing Data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data was taken from novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Tangled Vines”</span><span class="font2"> should be relevant, accurate and reliable. The data used collected by reading the book repeatedly and intensively to understand and comprehend the content of the story. Furthermore stylistic elements or relevant data related to the topic was found. After that data were analyzed based on the problems and aims of this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.2 Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Data collection from the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Tangled Vines”</span><span class="font2"> should be relevant, accurate and reliable. It is conducted by reading the book repeatedly and intensively to understand and comprehend the content of the story. Furthermore, finding the stylistic elements or the relevant data related to the topic that contained in the novel. After that data will be analyzed based on the problems and aims of this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing the data, the collected data were analyzed descriptively according to the theory of literature being adopted. The parts of novel which describe the stylistic elements were noted down. They were analyzed and then were commented in accordance with the related theory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Stylistic elements in the novel</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Before analyzing the novel, it will be presented as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kelly didn’t argue. Neither did she intend to completely let go of her high state of alertness. “Bring back some coffee. Black.” She called after him. (Tale 2 page 21)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Look at that.” He came off the stoop, pointing finger at the hood. “You left streaks all over it. What the hell is the matter with you? I buy you a new pair of glasses and you still can’t see.” (Tale 10 page 296)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">3.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Softly over the rear speakers came an old song by Hall and Oates. Mentally she turned it out, dug in her bag and took out a bulky folder. Crammed inside were pre-interview notes and a lengthy bio on a Harvard Professor-turned-author she was scheduled to interview on tomorrow nights “Live at Five” report. His weighty tome chronicling the country’s economic woes was also in her bag. Kelly flipped on the reading light and searched through the sheaf of papers for the bio, as always filling what otherwise would have been idle time with work. (Tale 3 page 33-34)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kelly did the final stand up live. She held her pose and position until the signal came that the network feed was complete. The lights were killed and she lowered the mike, dropping her calm, slightly grave on-air demeanor, a glow of triumph lighting her eyes and bringing a satisfied curve to her lips. (Tale 2 page 20)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Natalie, please,” Her hair lay darkly on top of her head, exposing small and dainty ears with diamond-and-ruby pendants. A love of color was obvious in her gown of metallic silk chiffon in a swirl of rainbow hues. “We are in America. It is not the place for titles. May I call you Kelly?” (tale 6 page 98)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">6.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Overhead the sky was a flawless blue, unbroken by clouds. The vineyards seemed to stretch on forever around them, the ground beneath their feet ageless, the mountains silent. For a moment, he seemed part of the elements, a man born out of the hot sun, the sea fog, and the rugged mountains. (Tale 16 page 309)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">7.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“She died some twenty years ago.” Katherine had a voice like cut crystal, sharp enough to slice to the bone when she chose. She chose now. “You have sufficiently milked her death. Do not expect to gain any more from it.” (Tale 1 page 11)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">8.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The vineyard baked in the heat of an August sun, it’s vines strung along the mountain’s rugged slope in orderly rows, their roots sunk deep in the rocky soil, drawing moisture and the distinctive tasted of the earth from it. The land was poor, incapable of nourishing any other crop, yet from grapes of this vineyard had come some of the finest wines in the whole Napa Valley – some said the world. (Tale 1 page 5)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">9.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;She stared, her face pale with shock, her mind racing in panic. How had he found her? How, after all these years? She had made a new life for herself. People liked her; they respected her. Dear God, she couldn’t let him ruin that for her. She couldn’t let him hurt her again. She couldn’t (Tale 1 page 5)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">10.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Instead Emile patted her hand, as one would a child’s and gave her an absent smile. “naturellement.” (Tale 7 page 129)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">By reading sentences presented above, it were all kinds of stylistic elements found. In each sentence of the poem. However based on analyzed the problems only two meaning constructed there were denotative or conceptual meaning found from five first sentences and the last five sentences conveyed the connotative meaning.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The result of this study shows that stylistic element occurs in the Tangled Vines by Janet Dailey are pattern of sound devices; alliteration, assonance, rhyme, sentence structures, elements of rhetoric; imagery, figurative language, and symbolism. All of the stylistic study features from the theory proposed by Morner and Rausch are used in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">novel adopted. The meaning that constructed in the obtained data are; conceptual meaning and connotative meaning. The conceptual meaning can be found in; alliteration, assonance, rhyme, sentence structure, and imagery, besides the connotative meaning can be found; metaphor, simile, hyperbole, personification, and symbolism.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>8Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Barnet, Sylvan. 1992. A Short Guide to Writing about Literature. New York: The Lehigh</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Press, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dailey, Janet. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled Vines</span><span class="font2">. Canada: Little, Brown and Company</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">EkaSutrisna, Putu. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Comparative Study of Hay’s Magpies and Wright’s Magpies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hasan, Ruqaiya. 1985</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Oxford Advanced Learner’d Dictionary of Current English.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenny, William. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbocker, K.L. and Renninger H.W. 1963.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font2">. New York: Holt,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rineheart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morner, Kathleen and Ralph Rausch. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms.</span><span class="font2">Illinois:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NTC Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muliani, Ni Made Sri. 2003. The Social Semiotic of Poetic Text: A case with “the Death of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the Bird”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tangled Vines Book Review.(Available from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2148822.Tangled_Vines"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2148822.Tangled_Vines</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">)</span></p>