---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF KATNISS EVERDEEN AS THE MAIN CHARACTER IN “THE HUNGER GAMES: CATCHING FIRE” BY SUZANNE COLLINS"
author: "Ni Made Mega Martyarini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ANALYSIS OF KATNISS EVERDEEN AS THE MAIN CHARACTER IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“THE HUNGER GAMES: CATCHING FIRE”</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> BY SUZANNE COLLINS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Made Mega Martyarini</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non- Regular Program of English Departement Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;Analisis Katniss Everdeen sebagai Karakter Utama dalam novel The Hunger Games: Catching Fire oleh Suzanne Collins&quot;. Tujuan utama dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui unsur-unsur intrinsik (Alur, Tokoh, Latar, Tema, Sudut pandang dan Gaya Penulisan), untuk mengetahui unsur-unsur ekstrinsik yang mempengaruhi karya sastra (fisiologis, psikologis dan sosiologis), dan menganalisis metode yang digunakan dalam menyajikan karakter utama dalam novel (dramatis, diskursif, kontekstual, karakter pada karakter lain dan metode campuran).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data untuk penelitian ini diambil dari Novel, sedangkan metode dan teknik pengumpulan data adalah dengan metode dokumentasi dan didukung dengan teknik pencatatan. Teori yang digunakan dalam menganalisis novel ini diambil dari Cara Menganalisa Fiksi (1966) oleh William Kenney, Teori Sastra oleh Rene Wellek dan Warren (1955), dan beberapa teori pendukung tentang sastra juga digunakan untuk mendukung analisis ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa terdapat: (i) unsur-unsur intrinsik (alur, latar, tema, sudut pandang dan gaya penulisan) yang terjadi dalam novel, (ii) unsur-unsur ekstrinsik (aspek psikologis, sosiologis dan fisiologis) seperti bagaimana aspek dipengaruhi oleh karakter utama, dan (iii) metode yang digunakan oleh penulis dalam menjelaskan tokoh utama dalam novel ini adalah metode yang dramatis dan kontekstual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: karakter utama, unsur intrinsik, unsur ekstrinsik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature as one aspect of language appreciations is used as a media to explore the language to be more aesthetic and meaningful. It is quite another way to express the world around it through our imagination. Literary work can be classified into two classes, fiction and nonfiction. This writing is concerned was to the prose fiction, in this case a novel. Fiction is a type of literature that describes imaginary people and events, not real things as in a non fiction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Character is revealed by his or her thoughts and expression, attitudes and interest, and actions. Characters express the author's thought to readers of the story, and it is fictitious creations and thus the dramatist and the novelist may be both judged with regard to their ability in the art of characterization. Therefore, without interesting characters the novel loses its emotional impact (Sheppard:2005). While characterization is the means by which a character is exposed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is interesting to discuss the analysis of the character, especially the main character, because literature has high values in which expression of thought and feelings toward life are found. The type of literary work analyzed in this study is a novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2">. The story of this novel is very interesting which could build up the emotions and feelings of the readers. Hunger Games: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> is science fiction novel, the second book in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games</span><span class="font2"> trilogy by Suzanne Collins.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above there are three problems of interest to be discussed such as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the intrinsic elements of the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games</span><span class="font2"> : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> by Suzanne Collins ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the physiological, sociological and psychological aspects of the main character in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> by Suzanne Collins ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the main character in Suzanne Collins’s novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games</span><span class="font2"> :</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> presented ?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In relation to the problems above the aims of the study are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the intrinsic elements of the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the physiological, sociological and psychological aspects of the main character in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> by Suzanne Collins.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the main character in Suzanne Collins’s novel, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> is presented.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data used in this writing were taken from the science fiction novel written by American writer Suzanne Collins entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire. </span><span class="font2">The book was first published on September 1st, 2009 in United States.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this study the data were collected through documentation method supported by note taking technique. At first, the novel was carefully read in order to obtain the general overview of the story, and the next step was to find the sentence containing the information about the main character after that, those data were selected in order to find the important things.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed using the theory </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2"> proposed by William Kenney (1966). The supporting theory is the theory proposed by Rene Wellek and Warren (1955) in their book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. And some supporting theories concerning literature are also used to support this analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>The Main Character</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Nurgiyantoro (1995: 176-177), the main character is categorized as the most important one and appears continually it seems to dominate almost the whole of the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Katniss Everdeen is the main character and protagonist of the novel and its narrator. She is strong, resourceful, seventeen year old who is far more mature than her age. Katniss is the main provider in her family, which consists of Katniss, her mother, and her younger sister, Prim. Katniss is fiercely protective of her younger sister, and she volunteers to take Prim’s place in the Hunger Games to protect her.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>The Analysis of The Intrinsic Elements of the Novel a. Plot</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Plot of the story keep us turning the page to read and find out what is going to happen next. The structure of the plot can be represented in terms of beginning, middle, and end (Kenney, 1966:17).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Not only are we in the districts forced to remember the iron grip of the Capitol's power each year, we are forced to celebrate it. And this year, I am one of the stars of the show. I will have to travel from district to district, to stand before the cheering crowds who secretly loathe me, to look down into the faces of the families whose children I have killed. (1.3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> started by Katniss and Peeta tour from district to district. The first stop on the Victory Tour is District 11, the home of Katniss's deceased friend and ally in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hunger Games</span><span class="font2">, Rue.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Setting is a place where and the time when the story takes place. Setting is the environment especially domestic interiors, which may be viewed as metonymic or metaphoric, expression of characters. (Wellek and Warren, 1955:229). Catching</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fire has scenes in a lot of different places, but two zones really stand out as important for the characters and the book: District 12 and the Quarter Quell arena.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theme</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Theme is the meaning of the story. According to Kenney (1966:89), morality is one of the simplex kinds of theme, while not all themes are relate to morality . The main themes of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Catching Fire</span><span class="font2"> include survival, and the conflict between interdependence and independence. Katniss and Peeta are definitely interdependent. They are both helping each other to survive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Point of View</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The novel is written in the first person point of view. The main character, Katniss Everdeen, is the narrator. Katniss tells her story through her own thoughts and actions, as well as through conversations and actions of others. The point of view of this novel is an intimate one that keeps the reader close to the main character and refuses to allow insight into the minds of other characters, therefore allowing the reader to see and understand only what Katniss sees and understands.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Style</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Suzanne Collins keeps the reader guessing with unpredictable twists and turns as the story progresses. Telling the story of a young girl in an arena where she is to kill to survive, the novel is full of action and excitement. One aspect of the novel that makes it a good novel is the suspense. Even after the last page, the reader is left guessing what will happen next. Another element is the style that makes the novel easy to read.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Analysis of Extrinsic Elements of The Novel</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological Aspect</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">According to Sukada (1987:65), physiology is another basic structure of character with physiological dimensions, which is observed through sex, age,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">physical appearance such as: shape of body, whether or not a person is beautiful or handsome, color of skin and hair.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I say grateful that I can show I haven’t totally taken them for granted. [...] Since I’ve been home, all I’ve done is stick it in its usual old braid down my back. (3.27)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Katniss (17<sup>th</sup>) is described as having straight black hair, olive skin, and grey eyes, which are typical characteristics of the Seam; the poorest area of District 12. Katniss normally wears her hair in a long braid down her back. She is thin and not very tall, but is strong for hunting to feed her family in the woods outside of District 12.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological Aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The author has described Katniss as being an independent strong survivalist, lethal, but good at thinking outside the box. Katniss' past hardships have made her a survivor, and she will endure hardship and hard work to preserve her own life and the life of her family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociological Aspect</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sociological dimension is based on the social background such as social activity where the characters live, in which there is a social system consist of the system family, polities, economics, belief, education, and nationality (Lajos Egri, 1987:135). Started with District 12 and her volunteering for her younger sister, Prim. Katniss Everdeen became a symbol of hope or a person to look up to among other workers.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Method Used in Presenting The Main Character</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In presenting character, the method that used by the writer is an important part in the story especially in the novel. In writing a literary work, the author must choose not only what kind character he will present, but also by what methods will be used to he present the main character. In analyzing the main character in this novel, the author used Dramatic Method and Contextual Method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the previous disscusion, it can be concluded that : The intrinsic element occuring in the novel is plot which includes ( beginning, middle, end), the setting, that is Nation of Panem-District 12, and the Quarter Quell arena. The point of view in the novel is Katniss Everdeen as the first person is point of view. The main themes of Catching Fire include survival, and the conflict between interpendence and independence. Style in the story is the narrator talks around the point a lot and describes things in gory detail without coming right out and saying what she means.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The extrinsic element is how the psychological, sociological and physiological aspects influence the main character. In terms of the aspect, Katniss Everdeen as the main character in psychological aspect, is Katniss’ past hardships, she has made her a survivor, and she will endure hardship and hard work to preserve her own life and the life of her family. In sociologically, she volunteer for her sister, Katniss Everdeen has become a symbol of hope or a person to look up to the other workers. In physiologically aspect, Katniss has straight long black hair, which she normally pulls back into a long braid, olive skin, gray eyes and she is seventeen years old.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The author of novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games : Catching Fire</span><span class="font2">, Suzanne Collins, uses two methods in presenting Katniss Everdeen as the main character. They are Dramatic Method and Contextual Method. Dramatic Method is the one that is most frequently used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bernhardt, M.a, Ph. D. Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font2">. Toronto: Mc.Graw-Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiman, Novita. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of The Main Character in The Novel The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayanana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Collins, Suzanne. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Hunger Games: Catching Fire</span><span class="font2">. United States: Scholastic Press.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.suzannecollinsbooks.com/index.htm"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.suzannecollinsbooks.com/index.htm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Krisnawati, Ratih. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Oliver Twist as The Main Character in Charles Dickens “Oliver Twist”</span><span class="font2">(thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayanana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Minderop, Albertine. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Karakterisasi Telaah Fiksi</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Minderop, Albertine. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">PsikologiSastra: Karya, Metode, Teoridan Contoh Kasus.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta: Yayasan Pustaka Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Natalia, Ayu. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Main Characters in Charlotte Brontes’s Biography and Her Novel “Jane Eyre”</span><span class="font2"> (thesis</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">).</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nugriyantoro, Burhan. 1955. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory Pengkajian Fiksi .</span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sukada, Made. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Kayumas &amp;&nbsp;Yayasan Ilmu Seni dan Lesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tarigan, Henry Guntur. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip – prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font2">. Bandung: Angkasa Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thomasson, Amie L. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Fictional Character and Literary Practices”</span><span class="font2"> in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The British Journal of Aesthetics.</span><span class="font2"> Cited from: </span><a href="https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&amp;rct=j&amp;q=&amp;esrc=s&amp;source=web&amp;cd=4&amp;cad"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&amp;rct=j&amp;q=&amp;esrc=s&amp;source=web&amp;cd=4&amp;cad</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> =rja&amp;uact=8&amp;ved=0CEQQFjAD&amp;url=http%3A%2F%2F</span><a href="http://www.amiethomasson"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.amiethomasson</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">. org%2Fpapers%2520to%2520link%2FFictional%2520Characters%2520and%2 520Literary%2520Practices.doc&amp;ei=nohPU-</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">D3FYSLrQfX34GoBg&amp;usg=AFQjCNH7nR9w3LtzucvWymJXbpigcbBzYA&amp; bvm=bv.64764171,d.bmk</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Warren, Austin. 1955. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>