---
layout: full_article
title: "THE INTENDED MEANING OF “SMURF” WORDS IN THE SMURFS MOVIE SCRIPT"
author: "Dhia Tinya Diparadara"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE INTENDED MEANING OF “SMURF” WORDS IN THE SMURFS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MOVIE SCRIPT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DHIA TINYA DIPARADARA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis wacana tidak hanya sekadar menggambarkan struktur tulisan, karena tidak hanya teks, tetapi juga bentuk interaksi sosial: pembicara dan pendengar, dan pembaca dan penulis, sehingga analisis wacana arti yang dimaksud digunakan sebagai topik utama penelitian ini. Penelitian ini mencoba untuk mengetahui analisis wacana dan arti tersebut yang diungkapkan oleh para karakter dalam sebuah film berjudul &quot;The Smurfs&quot;. Studi ini mengkaji bahasa tertulis yang bersumber dari skrip film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam melakukan penelitian ini, pendekatan kualitatif-deskriptif digunakan dan menjadi instrumen sehingga data dapat dikumpulkan dan dianalisis. Data diambil dari Script Film berjudul The Smurf. Dalam analisis, kejadian dari &quot;Smurf&quot; kata yang mewakili makna yang berbeda satu sama lain. Penelitian ini difokuskan pada pembahasan mengenai arti yang dimaksud dari &quot;Smurf&quot; dan alasan bagaimana penonton film mengerti tentang arti &quot;Smurf&quot; dalam dialog Film. Proses penafsiran seorang pembicara atau penulis yang dimaksudkan makna dalam memproduksi wacana melibatkan pengetahuan tentang dunia (fakta tentang dunia) berdasarkan teori frame, skrip dan skema menentukan kesimpulan yang akan dibuat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skrip film ini mengandung sedikit bahasa formal untuk menghubungkan setiap ucapan dari satu adegan ke adegan lain, mereka tidak kohesif, tapi masih koheren. Pembaca membuat setiap usaha menafsirkan arti dari skrip film dengan bekerja pada aspek koherensi disarankan oleh Brown dan Yule. Penonton tidak akan dapat memahami makna dari filmnya tanpa adanya faktor yang terintegrasi ke dalam satu kesatuan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci:bahasa, wacana, skrip</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Most people making conversations use language during their lives. Every language consists of sounds and sound pattern, basic unit of meaning or words, and rules to form new sentences. Those elements constitute the grammar of the language. Therefore, to understand a language, people have to know its grammar. But in conversation people sometimes use utterances that grammatically have no connection with the previous or next sentences. They use to express their feeling or performing a certain sense. The readers have to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">interpret the sentences by themselves. The coherence theory can be the guide, making sense of a text because of the continuity of sense among the knowledge activated by the expression of the text (Brown and Yule ;1983;84).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Discourse analysis was chosen as the main topic of the study because it is widely shared system of representation which provide culturally specific ways of thinking about, talking about, and acting in relation to an entire of phenomena. Discourse analysis does more than just describe textual structure, since it is not just text, but also a form of social interaction: speaker and hearer, and reader and writer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown and Yule (1983) states that Discourse analysis is based on the understanding that there is much more going on when people communicate than simply the transfer of information. It is not an effort to capture literal meanings; rather it is the investigation of what language does or what individuals or cultures accomplish through language. Based on this consideration, it will be interesting to find out the coherence of the text in the movie scripts. One “Smurf” word has many different meanings this study is intended to see whether there is coherence in it or not. Many “Smurfs” words in the Scripts have many meanings that should be interpreted by the viewer to convey the meaning and understand the story. Besides, this study also aims to find out what is the intended meaning of “Smurfs” words. It will make us think about how the movie viewer understands the meaning of “Smurfs” words in the movie in which words carry different meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The research will focus on the discussion on the intended meaning of “Smurf” and the reason how the movie viewer understands the meaning of “Smurf” in the movie dialogue. The reasons why the movie was chosen because there are a lot of conversations containing “Smurf” words used by the animated characters in the movie. Many vocabularies are replaced by “Smurf” words, it is not only used to replace particular words, and each word has different meanings from each other where the word itself does not have any</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">meaning. It is only the name for the village and the character, for example: Papa Smurf, Handy Smurf, et cetera.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, in this investigation, the research problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the intended meaning of “Smurf” based on discourse analysis?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the movie Viewers determine the inferences to be made in “Smurf” words that are found in different circumstances in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Smurfs” </span><span class="font2">movie scene?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the research problems, the purpose of the study are studied below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the coherence of Intended Meaning of “Smurf” found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Smurfs”</span><span class="font2"> movie based on discourse analysis.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain how the movie Viewers determines the inferences to be made in “Smurf” words found in different circumstances in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Smurfs” </span><span class="font2">movie scene?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method of this paper is divided into three sections namely: data source, method and technique of collecting Data, and method and technique of analyzing data. Data source of this paper. In order to get data, the printed scripts of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Smurf”</span><span class="font2"> movie were taken from the internet. In analyzing the data, qualitative, descriptive approach was predominantly used. The data ware inductively analyzed and more concern was given to find out the Intended Meaning of “Smurf” words, besides finding how the movie viewers understand the meaning of “smurf” found in different circumstances in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Smurfs” </span><span class="font2">movie scene based on Brown and Yule’s theory (1983). The result of the analysis is presented in the form narrative text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the intended meaning of “Smurf” based on discourse analysis Below is the analysis and findings of the study. Firstly, it describes the context and analyses of the story based on general socio cultural knowledge ( frame, scripts and schemata) and inference, and finally gives the intended meaning of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">smurfs</span><span class="font2"> in that story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of General Socio – Cultural knowledge</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are several words found in the script to analyze such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh My </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">smurf</span><span class="font2">!</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Up the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">smurfing</span><span class="font2"> creek without a paddle</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yeah, guys. Let's stay </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">smurftimistic.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I choose to be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pessismurfstic.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Smurf</span><span class="font2"> the whole day long!</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The italic words number (1) above has a frame that Smurfette was very surprised and she could not believe in what she had seen. So see expresses her feeling by the common expression word. The movie viewer’s script is all the Smurfs which just arrived in New York after a long time dimension journey and they were surprised by the view of the big city. The movie viewer’s already has schemata in their mind, that is, if someone is surprised they uttered their surprising expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The italic words number (2) the frame is Gutsy answering Grouchy amazement question about what he has seen where he is. The script is that all the Smurfs in riverside were having the same question with Grouchy, because they don’t know where they are. The Schemata is that they all have the same question in their mind about that location and what they have to do now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The italic words number (3) When all of the family members are in trouble, Smurfette tries to persuade them to stay strong and cheer them up by saying that sentence. The script is all the Smurfs in riverside except Grouchy agree with Smurfette because they don’t have to give up early before maximize the effort. The Schemata we found here is that Smurfette is the one who arouse</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the spirit of all the Smurf which has cast ashore in strange place to stay struggling whatever will come.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The italic words number (4) The script is Grouchy disagrees with Smurfette because they don’t have a reason to stay struggling and he does not know what to do next. The schemata we found here is that Smurfette is the one who arouse the spirit of all the Smurf which has cast ashore in strange place to stay struggling whatever will come. But grouchy is the opponent, he used his own opinion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The italic words number (5) The frame is all of the Smurfs were singing loud when they know that they were fully acceptable in Patrick’s Family. Smurfette celebrates it by singing a smurf song while she was washing strawberries. The movie viewer’s script is all of the Smurfs feel very happy and doing their first morning activity in Patrick house after a long tiring journey. The movie viewer is already having schemata that people mostly express their happy feelings by singing loud and doing that thing for whole day.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, Gillian and Yule, George.1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dressler,W.U. &amp;&nbsp;R. de Beaugrande .1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Text Linguistics</span><span class="font1">. Wolfgang, Singapore: Four strong Printing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fadhilah, Nurul Umi. 2010. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Discourse Analysis on the Persuasive Technique Used in DRTV Advertisement</span><span class="font1">” Thesis, English Department, Faculty of Humanities and Culture, the State Islamic University of Maulana Malik Ibrahim Malang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Firth, J.R. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Papers In Linguistics1934-51</span><span class="font1">. Oxford. Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gee, J. P. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. Amsterdam: Routledge Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday,M.A.K.1970. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Functional diversity in language as seen from a consideration of modality and mood in English, Foundations of language 6,322-361</span><span class="font1">. London. Oxford university press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Harris, Zellig S. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Theory of Language and Information: A mathematical approach.</span><span class="font1"> Oxford &amp;&nbsp;New York: Clarendon Press, xii, 428 pp.; illustr.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, Albert S. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2008</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford advanced learner's dictionary</span><span class="font1"> of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">current English seventh edition</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">University</span><span class="font1"> Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, D. 1974. Foundations in sociolinguistics: an ethnographic approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Philadelphia. University of Pennsylvania Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kusumaningrum. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Discourse Analysis of Intonation In “The Lion King” Movie Manuscript</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar. Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mukharomah .2010.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Discourse Analysis on Hedging and Flouting Maxims Found in The Script of &quot;Rush Hour 2&quot; Movie</span><span class="font1">. Malang. UIN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schiffrin, D.1994.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to discourse</span><span class="font1">. Oxford. Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Van Dijk. Teun A. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of critical discourse analysis. Journal of Discourse &amp;&nbsp;Society vol. 4.</span><span class="font1"> SAGE Printing. London. Newbury Park and New Delhi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wood, Linda and Kroger, Rolf . 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Doing Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. SAGE Printing. London.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.discourses.org/download/articles"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.discourses.org/download/articles</span></a><span class="font1">, accessed at February 9<sup>th</sup> 2013 02.44 PM</span></p>