---
layout: full_article
title: "LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF HEPATITIS B"
author: "Haneetha Yogarajah, AA Wiradewi Lestari, IWP Sutirta Yasa"
categories: emu
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/emu/full-5644 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/emu/id-5644"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/emu/full-5644"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF HEPATITIS B</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Haneetha Yogarajah<sup>1</sup>, AA Wiradewi Lestari<sup>2</sup>, IWP Sutirta Yasa<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>1</sup>Medical Student of Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>2</sup>Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Hepatitis B is a liver disease caused by a virus known as Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and is a major global health probelm. The liver is susceptible to a wide variety of adverse effects caused by an excess of alcohol, drugs, infections such as viral health department. Vaccination for children, adolescents and high-risk adults could also prevent hepatitis B. The prognosis is variable hepatitis, cancer and other metabolic disorders. Hepatitis B is the causative agent and belongs to the hepadnaviridae family of viruses. Transmission of HBV virus is through exposure to infected blood and body fluids. One of the important diagnostic criteria of Hepatitis B is by performing a thorough laboratory investigation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Liver, hepatitis, vaccination, hepadnaviridae.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The liver is the second largest organ in the human body after skin.<sup>1</sup> It is the largest internal organ weighing about 1.2-1.5kg and it is in reddish brown in colour due to its great vascularity. The liver is located beneath the diaphragm in the epigastric and right hypochondriasis regions of the abdomen.<sup>1,2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The liver is divided into right and left lobes which are separated by the middle hepatic vein. The right lobe is larger than the left lobe and the right lobe contains the caudate and quadrate lobe. For further breakdown, the liver is divided into eight segments by division of the right, middle, left hepatic veins. Each of the lobes contains a smaller unit</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">known as lobules. Most liver have 50000 to 100000 lobules that consist of a vein</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">surrounded by the liver cells called hepatocytes. <sup>1,2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The liver gets its supply from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. The liver gets 25% of the supply from the hepatic artery and the autoregulation of blood flow by the hepatic artery ensures a constant total liver blood flow. The remaining 75% of blood is supplied by the portal vein. The portal vein drains most of the gastrointestinal tract and the spleen.The liver receives parasympathetic innervations from the vagus nerve and sympathetic innervations from the thoracolumbar nerves through the celiac ganglia. <sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The liver cells, hepatocytes have numerous functions, including synthesis, storage, and release of vitamins; storage , and release of glycogen; synthesis of blood proteins; phagocytosis of old red blood cells and certain bacteria; removal of toxic substances; and production of bile. Bile is stored in the gallbladder and is eventually secreted into the duodenum for the emulsification and absorption of fats. <sup>1</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As the liver is so complex, therefore it is susceptible to a wide variety of adverse effects caused by an excess of alcohol, drugs, infections such as viral hepatitis, cancer and other metabolic disorders. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the interest of this study. The term ‘hepatitis’ means inflammation of the liver and could be caused by medications, chemical toxins, alcohol, autoimmune diseases and viruses. In the case of hepatitis B, the </span><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">disease is caused by the HBV and is the most serious type of viral infections.<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Around 2 billion of the world’s population-alive today have been infected with HBV while 350 million still remain infected. <sup>4</sup> National Centres for Disease Control (CDC)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">estimated for some regions of Asia indicate that one-third to one-half entire population have been infected with HBV. The prevalent of HBV infection in Asia, sub-Saharan Africa is about48% but less so in the Western Europe and North America which is less than 1%. In Asia, sub-Saharan Africa the virus is acquired through perinatal transmission (vertical) from the chronically infected mother or through infection in early childhood (horizontal transmission) whereas in southern and western Europe, the mode of transmission are perinatal transmission, needle sharing, tattooing and body piercing. In areas with low endemicity like North America and Australia, the transmissions are mainly through sexual contacts and needle sharing among drug users. <sup>4,5</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The prevalence rate for chronic HBV is related to differences in age at infection whereas for an acute infection will become chronic is 70-90% for perinatally acquired infection and 20-50% for horizontal infections acquired during early childhood. For adult-acquired HBV infection to develop into chronic infection ranges from 1% to 3%.<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hepatitis B is an elusive disease to tract as the infection and the symptoms could be asymptomatic especially in children. Furthermore it does not cause any pain or discomfort. As a result, the disease was not diagnosed and never reported to the public health authorities until symptoms appears usually years to decade after the initial infection, epidemiologists reported. For example, in the United States in 2001, there were 7.844 acute clinical cases of HBV infection reported to the CDC but the CDC estimates that there were actually 78.000 new HBV infections nationwide that year. Therefore, this study was conducted to have better understanding regarding the diagnosis of the disease as well as the </span><span class="font1">4 </span><span class="font2">management.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hepatitis B is a liver disease caused by a virus known as Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and is a major global health probelm. <sup>3</sup> Earlier, hepatitis B is known as “long intubation” and “serum” hepatitis. Hepatitis B could be asymptomatic or have a self-limited acute illness. This may progress to acute liver failure and eventually develop chronic liver disease. <sup>6</sup> Hepatitis B is the causative agent and belongs to the hepadnaviridae family of viruses. It is about 42 nanometres and is spherical in shape. The virus is composed of an inner core (nucleocapsid) and an outer envelope which has three hepatitis B surface antigens (HBsAgs) that involves in the diagnosis of HBV infection. The nucleocapsid is further divided into two parts, the core antigen (HBcAg) and the pre-core antigen (HBeAg). The core of the virus has the genetic material which is important in the replication process. </span><span class="font1">4,7</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Transmission of HBV virus is through exposure to infected blood and body fluids like semen, wound exudates, vaginal secretion and vagina. The highest concentration of the virus is found in the blood (108- 1010 virons/ml) and serum while saliva contains the lowest. <sup>6,9</sup>. There are few common modes of transmission of HBV such as percutaneous and premucosal exposure to infectious body fluids, sharing or using nonsterilized needles or syringes in body piercing, tattooing, drug injection and acupunture, sexual contact with an infected person, and perinatal exposure from an infected mother. <sup>4,6,9</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The premucosal transmission could be further divided into vertical transmission an horizontal transmission. In the regions of high endemicity, the vertical transmission is the major mode of transmission of HBV. Vertical transmission or also known as perinatal transmission is spread from mother to their babies at birth. Postexposure immunoprophlaxis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">plays an important role in reducing hepatitis B in infants. Without this, many infants born with HBV-infected mothers will develop chronic hepatitis B. Horizontal transmission occurs through sexual contact and occurs mostly in the countries with low and intermediate prevalence of HBV infection. <sup>6, 9</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Interfamilial transmission is rare but may occur in settings involving interpersonal contact over extended periods. This could take place when one person in the family is chronically infected with HBV resides in a household. The transmission may occur from child to child, and young children are at the highest risk of infection when they have frequent contact with the skin or mucous containing secretions or saliva. Besides, sharing things like washcloths, towels, razor or toothbrush could facilitate the transmission of HBV. <sup>10</sup> Below are the list of group of people who are at the risk of infected by HBV: a)Health care workers and emergency personnel, b) Infants born to mothers who are infected at the time of delivery, c) Partners or individuals living in close household contact with an infected person, d) Individual with multiple sexual partners, e) Illicit drug users, f) Individuals who get tattoos or body piercing, g) Individuals who travel to endemic countries such as Africa and Asia, h) Individuals emigrating from countries where hepatitis B is common, or born to parents who emigrated from these countries, i) Families adopting children from countries where hepatitis B is common.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The incubation period of HBV is two to six months. After this period of time, a person is said to have acute hepatitis B. Most people are able to clear and recover from the virus, however if the body is unable to mount an effective immune response, a person may become chronic carrier of HBV. Liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the complications that mat occur in the chronic carries of HBV.CDC estimated 25% of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">chronic carriers will suffer from the complication mentioned above. <sup>6,8</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Pre-S1 and Pre-S2 of the virus attaches itself the receptor on the surface of the hepatocyte and penetration occurs. The virus loses its coat and the virus core is transported to the nucleus. Transcription oh HBV into mRNA occurs whereby HBV DNA is converted into circular form (Yc DNA). This acts as a template for mRNA transcription. <sup>3,4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Replication of the genome and translation into HBV protein occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum. Then they are packaged and exported from the cell. One point should be noted that HBV does not cause direct injury to the liver. The damaged is caused </span><span class="font1">3 </span><span class="font2">by the cellular immune response of the host. <sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The viral antigen on the infected hepatocyte is recognized by the cytotoxic T cell via HLA class I molecules. Th 1 responses are linked with the clearance of the virus whereas Th2 responses are linked with the development of chronic infection and severity of </span><span class="font1">3 </span><span class="font2">the disease.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The viral persist in a patient whom has poor cell-mediated response and leads to a healthy chronic HBV infective state. A better response, however, results in continuing hepatocellular damage and eventually chronic hepatitis. <sup>2,3,4,10</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are two phases in the chronic HBV infection that is replicative and integrated phase. There is active viral replication, hepatic inflammation and the patient is highly infectious with HBeAg and HBV DNA positivity in the replicative phase. The viral genome become integrated into the host DNA at some point of time. The viral genes are</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">then transcribed along with those of the host. When this occurs, the level of HBV DNA in the serum is low and the patient is HBeAg negative and HBe antibody positive. From the liver histology, the liver is inflamed, often with cirrhosis. The amminotansferases is normal or slightly elevated. HCC develops at the late stage of the disease. <sup>2,3,4,10</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>DIAGNOSIS OF HEPATITIS B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The diagnosis of hepatitis B is done through clinical symptoms and laboratory examination. In general, there are general considerations in the diagnosis of hepatitis B. A person's history, age, risk factors, vaccination status and previous tests results should be used to guide appropriate testing. <sup>9,12</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The diagnosis of HBV infection is made through blood testing. Serological test can be performed on either serum or plasma. HBV antigens and antibody are stable at room temperature for days, 4°C for months, and frozen at -20°C to -70°C for many years. Today, automated enzyme immunoassays that depend on colurimetic or chemiluminescence signal measurement, care should be taken to avoid haemolysis of the sample as it may interfere with the ability of the assay accurately detect these markers. Besides, measures should be taken to avoid the degradation of the viral nucleic acid in the specimen, which can result in falsely low or no measurable viral load. Therefore, serum shpuld be removed from the clotted blood within 4 hours of collection and stored at -20°C to -70°C.12. <sup>12</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Acute Hepatitis B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The average incubation period is 60 to 90 days (range is 40 to 160 days). At the beginning patient usually complain of fatigue, malaise, anorexia, right upper quadrant</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">discomfort, or flu-like symptoms. Besides, low-grade fever, jaundice, and mildly tender hepatomegaly are the most common signs. As jaundice sets in, the urine becomes darker and the stools paler. In acute hepatitis B the disease may last from one to six weeks but may be prolonged and can be fulminate. The disease cannot easily distinguished by history, physical examination or routine serum biochemical tests alone as the cute hepatitis B resembles other forms of acute hepatitis clinically. <sup>2,9,13</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Laboratory Criteria of Acute Hepatitis B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The laboratory diagnosis of acute hepatitis B is made through the presence of IgM antibody to HBV core antigen (IgM anti-HBc). IgM anti-HBc is rapidly followed by IgG anti-HBc. Even though this occurs, IgM may persist for months to years and may even reappear during flares of chronic HBV. In self-limiting cases, there are presence of antibody to the hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) which indicates recovery from infection. This usually appears weeks to months following disappearance of serum HBsAg. Markers of HBV replication- HBeAg and HBV DNA is also present during the initial phase of infection. They are also present in the chronically infected individual. HbsAg, HbeAg, and HBV DNA are not specific for acute infection. <sup>4,13</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Chronic Hepatitis B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The progression from acute to chronic infection is largely influenced by the age of the person who becomes in contact with the virus. A person is said to be chronically infected if the person’s immune system is not able to clear the virus six months later after</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the initial exposure of HBV. Usually, person with chronic infection is asymptomatic besides being fatigue, loss of appetite and nausea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 1: Significance of viral markers in hepatitis B</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Significance of viral markers in hepatitis B</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Antigens</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">HBsAg</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Acute or chronic infection</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">HBeAg</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Acute hepatitis B</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Persistence implies: continued infectious state, development of chronicity increased severity of disease</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">HBV DNA</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Implies viral replication</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Found in the serum and liver</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Antibodies</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Anti-HBs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Immunity to HBV; previous exposure; vaccination</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Anti-HBe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Seroconversion</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Anti-HBc</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">IgM</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Acute hepatitis (high titre)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Chronic hepatitis (low titre)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">IgG</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Past exposure to hepatitis B (HBsAg-negative)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">No abnormalities would be found during physical examination. Muscle wasting, ascites, oedema, palmar erythema, encephalopathy and bruising, suggest advanced disease with cirrhosis.<sup>9,12</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Laboratory Criteria of Chronic Hepatitis B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">A person is said to be chronically infected if HbsAg persist for more than 6 months. Besides, it is also determined by the presence of HBsAg, HBeAg. HBV DNA, HbcAb Ig G. HbAb is not found. It is found that HBsAg will clear spontaneously in approximately 2% of chronic carriers. Over 7 years of observation, HbsAg are also clears independent of HBsAg. Clearance of HbeAg, even with persistence of HBsAg is associated with resolution of the inflammatory process, recovery, and decreased infectivity. In addition, alanine aminotranferases (ALT) should also be measured. Patients with both HbeAg-positive and HbeAg-negative who has normal serum ALT (women &lt;&nbsp;20 IU/L and men &lt;&nbsp;30 IU/L) should be monitored life long as the condition may change over time although they remain asymptomatic. In individual with elevated serum ALT concentrations should be monitored closely. <sup>4,13</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Differential Diagnosis of Hepatitis B</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The differential diagnosis for hepatitis B are as follows: a) Cholangitis, b) Cytomegalovirus, c) Hepatitis A, C, D, E and d) Wilson’s disease.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The liver is the largest internal organ and the second largest organ after skin in the human body. It has numerous functions in maintaining the physiology of human body; therefore it encounters a variety of adverse effects. One such example is hepatitis B. Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver and is caused by the HBV. It is estimated that 2 billion people around the world is infected with HBV and 350 million still remain infected.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">HBV spreads through percutaneous and premucosal exposure to infectious body fluids like</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">semen, exudates, vaginal secretion, nonsterilized needles or syringes in body piercing, tattooing, drug injection, sexual contact with an infected person and perinatal exposure from an infected mother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are two phases of hepatitis B that is acute phase and chronic phase. The intubation period is about 60 to 90 days and a person is said to be in the chronic state if the person’s body is not able to clear the virus after 6 months after the initial exposure to HBV. The diagnosis of hepatitis B is made from clinical manifestation and also laboratory findings. During acute period, the symptoms are similar to those of flu or cold. Later on, the symptom may develop like yellow skin and eyes, dark urine and light-coloured stool and itchy skin. Recovery period is from 2 to 3 months. The laboratory diagnosis of acute hepatitis B is made through the presence of IgM antibody to HBV core antigen (IgM anti-HBc). IgM anti-HBc is rapidly followed by IgG anti-HBc. During chronic period, the symptoms may be asymptomatic and those with chronic hepatitis B can develop chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and HCC. A person is said to be chronically infected if HbsAg persist for more than 6 months. Besides, it is also determined by the presence of HBsAg, HBeAg.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>REFERENCES</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Parents of Kids with Infectious Diseases. The liver: Assesing the Silent progress of Liver Disease. Available from:</span><a href="http://www.pkids.org/files/pdf/phr/06-01liver.pdf"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.pkids.org/files/pdf/phr/06-01liver.pdf</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: 14<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Parveen Kumar, Michael C (eds). Clinical Medicine. 7<sup>th</sup> ed Spain: Saunders Elseiver; 2009. p.319-39.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Toulouse &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hepatitis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NATAP. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.hepcadvocacy.org/factsheets/HepatitisB.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.hepcadvocacy.org/factsheets/HepatitisB.pdf</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: 13<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Heathcote J (Chair, Canada), Abbas Z (Pakistan), Alberti A (Italy), BenhamouY (France), Chen C (Taiwan), Elewaut A (Belgium), Ferenci P (Austria), Hui C (Hong Kong), Isakov V (Russia), Janssen H (The Netherlands), Lau G (Hong Kong), Lim S (Singapore), Okanoue T (Japan), Ono-Nita S (Brazil), Piratvisuth T (Thailand), Rizzetto M (Italy), Sollano I (Phillippines), Spearman W (South Africa), Yeh C-T (Taiwan), Yuen M (Hong Kong), Krabshuis J (France). World Gastroenterology Organisation Practice Guideline: Hepatitis B; September 2008. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.worldgastroenterology.org/assets/downloads/en/pdf/guidelines/12_hepatitis_b_en.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.worldgastroenterology.org/assets/downloads/en/pdf/guidelines/12_hepa</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.worldgastroenterology.org/assets/downloads/en/pdf/guidelines/12_hepatitis_b_en.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">titis_b_en.pdf</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: 8<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;D’Souza R, Foster GR. Diagnosis and treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Journal of the royal society of medicine. 2004;97: &nbsp;&nbsp;318-321. Available from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1079522/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1079522/</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: &nbsp;10<sup>th</sup> January</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fantry L. The Health Care of Homeless Persons - Part I - Hepatitis B. Available from:</span><a href="http://www.nhchc.org/HepatitisB.pdf"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.nhchc.org/HepatitisB.pdf</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: 13<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Baumert TF, Thimme R, Weizsacker F. Pathogenesis of hepatitis B virus infection. World Journal of Gastroenterology. 2007 January 7; 13(1): 82-90. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327/13/82.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327/13/82.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 8<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Department of health and human services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;HEPATITIS &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;VACCINE. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.immunize.org/vis/hepb01.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.immunize.org/vis/hepb01.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 13<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Bureau of Communicable Disease Control. Guide to Surveillance, Reporting and Control: Hepatitis B. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.mass.gov/Eeohhs2/docs/dph/disease_reporting/guide/hepatitis_b.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.mass.gov/Eeohhs2/docs/dph/disease_reporting/guide/hepatitis_b.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 16<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ganem D, Prince AM. Mechanisms of disease Hepatitis B Virus Infection — Natural History and Clinical Consequences. The new england journal of medicine. 2004;350:1118-29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMra031087"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMra031087</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: &nbsp;&nbsp;16<sup>th</sup> January</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Krajden M, McNabb G, Petric M. The laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis B virus</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2005 Mar–Apr; 16(2): 65–72. Available from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2095015/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2095015/</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">. Accessed: 8<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CDC EIP Hepatitis Project : Viral Hepatitis Case Definitions. Available from : </span><a href="http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/dc/hepatitis/viralhepcasedefinitions.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/dc/hepatitis/viralhepcasedefinitions.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 8<sup>th </sup>January 2011.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;body. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hepatitis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Virus. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Avaialble &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.thebody.com/treat/pdfs/adults_hep_b.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.thebody.com/treat/pdfs/adults_hep_b.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 8<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elgouhari H, Tamini TAR, Carey W. Hepatitis B: A strategy for evaluation and management. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine. 2009;76(1):19-35. Available from</span><a href="http://www.ccjm.org/content/76/1/19.full.pdf"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.ccjm.org/content/76/1/19.full.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: 13<sup>th</sup> January 2011.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>