---
layout: full_article
title: "HEGEMONY OF INTERNATIONAL STANDARD EDUCATION AT PUBLIC SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 78 JAKARTA"
author: "Tuntun Sinaga"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-9118 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-9118"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-9118"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">HEGEMONY OF INTERNATIONAL STANDARD EDUCATION AT PUBLIC SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 78 JAKARTA</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tuntun Sinaga</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Postgraduate Program Udayana University, Denpasar email:</span><a href="mailto:tuntunsinaga@gmail.com"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">tuntunsinaga@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Act Number 20 of 2003 concerning System of National instructed that international standard education unit be opened in every regency/city in every part of Indonesia as an attempt made to anticipate the globalized era. This study was intended to understand the forms of hegemony of PBI and the factors contributing to it at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta. In the present study, the Theory of Hegemony, the Theory of Discourse of Power/Knowledge, and the Theory of Social Practice were eclectically used with qualitative approach. The data were taken from documents, brochures, mass media, experts in education, community leaders, teachers, students, parents and the headmaster. The data were taken through interview, observation and documentary study. The data were validated through the process of triangulation which includes data reduction, data presentation, data verification, and interpretation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The result of the study showed that (1) the hegemony of PBI took place in the forms of the standardization of education, the capitalization of education, the image of international quality, the stratification of education and (2) the factors contributing to the hegemony of PBI were the politics of national education and the discourse of globalism. Hegemony took place in the form of internationalization of eight SNP and “benchmarking” of the quality of education in OECD countries in order to anticipate globalization. It is suggested that the general middle education which reflected the philosophy of national education, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pancasila</span><span class="font0">, need to be reconstructed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: hegemony, standardization of education, globalization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">As an attempt to develop the national education, the government designed a PBI unit based on what was instructed in the Act Number 20 of 2003 concerning the system of national education ‘Sistim Pendidikan Nasional’ Article 50 clause (3): “The government and local government undertake at least one unit of education in all levels of education to be developed into international standard educational unit”. In general, the government policy in education reflects how it views community, its political belief and interests (Sirozi, 2007: 17-18).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From political perspective, the policy of PBI is ideological-cultural in nature and constitutes a form of the government hegemony in the discursive contestation within the context of politics, economy, social and culture. In this case, hegemony refers to the concept of the domination of the dominating group (the government) over the subordinate groups (the community of education) through the process of intellectual, moral and political leadership and its implementation is supported by intellectuals referred to as the organic intellectual. Hegemony takes place when the subordinated classes have accepted the way of thinking of the dominating class (Bocock, 1986: 33; Simon, 1999: 9; Gramsci, 1971:57).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Since 2006 the government had developed the PBI unit in the form of schools which were designed to be international standard ‘Rencana Sekolah Berstandar International (RSBI) which exceeded the National Standard of Education ‘Standar Nasional Pendidikan (SNP)’. The RSBI was designed to be the school which would be developed into the international standard school ‘Sekolah Bertaraf Internasional’ (SBI). Then this led to a paradox in various aspects such as the teaching staff, the educational facilities, and the leadership of such an education unit. What could be observed from the national education was the phenomenon of the implementation of the principles of neoliberalism which was not in line with the idealism of the Constitution (Rifai, 2011: 141-143; Tilaar, 2007: 242; Darmaningtyas, 2012: 58-61).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It is important to see the matters pertaining to education from the ideological-cultural perspective. The reason is that, in theory, the attempt made to solve the matters pertaining to education should commence by correcting the non realistic assumptions as the basis for making the policy of educational politics (Widja, 2009: 5). The present study was conducted at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta for the reason that it was relatively close to “the eight minimal standards” of national education in order to deserve</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">“the RSBI status”. In this case, it was interesting to explore critically the discourse of PBI in order to understand the forms of the PBI hegemony and the factors leading to it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This present study employed descriptive-qualitative method. The primary data were obtained by interviewing the teachers, the headmaster and his assistants, the students, the students’ parents and the experts in education. The secondary data were in the forms of laws, regulations, and guide to the SBI implementation (Endraswara, 2006: 115-119); Mulyana, 2002: 173-176). The instruments used in the present study were an interview guide, a camera, and a computer. The data were validated through the process of triangulation which included data reduction, data presentation, data verification and presentation. As this present study is a qualitative study, the data were informally (descriptively) presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RSBI Unit constitutes the development of capitalism and neoliberalism in education as, in its implementation, it “only” gives opportunity to particular socioeconomic groups. Based on the field data, the “benchmarking” of the quality of education which refers to the quality of education of the countries which are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) socially and economically affected various components of the national educational standard. The quality educational services, for example, was getting capitalistic, stratified and was only enjoyed by particular social groups. However, according to the 1945 Constitution, the national education is indented to produce intelligent Indonesians (Tilaar, 2007: 242; Tilaar, 2006: 76).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Inn 1970s Paulo Freire and Ivan Illich criticized the world of education which was always assumed to be full with good deeds; in fact, however, it contains suppressions. In this case, education is considered reproducing the system of capitalism (Fakih, 2001: xxi). The field finding showed that the policy of PBI and standardization of educational components caused the text books needed at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta to be imported. In addition, the Cambridge examination was held, the costs needed became high and the economically weak people became marginalized. In this matter the globalized ideology operated through the policy of standardization of education which is full of competitive values and replaces the state socio-cultural values. In this matter, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">PBI discourse dominates the education at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta. This took place through the relation between SNP and “international standard of education” in the form of standardization of education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The forms of hegemony of PBI at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta included the standardization of education, the capitalism of education, the image of international quality, and the stratification of education. The standardization of education referred to the Act of Sisdiknas (the System of National Education) 20/2003 article 50 clause (3) concerning PBI unit as a strategy to anticipate the problems of the quality of education and the low national compatibility in the globalized era. The capitalization of education resulted from the implementation of OECD-oriented PBI unit and the rationalization of education as an investment which led to the commodification of education. The image of international quality at Public Senior High School 78 was achieved through the reality of education and the qualification of the teaching staff which was not in accordance with what was required by the “international curriculum” in order to be SBI. The stratification of educational services resulted in regular class, RSBI, and international class.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The factors which contributed to the hegemony of PBI were the politics of national education and globalism. The government dominated the community of education through PBI, the discourse of standardization, and compatibility in the globalized current. In this case, the Act of Sisdiknas Number 20 of 2003 and the Government Regulation Number 19 of 2005 concerning SNP required that PBI unit should be developed without taking the objective reality of a school into account. Globalization contributed to the international standardization such as the accreditation of ISO management, the adaptation of OECD curriculum and the use of the English language as the educational medium in order to be internationally recognized. The government and the group of intellectuals rationalized the policy of PBI through various socializations of education, discourses and jargons such as “globalized challenge”, “standard quality human resources”, “international compatibility” , the ISO certificate, “productivity” and the importance of mastering foreign languages especially English (Permendiknas No. 78 of 2009 concerning the implementation of SBI).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">PBI which was designed to lead to quality education and international compatibility was responsible for political, social, economic and cultural problems. The discourse of globalism and the politics of national education resulted in the hegemony of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">PBI at Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta in various forms such as the standardization of education, the capitalization of education, the stratification of education, and the image of international quality. The hegemony of PBI was influenced by internal and external factors, the politics of national education and globalism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The ideology of globalism in the policy of PBI caused education to be capitalistic, discriminative, and exclusive, and contributed to injustice. It is suggested that the Act of Sisdiknas Number 20 of 2003 with its various education policies should be comprehensively explored.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACKNOWLEGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, the writer would like to thank the Directorate General of Higher Education for the BPPS scholarship provided to the writer, and the principal of Public Senior High School 78 Jakarta for supporting the process of the present study. The writer would also like to thank the teaching staff of the Doctorate Program of Cultural Studies, School of Postgraduate Studies of Udayana University such as Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Kutha Ratna, S.U., and Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U. for their input to this article.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bocock, Robert. 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hegemony</span><span class="font0">. Chichester: Ellis Horword Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Darmaningtyas. 2012. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manipulasi Kebijakan Pendidikan</span><span class="font0">. Resist Book. Yogyakarta Endraswara, Suwardi. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metode, Teori, Teknik Penelitian Kebudayaan: Ideologi, Epistemologi, dan Aplikasi</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Widyatama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gramsci, A. 1971. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Selections from Prison Notebooks</span><span class="font0">. New York: International Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mulyana, D. 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif Paradigma Baru Ilmu Komunikasi dan Ilmu Sosial Lainnya</span><span class="font0">. Bandung: PT. Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Simon, R. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gagasan-gagasan Politik Gramsci</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Insist Press dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sirozi, M. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politik Pendidikan: Dinamika Hubungan antara Kepentingan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kekuasaan dan Praktik Penyelenggaraan Pendidikan</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tilaar, H.A.R. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mengindonesia Etnisitas dan Identitas Bangsa Indonesia</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jakarta: PT Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Widja, G. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan Sebagai Ideologi Budaya: Suatu Pengantar ke Arah</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan Kritis</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Kajian Budaya, Universitas Udayana</span></p>