---
layout: full_article
title: "THE REPRESENTATION OF THE DIVINE AND HUMAN BEING IMAGERY IN THE ENTITY OF RITUS SA’O NGAZA IN GURU SINA, NGADA, FLORES"
author: "Watu Yohanes Vianey, Emiliana Maryah, I Gde Parimartha, Aron Meko Mbete"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3570 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3570"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3570"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE REPRESENTATION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">OF THE DIVINE AND HUMAN BEING IMAGERY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">IN THE ENTITY OF RITUS </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SA’O NGAZA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">IN GURU SINA, NGADA, FLORES</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Watu Yohanes Vianey<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup> </span><span class="font2">, Emiliana Maryah<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Gde Parimartha<sup>2</sup>, Aron Meko Mbete<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduate Study, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:sigawunga@yahoo.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">sigawunga@yahoo.com</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This dissertation discusses the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font1"> in the village of Guru Sina in Ngada Regency, Flores. The empiric problems of this dissertasion are connected with the marginalized phenomenon of the local religion that submerged in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font1"> and its ritual practices. This probelm is relevant to be investigated from the perspectives cultural studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The problems raised in this study are : 1) the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza,</span><span class="font1"> 2) the representation of the relationhip between the Divine and human being in ritual practices of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza,</span><span class="font1"> and 3) the meaning of the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza.</span><span class="font1"> This study applies the qualitative method and the data collection was done using techniques of intensive interview, participationobservation, and documentation. The data were analyzed using the theory of ritus, the theory of process,the theory of semiotics, and the theory of deconstruction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The findings of the study can be explained as follows. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Firstly</span><span class="font1">, the representation of the Divine imagery is dyadic and triadic. In the dyadic imagery representation, The Divine is depicted as ’The Giver of an Unlimited Love and at the same time as ’The Unpredictable Taker of Love’. In the triadic representation, The Divine is depicted as The Sacred, in the attributive as ‘The Beginning’, ‘The End’, and ‘The Present Throughout’. In the dyadic imagery, the human being consists of the elements of the body and the soul, and in the triadic imagery, the human being consists of the elements of the body, the psyche, and the spirit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Secondly</span><span class="font1">, the relation between the Divine and human being is representatively revealed in the ritual practices of legitimating </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font1">. This relation centers in the methapor of relationship between the simbolic body dan the religious body, and affirms the status of human being as ’the wrapper of divinity seed’ and ‘His image’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Thirdly</span><span class="font1">, the meaning of the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font1"> is sacral , spiritual, and moral. The sacral value pertains to the dinamic relationship between the human being and the Divine in a sacral way and the sacral place. The Spiritual value pertains to the relation intra-human being and his spiritual opened and connected through inner feeling with the One Sacral in the strong effort of making the human being perfect. The moral value pertains to a good relationship among human beings themselves in accordance with their norms of community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The findings of the study enrich the theory of process about the concept of the Divine from Whitehead and contrast with the theory of ritus as the choreography of violence from Smedal. In the entity of ritus </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font1">, there is a unique concept of human being in the design of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ulu pali </span><span class="font1">carvings, which describes the ideology of leadership in the local tradition. The finding of this concept can become the model of implementation of the decostruction theory and the semiotic theory which removes and deconstructs binary opposition between the leader (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ulu</span><span class="font1">) and the follower (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">eko</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key word: representation, imagery, entity, relation, meaning</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The aim of this study is just to elaborate the religious emotion and its practice, which is called the ritus “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sao Ngaza</span><span class="font2">” of the people of Guru Sina. As the first stage of this academic work, let us start with an identification note of Guru Sina, which is as one of Ngada subculture in Ngada regency. This study is trying to academically and responsibly react to the echo of the phenomena of marginality based on the local tradition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phenomenon of marginalization is a relevant subject of study in order to defend the mission of strengthening the equality in this multicultural discourse. In this mission, such a study has a purpose to develop a human being and religious insight based on the local values as kept in the tradition and local ritual practices. These values at the same time can also help maintain the order of living in the frame of the ecological system. The main arguments of this study can be formulated as follows: How one is able to figure the representation out of the Divine and human being imagery in the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">; How one is able to identify the relationship of the representation between the Divine and the human being in the practice of the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">; and the last one is that How one can overview the meaning of the representation of Divine and human being imagery in the entity of the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The general purpose of the current academic work is just to understand and to interpretate the product and the practice of local culture of the people of Guru Sina, especially in performing the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">. This rite itself is believed as the media of representation of the Divine and human being imagery. To put in details, there are special goals of this study. (1) The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">researcher describes the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> as it is seen in the frame of ordering names, providing rooms and selecting paintings within the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">. (2) The researcher overviews with a thorough understanding of the relationship between human being and the Divinity within a process of ritual celebration. The center point of such elaboration is to put in a better explanation about metaphor of body which can be divided into personal body, social body, symbolic body and religious body. (3) In this way, the researcher interpretates the meaning of the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> which is inherently connected with the practice of the other rituals, including the sacral or holiness aspect, spirituality and sacrality perspectives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Theoretically, this study also has both aspects, its practical and theoretical values. This research improves the tradition of cultural studies, which is always in the mainstream of critical, multidisciplinary, multicultural and stand in the side of the marginal. The practical value of this study is to revitalize the appraisal of the sacral value, spiritual value and moral value based on the local point of view.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>MATERIAL AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The goal of this study is to find out and to get the qualitative representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the entity of the rite and the ritual practice of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> in Guru Sina. This study applied qualitative research method and the theoretical basis of the study is referred to an eclectic way from the theory of rite, combining the theory of process</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">linked to an analysis of semiotic and the deconstruction theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the perspective of organism ontology the actual expressions of the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> are the order of names, of place, and of ordering the paintings in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> location. In the frame of name order, the entity of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza </span><span class="font2">has the collective and particular name. In a specific speculation, the totality of this name order – collective and particular – hides the ideal type of culture (Kleden, 1988:54) and expresses significantly the representation of the Divine and human being imagery in the triadic atribute.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The concept of the order of place in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> is expressed by two kinds of ritual formulations, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pata Téke </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pata Po Pera</span><span class="font2">. In the order of place the concept of the representation of the Divine and human imagery is not only triadic as it is expressed in the name order dimension, but also it is dyadic principal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the dimension of painting order, there is a concept of the representation of the unique human being imagery in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ulu pali</span><span class="font2"> carvings, which describes the ideology of leadership in local tradition. This design expresses the ethos of a good leader in the local wisdom who must threat the others (fellowship) as he threats himself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The representative celebration of the rite represents the relationship between the Divine and human being in the practice of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> celebration. The relationship of the representation of the Divine and human being is expressed clearly in the prayer and also in the sacrifice of the animal in the process of killing, cooking and is offered to the holiness. In the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> this celebration is arranged as a sacrifical ceremony and not to be called as a celebration of victimization or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">violence of celebration. The prayer of the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa'o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">, stresses the concept of the relationship between the representation of the divinity and human being as we have discussed before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The entity of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> is connected with the celebration of the rite that indicates the practice of the relationship between the representation the Divine and the human being. The representation of such a relationship in the frame of the ontological perspective indicates a personal, social, symbolic and religious relationship. The relationship between the Divine and human being within the celebration of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> is centered on the metaphor of body networks, which consists of the interactions of personal body, social body, and the relation of the symbolic body and the religious body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are three meanings of the representation of the Divine and human being imagery: the sacral value, spiritual value, and moral value. The sacral or the holiness value deals with the relationship between human being and the Divine as the Holly One or the Sacred. It is a being and the center of the existence of the origins of life. Human being is invited to honor the Divine with verbal celebration in the form of prayer and other religious action, for instance, performing the sacrificial animal. All the people’s daily actions dealing with goodness and hollyness done with a pure knowledge – as well as with an active and pious – these can direct people in the better way to choose the prosperous life or whatever option of salvation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The spiritual value is the assessment of human being networks with his own personality which is spiritually connected with the Divine. The aim of practicing such value</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">generally has its goal in preventing the good soul with another purpose, which is to clean the spirit by getting the good spiritual life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The moral value is the assessment to have a relationship between human being and the neighbors that is viewed as the expression of love among the neighbors in the frame of love </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(mesu mora).</span><span class="font2"> The implementation of love among the neighbors is expressed in the name of ‘Generated house’. The meaning of love stresses some communitarian norms, which can be seen in the following aspects, (1) in the relationship with others, in which one must help each other and most especially in the moments of difficulties. (2) One has to respect the privacy and the ownership of wealth. The wealth also has the social function and has to be used in terms of improving the benefit of the community. (3) In the community life, one has to extend the habit of sharing with others. (4) Every body has to threat others as well as possible as friends and has a good will to respect differences.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Novelty of the Research</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">First: </span><span class="font2">the findings related to the concept and theory of the entity of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">. In the phenomenon of collective name order there are concepts of the representation of the Divine imagery as ‘The Beginning’, ‘The End’ and ‘The All Throughout’. Such concepts enrich the process of thought, which only states the Divine imagery as the primordial nature (‘The Beginning’) and the consequent nature (‘The End’).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the phenomenon of painting order in the entity of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">, there is a unique concept of human being imagery in the design of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ulu pali </span><span class="font2">painting which traditionally describes the ideology of leadership and fellowships. The finding of this concept</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">can become one of the best models of implementation of the destruction and the solidarity semiotic theory which removes and destructs binary opposition between the leader </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(ulu)</span><span class="font2"> and the follower </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(eko).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Second</span><span class="font2">: The finding is related to the theory of the practice of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">. In this context, the act of sacrifice is quite different from the rite theory of Smedal which is indicated as the rite for the choreography of violence. The sacrifice of the chicken, pig and buffalo in the rite of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza </span><span class="font2">is seen as a holly action in which sacrificing the animals took place to replace the position of a human being linked to the symbolic and religious relationship with the Divine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All the prayers in ritual ceremony of Guru Sina highlight the concept of representation of Divine imagery as the Sacred in a triadic way. In the dyadic principle the concept of representation of the Divine as the Holly One or the Sacred can be explained as follows: (1) The Divine is ‘The Mother and Father’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ine Ema</span><span class="font2">) (2) The Divine is ‘The Giver of An Endless Love’ and ‘The Holy One Who Unpredictably Takes that Love (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Susu Keri Asa Kae</span><span class="font2">); (3) The Divine is also ‘The Transcendent’ and ‘The Immanence’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewa Zeta Nitu Zale</span><span class="font2">). In the triadic way, the concept of the representation of the Divine imagery as the Sacred can be explained as follows: (1) The Divine is thought as ‘The Beginning’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pu’u</span><span class="font2">), ‘The End (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lobo</span><span class="font2">), and ‘The Present Throughout’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dhoro</span><span class="font2">). (2) The Divine is ‘The Being-Beyond-World’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewa Wawo</span><span class="font2">), ‘The Being – Accompanies House’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewa Sa’o</span><span class="font2">), and ‘The Being – In – Me’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dewa Ja’o</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The relationship between the Divine and human being is represented in the ritual practices of legitimating </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2">. This relationship centers in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the metaphor of the symbolic body and the religious body, and affirms the status of human being as ’the wrapper of divinity seed’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kopa Dewa</span><span class="font2">) and ‘His image’ (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nenu ngia Dewa</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Third: the finding shows that the concepts in the representation of the meaning of the Divine imagery and the human being contain sacral, spiritual and moral values. The sacral value is the assessment of relationship between human being and his neighbors which is generally expressed by the concept of love </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(mesu mora).</span><span class="font2"> It is a dyadic way to figure love out of the Lord and neighbors in order to develop a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bonum commune</span><span class="font2"> in a community life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS Conclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All the results of the study can be concluded as follows: The entity of the ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> expresses the traditional house of the people of Guru Sina, which is essentially seen as the ritual body. The order of place in this respect of culture does not function only as the room for human meeting, but also as the house for human meeting with the Divine. This expresses significantly the representation of the Divine and human being imagery.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dealing with the entity of ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sa’o Ngaza</span><span class="font2"> which, in its practice, became a thorough way to express the intimate relationship between the Divine and human being, ontologically conveys the personal, social, symbolic and religious relationship. The meaningfulness that is revealed by this study is sacral, spiritual and moral.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>ACKNOLEDGEMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">I would like to take this opportunity to express my great thanks to Prof Dr. Emiliana Mariyah, MS as my promoter,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prof. Dr. I Gde Parimartha, MA., as copromoter I and Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete, as co-promoter II who have attentively given me support, encouragement and guidance starting from proposal writing until the last process of completing this dissertation report. I would also like to deliver my high appreciation to Arnoldus Foundation and Widya Mandira Catholic University, Rector of Udayana University, Director of Post-Graduate Program Udayana University and staff, and the Head of Cultural Study Doctorate Program Udayana University and staff.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Deus est caritas, ceratio ex amore</span><span class="font2">!</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Abesamis, H. Carlos, 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Third Look At Jesus</span><span class="font2">, Philipina: Claritian Publication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Adnan, Aslan, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Menyingkap Kebenaran, Pluralisme Agama dalam Filsafat Islam dan Kristen Seyyed Hossein Nashr dan &nbsp;John Hick</span><span class="font2">, Bandung:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alyfia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Amaladoss, M, &nbsp;&nbsp;2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pembebasan Asia</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: CINDELARAS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim, 1956. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Biblica Sacra, Juxta Vulgatum Clementinam</span><span class="font2">, Roma: Societatis S. J. Evang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1973. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Alkitab</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1971. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sura Ngasi ne’e Mebho</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Encyclopedia of Religious</span><span class="font2">, Vol II, New York: MacMillan Library Reference.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ensiklopedi Nasional Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta: Delta</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pemungkas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Armstrong, Karen, 1993.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A History of God: The 4000 Year Quest of Judaism, Christianity and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Islam</span><span class="font2">, New York:Ballantina Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">________, 2005. Sejarah Tuhan, Kisah Pencarian Tuhan Yang Dilakukan Oleh Orang-Orang Yahudi, Kristen, dan Islam Selama 4000 Tahun, (terj.) Zaimul Am, Bandung: Minzan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Arndt, Paul,. 1929-1931. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">&quot;</span><span class="font2">Die Religion der N’ada</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">”,</span><span class="font2"> (part 1 &amp;&nbsp;part 2) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropos</span><span class="font2"> 24: 817-861; 26, 353-405; 697.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1936/1937. “Deva, das Höchste Wessen der Ngadha”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropos</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> 31: 894-909; 195-209; 347377</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1954. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gesellschaftliche Verhältnisse der Ngadha</span><span class="font2">, Wien-Modling: Studia Instituti Anthropos.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1958., ”Hinduismus der Ngadha,” Nanzan: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Asian Folklor Studies</span><span class="font2">,17</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama Orang Ngadha: Dewa, Roh-roh, Manusia, dan Dunia,</span><span class="font2"> Vol 1 (terj.) Paul Sabon Nama, Seri Etnologi Candraditya, No.6, Maumere: Seri Etnologi Candraditya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Astra, I Gde Semadi, dkk., 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Sanskerta – &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span><span class="font2">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar: &nbsp;Milik &nbsp;Pemerintah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Provinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guratan Budaya Dalam Perspektif Multikultural</span><span class="font2">, Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Atmaja, Nengah Bawa, 2005. ”Penelitian Kualitatif dan Penelitian Kuantitatif, dan Contoh Kajian Budaya Bali Pada Era Globaliasi”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahan Kuliah</span><span class="font2"> Prog. Doktor (S3) Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bader, Herman, 1953. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Die Reifefeiren bai den Ngadha</span><span class="font2">, Wien-modling: Studia Instituti Anthropos.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1964. ”In Memoriam Paul Arndt”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropos,</span><span class="font2"> 59, 639-632.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bagus, Lorens, 1996, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Filsafat</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bakker, J.W.M., &nbsp;&nbsp;1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan Sebuah Pengantar</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Balasuriya, Tissa, 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Eucharist and Human Liberation</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> Britain: SCM Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi Siarah</span><span class="font2"> (terj.) staf penerjemah PT BPK Gunung Mulia, Jakarta: BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Banawiratma, J.B., 1994. ”Beberapa Tantangan Terhadap Usaha Berteologi Dewasa Ini”, dalam Budi Susanto,SJ (ed) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi dan Praksis Komunitas Postmodern</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Barker, Chris, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori dan Praktik</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Bentang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Barnes, R.H., 1972. “Ngada”, dalam LeBar, Frank M. (ed.), 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ethnic groups of insular Southeast Asia; Andaman Islands and Madagaskar,</span><span class="font2"> New Haven: Human Relation Area Files Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Barret, David B. dan Todd M. Jhonson, 1988. “Annual Statistical Table on Global Mission:1988”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Bulletin of Missionary Research</span><span class="font2">, No 22, Januari</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Barth, Frederik, 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kelompok Etnis dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Batasannya</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Baskara, T. Wardaya, 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Spiritualias Pembebasan</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: 1995.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Basrowi dan Sukidin, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif Perspektif Mikro</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Grounded Theory, Feneomenologi, Etnometodologi, Etnografi, Dramaturgi, Interaksi Simbolik,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutik, Konstruksi Sosial, Analisis Wacana, dan Metode Refleksi</span><span class="font2">), Surabaya: Insan Cendekia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bellwood, Peter, James J. Fox dan Darrell T. Tryon (eds).,1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Austronesians; Historical and comparative perspecitives. </span><span class="font2">Canberra: Departemen of Anthropology, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bellwood, Peter, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prasejarah Kepulauan Indo-Malaysia</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Berger, Arthur Asa, 2000</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Tanda-Tanda dalam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kebudayaan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kontemporer</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Tiara Wacana</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Best, Steven dan Douglas Kellner, 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Postmodern Teory: Critical Interogation</span><span class="font2">, London: MacMillan Education, Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Boff, Leonardo, 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Allah Persekutuan, Ajaran tentang Allah Tritunggal</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Aleksius Armanjaya dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Georg</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kirchberger, Ende: Arnoldus Ende.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bolong, Bertholomeus, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Memburu Hak &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mengorbankan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Persaudaraan, Potret Konflik Pengklaiman Hak Atas Tanah di Ngada</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Biagraf.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brand, Paul, dan Philiph Yancey, 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In His Image – Sesuai GambarNya</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Esther S. Manjani, Batam: Interaksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Buber, Martin., 1958. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I and Thou</span><span class="font2">, New York: Scribners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1957 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pointing the Way</span><span class="font2">., New York: Harper and Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Burns Tom R., Thomas Baumgastner, dan Philippe Devilie, 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keputusan,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat, Teori Dinamika antara Aktor dan Sistem</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Pradnya Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cavallaro, Dani, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Kritis dan Teori Budaya</span><span class="font2">, (Terj.) Laily Rahmawati, Yogyakarta: Niagara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chang, William, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Menggali Butir-Butir Keutamaan,</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ching , Julia, 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chinese Religions</span><span class="font2">, New York: Orbis Book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Christomy, T., dan Untung Yuwono (penyunting), 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Budaya</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Kemasyarakatan dan Budaya Direktorat Riset dan Pengabdian Masyarakat Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cobb, John B., 1990. Two Types of Postmodernism: Deconstruction and Process” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theology Today </span><span class="font2">47: 149-158.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Copelston, Frederich, 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A History of &nbsp;&nbsp;Philosophy</span><span class="font2">, New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dobleday.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cremers, Agus 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Antara Alam dan Mitos, Memperkenalkan Antropologi Struktural Claude Levi-Strauss</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cummins,R., 1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning and Mental Representation</span><span class="font2">, Cambridge: MIT Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dadang, Rusbiantoro, 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Dekonstruksi Ala Foucault dan Derrida</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Tiara Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Daeng, Hans 1998. “Upaya Inkulturasi Gereja Katolik di Manggarai dan Ngada”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Disertasi</span><span class="font2"> , Yogyakarta, UGM.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dahana, Radhar Panca, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jejak Posmoderenisme, Pergualatan Kaum Intelektual Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Bentang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dahler, Franz dan J. Chandra, 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Asal dan Tujuan Manusia</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta:Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darmawijaya,St., 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gelar-Gelar Yesus</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Davies, Peter (ed.), 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The American Heritage Dictionary of The English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Language,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NewYork:Dell Publishing Cp. INC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dewanto,S.S, (penerjemah), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Veda &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Samhita</span><span class="font2">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dhavamony, Marisuasi, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Fenomenologi </span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rg </span><span class="font2">Surabaya:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama</span><span class="font2">,</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">Dister, Nico Syukur, 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bapa &amp;&nbsp;Ibu Sebagai Simbol Allah</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Djawanai, St., 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ngadha Text Tradition</span><span class="font2">, Canberra: ANU Printing Service.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Downey, Michael (ed)., 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The New Dictionary of Catholic Spirituality</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;Minesota: The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Liturgical Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Altogether Gift: A Trinitarian Spirituality</span><span class="font2">, New York: Orbis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Duchrow, Ulrich,1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mengubah Kapitalisme Dunia</span><span class="font2"> (terj.) Esther Kuntjara, Jakarta: BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Editorial </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Media Indonesia,</span><span class="font2"> 9 April 2006.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ellacuria, Ignacio, 1976, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Freedom Made Flash: The Mission of Christ and His Church</span><span class="font2">, (terj. ) John Drury, New York: Orbis Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Elleas, Indrawan, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Isu Masa Kini Tentang Nama Allah</span><span class="font2">, Malang: Gandum Mas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fay, Brian, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Ilmu Sosial Kontemporer,</span><span class="font2"> (Terj.) M.Muhtih, Yogyakarta: Jendela.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fernandez, S. O., 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Citra Manusia Budaya Timur dan Barat</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ford, S.Lewis, 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Emergence of Whitehead’s Metaphysics</span><span class="font2">, Alabny: State University of New York Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Foucault, Mikchael, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Disiplin and Punish</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Harmondsworth,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Penguin, 1979.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fox, James J., (ed.) 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To Speak in Pairs, Essays on the Ritual Languages of Eastern Indonesia</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, (ed) 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Austronesia Houses</span><span class="font2">, Canberra: Departemen Antrhropology Research School of Pasific and Asian Studies, ANU.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, &nbsp;&nbsp;1995. &nbsp;&nbsp;“Genealogy &nbsp;&nbsp;and Topogeny: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Towards &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ethnography of Rotinese Ritual Place Names”, dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Poetic Power of Place</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font2">James J. Fox (ed), Canberra: Departemen Antrhropology Research School of Pasific and Asian Studies, ANU.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fox, James dan Clifford Sather, ed., 1996, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Origins, Ancestry and Alliance, Explorations in Austronetians Ethnography, </span><span class="font2">Canberra: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Departemen</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Antrhropology Research School of Pasific and Asian Studies, ANU.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frick, Heinz, 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pola Struktural dan Teknik Bangunan di Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Geertz, Clifford, 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama dan Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Francisco Budi Hardiman, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ghono, Yohanes, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sura Ngasi ne’e Mebho</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Giddens, Anthony, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat Pos-Tradisional</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Ali Noer Zaman, Yogyakarta: RCiSod.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Girard, Rene, 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Scapegoat</span><span class="font2">, New York: The John Hopinks University Press .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Violence and The Sacred</span><span class="font2">, New York: The John Hopinks University Press .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Glinka, Josef.1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gestalt und</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Herkunft. Beitrag zur anthropologischen Gliederung Indonesiens</span><span class="font2">, Studia Institusi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anthropos, 35. Bonn: St. Augustin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Golshani, Mehdi, 2004. ”Sains dan Yang Sakral: Sains Sakral vs Sains Sekular”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah </span><span class="font2">International Conference on Religion and Science in the Post-colonial &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;World,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: UGM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Groppe, T, Elizabeth, 2002. “Catherina Mowry LaCugna’s Contribution to Trinitarian Theology”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theological Studies</span><span class="font2">, No 63.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hadinata, Andika, 2007. “Imlek dan Harmoni Dengan Alam”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, 5 Februari.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Haedar, Nashir, 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama dan Krisis Manusia Modern</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halkes, Catherina, “Feminist Theology: An Interium Assesment”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Concilium,</span><span class="font2"> No.134</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hartono, Dick, SJ (dkk), 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ilmu Budaya Dasar</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: APTIK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Memanusakan Manusia Muda</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hayford, Jack, 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Citra dan Indentitas &nbsp;&nbsp;Seseorang</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;(terj.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wim Salampesy, Batam: Interaksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hendriks, Herman CICM, 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keadilan Sosial Dalam Kitab Suci</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Heriyanto, Husain. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paradigma Holistik, Dialog Filsafat, Sains, dan Kehidupan Menurut Shadra dan Whitehead</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Teraju.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hick, John, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuhan Punya Banyak Nama,</span><span class="font2"> (terj.) Yogyakarta: Dian/Interfidei.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hidayat, S. Rahayu, 2004. “Semiotik dan Bidang Ilmu”, dalam Christomy, T., dan Untung Yuwono (penyunting), 2004.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika Budaya</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Pusat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Penelitian</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kemasyarakatan dan Budaya Direktorat Riset dan Pengabdian Masyarakat Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holland, Joe., 1988. “A Postmodern Vision Spirituality and Society”, dalam David Roy Griffin (ed.) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Spirituality and Society Postmodern Visions</span><span class="font2">, New York: State University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Huijbers, Theo, 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia Mencari Allah, Pengantar Ke Dalam Filsafat Ketuhanan</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Huntington, Samuel, P., 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Benturan Antar Peradaban dan Masa Depan Politik Dunia</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) M. Sadat Ismail, Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Izutsu, Toshihiko, 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Relasi Tuhan dan Manusia, Pendekatan Semantik Terhadap Al-Quran, </span><span class="font2">(terj.) Agus Fahri Husein, Supriyanto Abdullah, dan Amirudin, Yogyakarta: Tiara Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jackson, Roy, 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Friedrich Nietzsche</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Abdul Mukhid, Yogyakarta: Bentang Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jacobs, Tom, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Immanuel – Allah Beserta &nbsp;&nbsp;Kita</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jaspers, Karl, 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Augustin</span><span class="font2">, München: Piper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jebadu, Alex, 2007. “Penghormatan Kepada Leluhur dan Kemungkinan Pengintegrasiannya ke Dalam Iman dan Bakti Kristen:, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ledalero</span><span class="font2">, Vol 6, No 1 Juni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jegalus, Norbert, 2003.“Filsafat Kebudayaan”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Diktat</span><span class="font2"> Bahan Kuliah Filsafat Agama Universitas Katolik Widya Mandira Kupang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jendra, I Wayan, 2007. “Sabar-Subur, Bersyukur Dijauhkan Dari Liang Kubur”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Spiritual Universal</span><span class="font2">, Edisi Juni-Juli.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kartodirdjo, Sartono (dkk), 1975. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sejarah Nasional Indonesia V</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Departemen</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kewuel, K . Hipolitus, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Allah Dalam Dunia Postmodern</span><span class="font2">, Malang: Dioma.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kirchberger, George, 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Allah Menggugat</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maumere:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ledalero.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Allah, Pengalaman dan Refleksi dalam Tradisi Kristen</span><span class="font2">, Ledalero: LPBAJ.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______(ed)., 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gereja Berwajah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Asia</span><span class="font2">, Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kleden, Ignas, 1984. “Penelitian dan Kemampuan Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial: Pelajaran dari Seminar Orientasi &nbsp;&nbsp;Sosial &nbsp;&nbsp;Budaya”,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prisma</span><span class="font2">, No 1, edisi Januari.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______ 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sikap Ilmiah dan Kritik Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: LP3ES.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1988.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">”Paham Kebudayaan</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Clifford</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Geertz”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Monografi,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Jakarta:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The Society for</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Political</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Economic Studies</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(SPES),</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">LP3S dan Friedrich</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Nauman Stiffung (FNS).</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">______.,1995. “Kebangkitan Agama dalam Tiga Dimensi”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, (3 April)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1996. ”Pergeseran Nilai Moral, Perkembangan Kesenian dan Perubahan Sosial, Jurnal </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kalam</span><span class="font2">, edisi VIII.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2000. “Globalisasi dan Implikasi Sosial Budaya”, dalam Romanus Satu dan Herman Embuiru Wetu (ed.), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Gereja Milneium Baru,</span><span class="font2"> Maumere: Ritapiret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______,2002. “Konflik Etnis atau Konflik Politik?”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tempo</span><span class="font2">, 6 Januari (Edisi Khusus).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2006. “Cultural Studies dan Masalah Kebudayaan di Indonesia”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah</span><span class="font2">, Seminar Nasional, Hari Ulang Tahun X Program Studi Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, 18 Nopember.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2007. “Puisi dan Dekonstruksi: Perihal Sutardji Calzoum Bachry”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, Sabtu 4 Agustus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kleden, Paulus Budi, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dialog Antaragama Dalam Terang Filsafat Proses Alfred North Whitehead,</span><span class="font2"> Maumere: Penerbit Ledalero.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Koentjaraningrat</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ritus Peralihan di Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Komaruddin, Hidayat, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Menafsirkan Kehendak Tuhan, </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Teraju.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kottak, Conrard P. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mirror for Humanity, A Concise Interduction to Cultural Anthropology</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;International</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Editionas, Boston Burr Ridgge, Il Dubuque (etc), MC Graw-Hill Collage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kraft H. Charles, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Christianity in Culture, A Study in Dynamic Biblical Theologizing in Cross-Cultural &nbsp;&nbsp;Perspective</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;New</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">York: Orbis Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Küng, Hans, 2000. “Perdamaian Dunia, Agama-Agama Dunia, dan Etika Dunia”, dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama Untuk Manusia,</span><span class="font2"> Fazlur Rahman, et.al, (terj.) Ali Noer Jaman, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Küng, Hans dan Karl Josef Kuschel, 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Etik Global</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Ahmad Murtajib,Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Küng, Hans dan Julia Ching, 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chritianity and Chinese Religions</span><span class="font2">, New York: Dobleday Dell Publishing Groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kwek, J.S., 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mitologi China dan Kisah &nbsp;&nbsp;Alkitab</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Andi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kwik, Kian Gie, 2006 ”Pengemis Tak Punya Pilihan”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, 26 September.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lacey, N., &nbsp;&nbsp;1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Image and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Representation</span><span class="font2">, London: MacMillan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">LaCugna, Chatherine, Mowry, 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">God for Us: The Trinity and Christian Life</span><span class="font2">, San Fransisco: HarperCollins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leahy, Louis, SJ., 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia Sebuah Misteri</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia Di Hadapan Allah, Masalah Ketuhanan Dewasa Ini</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Ketuhanan Kontemporer</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">LeBar, Frank M. (ed.), 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ethnic groups of insular Southeast Asia; Andaman Islands and Madagaskar,</span><span class="font2"> New Haven: Human Relation Area Files Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leenhouwers, 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia Dalam Lingkungannya. Refleksi Filsafat tentang &nbsp;&nbsp;Manusia</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lefebure, Leo D., 2006</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, Pernyataan Allah. Agama dan Kekerasan, </span><span class="font2">(terj.) Bambang Subandrijo, Jakarta: BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leksono-supeli, Karlina, 2002. “Masikah Agama Diperuntukan Bagi Kehidupan”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basis</span><span class="font2">, No 0506, Mei Juni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Liliweri, Alo, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makna Budaya dalam Komunikasi Antarbudaya</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: LkiS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2004. ”Kearifan Lokal, Revitalisasi Kesadaran Atas Keberagaman Budaya Demi Kesatuan Bangsa”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah, </span><span class="font2">Dinas Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan NTT.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Luijpen, William A., 1969. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Existensial Phenomenology</span><span class="font2">, Pitsburgh: Duquesne University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Madrasuta, Ngakan Made, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hindu Akan Ada Selamanya</span><span class="font2">, Denpasar: Media Hindu</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Magnis-Suseno, Frans,SJ., 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Sebagai Ilmu Kritis</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______., 2000. “Agama, Humanisme, dan Masa Depan Tuhan”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basis</span><span class="font2">, No 05-06. Mei- Juni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______., 2005., </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pijar-Pijar Filsafat</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2006. “Peranan Tokoh dan Pemuka Agama Perlu Memperhatikan Moralitas Bangsa Bermartabat dan Persaudaraan Sejati”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah, </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Departemen Agama RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Maman S. Mahayana, 2006, Citra dan Citraan Monyet di atas Gerbong Kereta”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, Jumat 7 April, hlm. 14.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mangkey,J. 2008. “Hak Dasar Bukan Negosiasi”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hati Baru</span><span class="font2">, No 07, Januari.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mangunwijaya, J.B., 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Religiositas</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______., 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Wastu Citra</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mantra, Ida Bagus, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Penelitian dan Metode Penelitian Sosial</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Manusia Flores”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Media Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, 11 Juni 2006.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mariyah, Emiliana, 2005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“Perkembangan Kajian Budaya Universitas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sepeninggal Prof. Dr. I Gusti</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ngurah Bagus”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Pidato Pengukuhan</span><span class="font2"> Jabatan Guru Besar Tetap dalam Bidang Antropologi pada Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana, Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Universitas</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Martasudjita, E.,Pr., 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makna Liturgi Bagi Kehidupan Sehari-hari</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Allah Bapa Semua Orang</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Maslow, Abraham, 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama, Nilai dan Pengalaman Puncak</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Agus Kremers dan Donatus Sermada, Maumere: LPBAJ.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mbete, Aron M., 2003. “Bahasa dan Budaya Lokal Minoritas: Asal-Muasal, Ancaman Kepunahan dan Ancangan Pemberdayaan dalam Kerangka Pola Ilmiah Pokok Kebudayaan Universitas Udayana”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Pidato Pengukuhan</span><span class="font2"> Jabatan Guru Besar Tetap dalam Bidang Linguistik pada Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana, 26 Oktober 2003, Denpasar: Universias Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______(dkk.,) 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nggua Bapu, Ritual Perladangan Etnik Ende Lio,</span><span class="font2"> Dinas Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Kabupaten Ende: Pustaka Laras</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McIntyre, Alasdair, 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">After Virtue. A Study in Moral Theory</span><span class="font2">, London: Ducworth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mecado, L.N., 2000. “From Pagans to Partners in Dialogue”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Verbum SVD</span><span class="font2">, Vol 41.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Miles, B. M., dan M. B. Huberman. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Data Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta:UI - Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mills, C. Wright, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kaum Marxis, Ide-Ide Dasar dan Sejarah Perkembangannya</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(terj.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Imam Mutaqien, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Miri, Mohsen Seyyed, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sang Manusia Sempurna, Antara Filsafat Islam dan Hindu</span><span class="font2">, Bandung: Mizan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moleong, J. Lexy, 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font2">, Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Molnar, Andrea Katalin, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Grandchildren of the Ga’e Ancestors, Social Organisation and Cosmology among the Hoga Sara of Flores</span><span class="font2">, Leiden: KITLV Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muda, Hubert, SVD, 1986. “The Supreme Being of The Ngadha People In Flores, Its Transendence And Imanence”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Disertasi</span><span class="font2">, Roma: Pontificio Gregoriana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 2001. “Kebudayaan Reba Dalam Perspektif Agama Katolik”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah</span><span class="font2"> Seminar Kebudayaan Ngada, 20 Januari, Jakarta: Panitia Menggali Makna Kebudayaan Ngada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Naif, Octovianus, 2006. ”Spiritualitas </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Deus Unus et Trinus</span><span class="font2">: Membentuk Pribadi Yang Trnitaris, Membentuk Komunitas Yang Trinitaris, Membentuk Sikap Sosial Yang Trinitaris”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah</span><span class="font2"> Kapitel SVD Timor, 23-28 Januari, Atambua: Kapitel SVD Timor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nakamura, Hajime, 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ways of Thinking of Eastern Peoples</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font2">Honolulu: Hawaii University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nas, Peter, J.M dan Gerard A. Peterson, 2003. “Introduction Signs and Symbols”, dalam Peter Nas, Gerard A. Persoon dan Rivke Jaffe (eds), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Framing Indonesian Realities</span><span class="font2">, Leiden: KITLV.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Noerhadi, Toety Herati, 1999. “Dramatik Dalam Linguistik”, dalam Henri Chambert- Loir dan Hasan Muarif Ambary,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(ed), Panggung Sejarah: Persembahan Kepada Prof.Dr. Denys Lombard, Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Palm-Nooy, Hetty, 2003. ”The Buffalo in Ritual, Mith and Daily Life of The Sa’dan Toraja”, dalam Peter Nas, Gerard Persoon dan Rivke Jaffe (eds), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Framing Indonesian Realities</span><span class="font2">, Leiden: KITLV.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Palmer, Richard R., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2003.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Heremenutika, Teori Baru Mengenai Interpretasi</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Musnur Hery dan Damanhuri Muhammed</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yogyakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pals, L. Daniel. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Seven Theories of Religion</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dari Animisme</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">E.B.Tylor, Materialisme Karl Marx, Hingga Antropologi Budaya C. Geertz</span><span class="font2">. (terj.) Ali Noer Zaman, Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Panikkar, Raimundo, 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dialog Intra Religius</span><span class="font2"> (terj. dan ed.) A, Sudiarja, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parimartha, I Gde., 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Perdagangan dan Politik di Nusa Tenggara, 1815-1915</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Jembatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">________, 2005. “Pokok-Pokok Pikiran Dalam Perspektif Kajian Budaya”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah</span><span class="font2"> Bahan Kuliah Program Doktor (S3) Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Paus Benediktus XVI, 2006. “Iman, Akal Budi dan Universitas”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Pidato</span><span class="font2"> Kepausan, (terj.) B.S. Mardiatmaja,SJ. Jakarta: Dokpen KWI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Paus Yohanes Paulus II, 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keprihatinan Akan Masalah Sosial</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) P. Turang, Pr., Jakarta: Dokpen KWI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Peacocke, Arthur, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Path From Science towards God.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford: Oneworld.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Piadade, Inocenscio Joao, 1994, “Proses Berteologi Dalam Interaksi”, dalam Budi Susanto,SJ (ed) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi dan Praksis Komunitas Postmodern</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Piliang, Yasraf Amir, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hipersemiotika, Tafsir Cultural Studies Atas Matinya Makna</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poedjosoedarmo, S., 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Bahasa</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Surakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muhammadiyah &nbsp;&nbsp;Universitu</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Polanyi, Michael, 1958. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Personal Knowledge</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Routledge and Paul Kegan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______, 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Segi Tak Terungkap Ilmu &nbsp;&nbsp;Pengetahuan</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;(terj.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mikhael Dua, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poster, Mark, 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jean Baudrillard: Selected &nbsp;&nbsp;Writing</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;London:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Polity Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pudja, G., dan W. Sadia (penerjemah), 1978, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Rig Weda</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Departemen Agama Republik Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sama Weda</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Departemen Agama Republik Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ratna, Nyoman Kutha, 2005. “Postmodernisme: Ciri-Ciri, Perkembangan, dan Teori-Teori yang Relevan”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah </span><span class="font2">Bahan Kuliah Prog. Doktor (S3) Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_____, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Cultural Studies, Representasi Fiksi dan Fakta</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_____, 2006. “Metodologi Kajian Budaya”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah</span><span class="font2"> Bahan Kuliah Program Doktor (S3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kajian Budaya Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ritzer, George, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sosial Postmodern</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Muhamad Taufik, Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Robinson, Fiona,1999. Globalizing Care. Ethics, Feminist Theory, and Inernational Relation, Boulder: Westview Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rogacion, Mary Rebecca Rivka E., 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Enneagram Timur, 9 Tipe Kepribadian</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) A. Supratiknya, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sachari, Agus, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Estetika, Makna, Simbol dan Daya</span><span class="font2">, Bandung: ITB</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saifuddin, Achmad Fedyani, 1999. “Keluarga dan Rumah Tangga: Satuan Penelitian dalam Perubahan Masyarakat”, Jurnal </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropologi Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, Th. XXIII, No.60, Jakarta: Departemen Anthropologi Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik UI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_____, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Antropologi Kontemporer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Suatu Pengantar Kritis Mengenai Paradigma, </span><span class="font2">Jakarta:Prenada Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sastrapratedja (ed), 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia Multi Dimensional</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schröter, Susan, 1988. “Death Ritual of the Ngada in Central Flores, Indonesia, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropos</span><span class="font2"> 93, Fribourg, Switzerland: St. Paul Publication, 1988.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schimel, Annemarie, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Mistery of Numbers. Misteri Angka-Angka Dalam Berbagai Peradaban Kuno Tradisi Agama Islam, Yahudi dan Kristen</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Agung Prihantoro, Bandung: Pustaka Hidayah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shahab, Yasmin Z., 2006. “Tantangan Peran Anthropologi Indonesia,” Jurnal </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropologi Indonesia</span><span class="font2">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 30, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No.2, Jakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Departemen Anthropologi Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik UI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Simson, D.P., 1959. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cassel’s New Latin Dictionery</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> New York: Funk &amp;&nbsp;Wagnels Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Singgih, E.G., 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Berteologi dalam Konteks</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Smedal, H. Olaf, 1996. “Conquest and Comfort A Ngadha Bad Death Ritual”, dalam Signe Howel (ed) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">For The Sake of Our Future Sacrificing In Eastern Indonesia, </span><span class="font2">Leiden: Research School CNW, Vol 42.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">____, 2000. “The Aesthetic of Ngadha Houses </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropology and Aesthetics,</span><span class="font2"> 37, Spring.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sobrino, J., 1990. “The Crucified Peoples: Yahwe’s Suffering Servant Today: In Memory of Ignacio Ellacuria”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Concilium, </span><span class="font2">No 6.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Song,C.S., 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sebutkanlah Nama-Nama Kami: Teologi Ceritera dari Perspektif Asia</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: BPK Gunung Mulia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Storey, John., 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Budaya dan Budaya &nbsp;&nbsp;Pop, Memetakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lanskap Konseptual Cultural Studies,</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(suntingan) Dede</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nurdin, Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stott, John R.W. dan Coote, Robert (eds), 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Down to Earth: Studies on Christianity and Culture</span><span class="font2">, London: Hodder and Stoughton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suastika, I Made, 2005. ”Pentingnya Pemahaman Nilai Budaya Pada Naskah Sastra Bagi Pembaca Modern Dalam Konteks Ajeg Bali”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Pidato Pengukuhan</span><span class="font2"> Jabatan Guru Besar Tetap dalam Bidang Ilmu Sastra pada Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana, 8 Oktober 2005, Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudarminta, J., 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Proses – Sebuah Pengantar Sistematik Filsafat Alfred North Whitehead,</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1994. ”Model Pemahaman tentang Allah dalam Filsafat Proses Alfred N. Whitehead”, dalam Budi Susanto,SJ (ed) </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi dan Praksis Komunitas Postmodern</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudiarja, 2005. ”Habermass dan Teori Komunikasi &nbsp;&nbsp;Sosial, &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Diskursus Filsafat Soial</span><span class="font2"> S-3, Universitas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gajah &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mada,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sugiharto, Bambang I., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1996.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Postmodernisme Tantangan Bagi Filsafat</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sunarto, Kamnto, Ruessel Hiang-Khang Heng, Achmad Fedyani Saifuddin (ed.), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2004.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Multicultural Education in Southeast Asia: Stepping into Unfamiliar</span><span class="font2">, Jakarta: Jurnal Antropologi Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Supomo, S., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1995. ”Indic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Transformation: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sanskritization of Java and Javanization of the Bharata”, dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font2">Peter Beelwood, James J. Fox dan Darriel Tryon (eds.), Canberra: Departemen Antrhropology Research School of Pasific and Asian Studies, ANU.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suprayogo, Imam, dan Tobrani, 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Sosial Agama</span><span class="font2"> Bandung: Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sutrisno, Mudji dan Hendar Putranto, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori-Teori Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sutrisno, Mudji, 2006. ”Posisi Cultural Studies Di Manakah”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kompas</span><span class="font2">, 9 April: 27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suwatno, Edi, 1997/1998. “Mamayu Hayuning Buwana”, dalam </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">, No. 4, Thn 7, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Synnott, Anthony, 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tubuh Sosial, Simbolisme, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diri, dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat,</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(terj.) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yudi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Santoso, Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tatt, Ong Hean,1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Simbolisme Hewan China</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Lie Hua, Jakarta: Megapon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therik, Gerson Thom, 2000. “Arus Balik Globalisasi Dalam Milnium Ketiga”, dalam Martin L.Sinaga (ed.), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agama-Agama Memasuki Milenium Ketiga</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Grasindo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tillich, Paul,1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">On Art and Architecture</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crossroad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Titib, I Made, 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Veda Sabda Suci </span><span class="font2">(</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Praktis Kehidupan</span><span class="font2">), Surabaya: Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tjahjadi, L. Simon Petrus, 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tuhan Para Filsuf dan Ilmuwan</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tjahyono, Gunawan,1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cosmos, Center, and Duality in Javanese Architectural Tradition</span><span class="font2">, Barkeley: Berkeley University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Treublord, David, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Agama</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) 1987. H.M. Rasjidi, Jakarta: PT Bulan Bintang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tule, Philipus, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Longing for the House of God Dwelling in the House of &nbsp;&nbsp;Ancestors</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;St.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Augustin: Studia Instituti Anthropos 50 - Academic Press Fribourg.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_____, 1998. ”Hause-Pots and Basket: Social Organisation of Udi Worowatu Pepole, Eastern Keo of Central Flores”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropologi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, No 57, Th. XXII, September – Desember.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Turner, Brian S, 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Religon and Social Theory</span><span class="font2">, London: Age Publication Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Turner, Harold W, 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">From Temple to Meeting House: The Phenomenology and Theology of Places of Whorship</span><span class="font2">, Mouton: The Hague</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Turner, J. H., 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Strucuture of Sociological Theory</span><span class="font2">, Illinois: The Dorswei Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tyler, T. Roberts, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Spiritualitas Posreligius</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) M. Khatarina, Yogyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">van Zoet, Aart, 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tentang Tanda: Cara Kerjanya, dan Apa yang Kita Lakukakan dengannya, </span><span class="font2">(terj.) Ani Soekowati, Jakarta: Yayasan Sumber Agung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vatikan II, 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dokumen-Dokumen Konsili Vatikan II</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) R. Hardawirjana, Jakarta: KWI-Obor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vatter, Ernst, 1931. ”Die Ngada; Ein Megalitith-Volk auf Floress”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Der Erdball</span><span class="font2"> 5 - 9:347-351.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vischer, P. Michael, 2003. ”Substitution, Expiation and the Idiom of Blood on Ko’a Sacrificing. Coparative Issues in Austronesian Ethnograpy”, dalam Peter Nas, Gerard A. Persoon dan Rivke Jaffe (eds), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Framing Indonesian Realities</span><span class="font2">, Leiden: KITLV.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waterson, Roxana, 1990.The Living House: An Athropology of Architecture in South-East Asia, Singapore: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Watu, Yohanes Vianey, 1986. “Manusia Dalam Filsafat Pata Dela”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> STFK Ledalero.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1993/1994 “Citra Humanisme </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pata Dela</span><span class="font2">”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> No 5 Thn III, Jakarta: Departemen</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1994/1995. “Kalau Manusia Adalah Kita: Sebuah Catatan Holistik”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font2">No 8 Thn IV, Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1996. ”Epistemologi, Perspektif, Piranti, dan Kritik Realisme”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Diktat</span><span class="font2"> Bahan Kuliah Filsafat Agama Universitas Katolik Widya Mandira Kupang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 1997/1988. ”Neke Antara Emansipasi dan Seni Mencinta”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">, No 14, Th VII, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan RI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2003. ”Reba, Fenomen Hinduisme Purba dan Implikasinya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bagi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pengembangan Komunitas Iman dan Otonomi Daerah di Kabupaten Ngada”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prajna</span><span class="font2">, No VIII, (Januari –Juni).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2005. ”Transformasi Identitas Orang Bajawa dan Implikasinya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bagi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kepemimpinan Kontemporer”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prajna</span><span class="font2">, No IX (Januari – Juni).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______, 2005. ”Citra Tuhan Dalam Ritus </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ka Sa’o</span><span class="font2"> Orang Guru Sina dan Implikasinya Bagi Ketahanan Budaya Lokal, Sebuah Penelitian Awal”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manuskrip</span><span class="font2">, LPPM Unwira Kupang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">______,2007. ’Media Neke dan Tafsir Ideologi Vagina di Guru Sina, Flores, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Kajian Budaya</span><span class="font2">, Vol 4, No 8 (Juli 2007).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Winangun, Wartaya, Y.W., 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat Bebas Struktur, Liminalitas dan Komunitas Menurut Victor Turner</span><span class="font2">, Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Winarto T. Yunita, 1999. “Pendekatan Prosesual: Menjawab Tantangan dalam Mengkaji Dinamika Budaya”, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Antropologi Indonesia</span><span class="font2">, Thn XXIII, No 60, Sep – Des.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Whitehead, Alfred North, 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Religion in the Making</span><span class="font2">, New York: New American Library.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">_______1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Process and Reality</span><span class="font2"> (ed.) David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne, New York: The Free Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Zoetmulder, Piet, 1990, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manunggaling Kawula Gusti</span><span class="font2">, (terj.) Dick Hartoko, Jakarta: Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">17</span></p>