---
layout: full_article
title: "ECOLOGICAL AND IDEOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF KABHANTI PERFORMED BY MUNA COMMUNITY IN MUNA REGENCY,  SOUTH EAST SULAWESI"
author: "Hadirman -"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-7460 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-7460"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-7460"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ECOLOGICAL AND IDEOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">KABHANTI </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PERFORMED BY MUNA COMMUNITY IN MUNA REGENCY, SOUTH EAST SULAWESI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Hadirman</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Teachers’ Training College, University of Haluoleo</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kendari, South-East Sulawesi </span><span class="font0">email:</span><a href="mailto:hadiecolinguistik@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">hadiecolinguistik@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kabhanti is one of the oral traditions performed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Muna</span><span class="font1"> community. It is performed as part of the traditional ceremony adhered to by Muna community as an amusement and a means of presenting ideas and ideologies, and bequeathing the values which are useful to human life. Specifically, this present study was intended to describe the forms of ecological representation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> performed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Muna</span><span class="font1"> community, to reveal the ideology it contains, and to interpret the ecological meanings it contains. The theory of ecolingistics, the theory of ideology, and the theory of semiotics were eclectically used in the present study. Qualitative method was used and the data were descriptively and interpretatively analyzed. The present study was conducted at </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Watumela</span><span class="font1"> Village and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Latugho</span><span class="font1"> Village, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lawa</span><span class="font1"> District, Muna Regency. The data were collected through participatory observation, in-depth interview, the informants’ personal experience, and documentary study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The results of the study showed that ecologically the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> performed by Muna community represented natural environment and human environment. All the ecological lexical items and the human ecological lexical items in such a performance reflected the existence of Muna people in their lives. It contained environmental, educational, social and developmental ideologies. The meanings of ecological representation in this present study included the meaning of environment, the meaning of cultural endurance, the meaning of identity, and the meaning of solidarity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: representation, ecologicy, ideology, ecolinguistics, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1">, and Muna community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> is one of the oral traditions of the Muna community in Muna Regency, South East Sulawesi Province. It is performed using a specific language representing natural environment and human environment. The ecological lexical items representing the natural environment and human environment prove that the Muna people, especially the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pemantun</span><span class="font1"> (the poem reciter) are close to their environment. However, it is getting extinct as it has been scarcely performed in the domain of traditional ceremony. In relation to such a phenomenon, the problems of the present study are formulated in the form of three questions. They are what its ecological representation is like; what ideologies it contains, and what its ecological representation means.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In relation to this present study, the use of the concept Muna reflects that there is a number of individuals who occupy a region in Muna Regency. They make friends and associate</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">with each other. In their interaction, they are confined by regulations, norms, values, manners, and procedures; they are bound to the feeling of solidarity and collective interest; they recognize that there are norms which make them interact with each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker (2005: 10) states that representation is related to how the world is socially constructed and presented to and by us. Further, the essence of cultural studies can be defined as the studies in which culture is considered the practices of meaningfulness and representation. Representation is an action to present or represent something through another thing outside itself, which is usually in the form of a sign or symbol (Piliang, 2006: 24).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ecology is a network. Understanding ecosystem means understanding a network (Widianarko, 2004: 112). Moreover, Suharso et al (1993: 8) state that the central concept of ecology is ecosystem, that is, an ecological system formed by the mutual relation between animate beings and their environment. Apart from that, Mbete (2001: 15) states that ecology or environment refers to natural and social spaces which interact and influence one another. Although human beings recognize that they are part of the natural and biological systems, the psychological factor, the social dimension, and the cultural dimension inspire people to distinguish the natural environment from the cultural environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In general, this study was intended to obtain the basic data and the relation between the oral tradition and linguistics concerning the forms of the ecological description in the oral tradition of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1">. The ecological representation revealed is wrapped by the environmental language used by the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pemantun</span><span class="font1"> (poem reciter) when performing </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1">. This present study is significant theoretically and practically. In theory, it was expected that the results of the study would justify and enrich the information needed to strengthen the theoretical framework of the relation between the oral tradition and ecolinguistics in the cultural life of a society. In practice, it was expected that the result of the study could be used as the basis for empowering the ecological linguistic potential in the creation of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study was conducted in Muna Regency, South East Sulawesi Province. Lawa District was chosen as the location where the research was conducted for several considerations; they are (1) it is relatively homogenous, the Muna people living there work as traditional farmers cultivating dry land and still perform the oral tradition kabhanti, although it is scarcely performed; (2) the oral tradition kabhanti is still performed by the Muna community, although it has been scarcely bequeathed and it is only in the cognitive of the old speakers; and (3) it seems</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">that the oral tradition kabhanti does not function to trigger communal unity and the consciousness of the Muna community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through participatory observation, in-depth interview, and the informants’ personal experience. The qualitative data in the form of recording of the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> and narrations were analyzed in the present study. The data were obtained from both the primary and secondary data sources. The primary data were directly obtained from the informants, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> text and pictures. The secondary data were obtained from written sources. The data were descriptively and interpretatively analyzed. The theories used to answer the problems of the study were the theory of ecolinguistics proposed by Einer Haugen (1972), the theory of ideology proposed by Thompson (2004) and Volosinov (1973), and the theory of semiotics proposed by Barker (2005) and Riffaterre (1978).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A text is stated to contain ecological representation if it contains the lexical items of natural environment and human environment. This insight is in line with what is used as the basis of ecolinguistic studies. The forms of ecological representation in the present study can be classified based on the lexical elements taken from the natural environment and human environment. The forms of the representation of the natural environment recorded in the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> in the Muna community included the description of flora, fauna, cosmos, energy, and mineral. Such a description was not meaningless but was functional and meaningful to human life as well. The phenomena of the natural environment which was present at the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> indicated that there was a relation between human beings and the environment it represented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Human is part of the ecosystem. There were various types of interaction in the social environment. The representation of lexical items of human ecology refers to everything related to (1) human organism, (2) the activity of human body, (3) human life equipment, (3) names of places, (4) jewelry and dress, and the interrelation between human and the world of souls.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The traditional performance of the oral tradition of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> in the Muna community contains several ideologies. An ideology is defined as a social glue which is used by a community to maintain the stability of its people to apply norms collectively. Thomson (2004: 17-22) states that an ideology is not only a relation of the form of power which is institutionalized in a modern state, but it is also a system of relation in everyday life which does not focus on minor things but also neglects the characteristic and wider structural boundary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> can also be performed as a suggestion of socialization to spread the ideology of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pemantun</span><span class="font1"> (the poem reciter) of the surrounding social reality. When it is recited to the public (the viewers), it is responsible for spreading a belief, ideology, values or a particular prejudice. When it is performed, it seems that the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pemantun</span><span class="font1"> exposes (1) an environmental ideology, that is, the people’s way of life which positions and uses environment to reveal the massage which is intended; (2) an educational ideology, that is, an ideology of relation of both formal education and local education the Muna community has; (3) a social ideology, that is, an ideology of social relation taking place in the community; and (4) an ideology of development, that is, an ideology of physical and mental-spiritual developments.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ecolinguistic representation in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> performed by the Muna community contains various meanings depending on the viewers’ point of view, meaning that there is no single meaning. Meaning will be realized in relation to a particular discourse (Storey, 1984: 103). The lexical items used by the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pemantun</span><span class="font1"> will change depending on his observation of the surrounding environment used as the idea of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> text. The meaning of the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> includes (1) environmental meaning, that is, the environmental meaning marking the relation of human and environment, that is, the relation in which the social and natural environments takes from and gives to the people who create them; (2) the meaning of cultural endurance, that is, the meaning which gives space to the community as the owner for the oral tradition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> to exist in; (3) the meaning of identity, that is, through </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> the Muna people show their identity of having their own language ‘Muna language’ and the oral tradition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1">. In addition, through the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> the poem reciter invites the viewers to establish solidarity in praying that the ceremony will be successful, solidarity in building their village (Muna), and solidarity in achieving what is good together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Novelties of the study can be stated as follows. Firstly, it turned out that environment was used to inspire the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> text. There were two forms of ecological representation in the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> in the Muna community; they are (1) the natural environment and (2) the human environment. Some environmental forms had some references in the nature and the others did not as a consequence of the change in living environment and cultural environment; however, they were still recorded in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> performed. First, as far as the natural environment is concerned, two lexical items were recorded in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> text; however, their physical realizations were not available any longer; they are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sandana</span><span class="font1"> ‘sandalwood tree’ and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ghoghorio</span><span class="font1"> ‘kepodang bird’. Second, as far as the human environment is concerned, the household tools which had already been extinct were found; they are (1) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaghua</span><span class="font1"> ‘equipment used for drinking’, (2) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaperangku</span><span class="font1"> ‘equipment used for chasing sparrow away’, (3) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">o kampanaha</span><span class="font1"> ‘a tool</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">used for consuming betel vine’ and (4) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kawera</span><span class="font1"> ‘pan made of soil’. The lexical items were already extinct and did not have any references. The ecological change and the people’s cultural change caused the references of flora, fauna and household tools to get extinct.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Secondly, the ideologies of the performance of the oral tradition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> implied the people’s ideas, feeling, desire, idea, and ideology in their lives. In the ideology of education, the people’s ideology in choosing which works were allowed and which ones were not allowed was represented by the expression ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kotoginana kodotoangka ne giu pata mentela</span><span class="font1">’, meaning ‘ do not attach to and do not follow the words which are not allowed’. This expression was also related to the character education . Further, the ideology of the Muna people’s local education related to a group of knowledge which was taught in their family environment was recorded in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti </span><span class="font1">text performed as well. They are (1) the knowledge of bente ‘the knowledge of how to take care of oneself’, (2) the knowledge of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kantisele</span><span class="font1"> ‘the knowledge of how to recall any soul which was lost due to being surprised’, (3) the knowledge of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sawurondo</span><span class="font1"> ‘the knowledge of how to make oneself disappear in a second’, (4) the knowledge of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kutika</span><span class="font1"> ‘astrology’ (the knowledge of how to identify what days are good and what days are bad in the Muna calendar), and (5) the knowledge of how people learned from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tooke</span><span class="font1"> ‘house lizard’ based on its natures.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thirdly, there are five meanings which the ecological representation of the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> by the Muna people contained. They are (1) the meaning of strengthening environmental awareness, (2) the meaning of cultural endurance, (3) the meaning of inheritance, (4) the meaning of identity socialization, and (5) the meaning of strengthening solidarity. The cultural endurance was encouraged by the philosophy of the Muna people’s culture. The expressions in kabhanti showed the spirit that establishing self-endurance and living endurance was important. In addition, it was found that in the oral tradition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> had never been taught in any formal educational institution in Muna Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the results of the study, several conclusions can be drawn. First, in the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1">, the lexical items used by the poem reciter represent natural environment and human environment. Second, the ideologies the ecological representation in the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti </span><span class="font1">include (1) environmental ideology, (2) educational ideology, (3) social ideology, and (4) developmental ideology. Third, the meanings of the ecological representation of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti </span><span class="font1">performed by the Muna community include (1) environmental meaning, (2) cultural endurance meaning, (3) the meaning of identity, and (4) the meaning of solidarity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is suggested that, first, the poem reciter in the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> who usually comes from the old generation should introduce </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> to the young generation. Second, it is suggested to the Local Government of Muna that training should be provided to the teachers teaching locally loaded lessons so that they will implement the curriculum of locally loaded lessons well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this opportunity the writer would like to thank and highly appreciate Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U., as the main supervisor, Prof. Dr. Aron Meko Mbete and Prof. Dr. Emiliana Mariyah, M.S., as co-supervisor I and co-supervisor II for their attention, supervision, and encouragement. The writer would also like to thank Prof. A.A. Bagus Wirawan, S.U. and Dr, Putu Sukardja, M.Si. as Head and Secretary of the Doctorate Program of Cultural Studies and all the teaching staff for transforming their knowledge to and helping the writer in completing his study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktik</span><span class="font1">. Cetakan Pertama. Yogyakarta: Bentang Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hadirman. 2013. &quot;Representasi Ekologis dalam Pementasan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kabhanti</span><span class="font1"> pada Masyarakat Muna”, disertasi, Program Doktor, Program Studi Kajian Budaya, Program Pascasarjana, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Haugen, Einer. 1972. &quot;The Ecology of Language&quot;, in Dill, A.S. (ed.) The Ecology of Language: Essays by Einer Haugen. Stanford: Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mbete, Aron Meko. 2008. “Selayang Pandang tentang Ekolinguistik”, makalah Matrikulasi Program Magister Linguistik, Program Pascasarjana Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2006. Dunia yang Dilipat, Tamsya melampaui Batas-batas Kebudayaan”. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Riffaterre, Michael. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics of Poetry</span><span class="font1">. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Storey, John, 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies dan Kajian Budaya Pop Pengantar Komprehensif Teori dan Metode</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suharso, dkk. 1993. Kearifan Tradisional dalam Upaya Memelihara Lingkungan Hidup di Daerah Jawa Tengah. Semarang: Depdikbud, Dirjen Kebudayaan, Penelitian Pengkajian dan Pembinaan Nilai-nilai Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thompson, John B., 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kritik Ideologi Global: Teori Sosial Kritis tentang Relasi Ideologi dan Komunikasi Massa</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: IRGiSoD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Volosinov, N.V. 1973. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. Judul asli Marksizm I Filosofija. Leningrad, 1993. New York and London: Seminar Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Widianarko, dkk. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Menelusuri Jejak Capra Menemukan Integrasi Sains, Filsafat, dan Agama</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>