---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS VERBAL AND NON-VERBAL SIGNS OF PRINTED PUBLIC SERVICE ADVERTISEMENTS"
author: "I Komang Edy Sudiantara"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS VERBAL AND NON-VERBAL SIGNS OF PRINTED PUBLIC SERVICE ADVERTISEMENTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">I KOMANG EDY SUDIANTARA</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internet merupakan media iklan yang sangat efective pada masa kini karena internet sangat mudah diakses oleh banyak orang kapanpun dan dimanapun baik dari layanan internet yang diakses dengan menggunakan computer jinjing, tablet compter, atau juga dengan handphone. Setiap iklan layanan masyarakat di internet mengandung tanda-tanda verbal dan non-verbal yang memiliki makna dan fungsi. Penelitian ini menggunakan 2 iklan layanan masyarakat yang diambil dari internet, sebagai data di dalam penelitian ini. Setiap tanda-tanda dalam iklan layanan masyarakat memiliki makna tersendiri yang saling berhubungan dan saling mendukung satu sama lainnya. Tanda-tanda di dalam iklan memiliki makna yang berfungsi membuat masyarakat lebih sadar dan memahami tentang apa yang disampaikan dalam iklan tersebut. Selain memiliki makna, tanda-tanda di dalam iklan juga mempunyai fungsi yang juga mengacu pada fungsi iklan tersebut. Iklan yang digunakan sebagai data dalam penelitian ini pertama-tama di identifikasi structurnya dan di analisa sesuai dengan structur iklan tersebut. Penelitian ini menggunakan teory dari Leech yang mengidentifikasi conceptual dan connotative meanings (1981:911) dan juga teory functions (1974:47-50). Selain teory dari Leech penelitian ini juga menggunakan teory dari Color Psychology, (2000) ‘How Colors Impact Moods, Feelings and Behaviors, untuk menganalisa makna dari warna-warna yang digunakan dalam iklan tersebut. Penelitian ini menghasilkan temuan ternyata makna dari tanda-tanda dalam iklan layanan masyarakat menyadarkan kita tentang hal-hal yang berguna untuk kehidupan kita. Fungsi dari dibuatnya iklan layanan masyarakat adalah untuk menyadarkan dan mengajak kita melakukan sesuatu yang berguna bagi kehidupan kita.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: iklan layanan masyarakat, makna, fungsi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The term advertisement is a common phrase heard every day in our lives. It exists in many forms of information and communication media such as</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">newspaper, magazines, television, radio, and internet. According to Leech (1966:25), advertisement is a means of communication which tries to persuade people or tell people about certain product, job or service and it can take the form of a notice, picture, text, film, song, or combination of all. Advertisement usually contains verbal signs and non-verbal signs used to get readers attention and to persuade the readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Generally, advertisement can be differentiated in two types, commercial advertisement and public service advertisement. Commercial advertisement is advertisement which gives information about something product, product launching or promotes sales and service. Public service advertisement is advertisement which is used to promote something positive for society, for examples as a government site to launch the new regulation, a warn, and to give national information. Public service advertisements are also at two kinds, government public service advertisement and non-government public service advertisement. Government public service advertisement is the advertisement which is used to launch new regulation, and to give national information. Nongovernment public service advertisement is the advertisement which gives social education to society, for example, advertising which gives explanation to stop illegal logging, advertising on the invitation to care and adopt the homeless animal, and advertising who tell the reader to respect environments. Advertisement usually contains verbal signs, verbal signs in advertisement always represents words, or texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Press (newspaper, magazine), television, films, and internet, is the media of advertisement. Talking about media of advertisement, internet is the famous media to advertise something, it is because internet is one of the easiest media found nowadays, the internet can be accessed through our mobile phone or other gadgets. Public service advertisement is totally different from the objective of a standard advertisement that is to market a product. It is intended to change the public interest by raising awareness of an issue, affect public attitudes, potentially stimulating action, and persuade to do something good for society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">What are the meaning and functions of the verbal and non-verbal messages of the printed public service advertisement? Based on those phenomena</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">printed public service advertisement is chosen as the object of this study. This study must be conducted because not all people can interpret the meaning, and function of the advertisement. The reason of choosing internet site as the main focus of this study is that it is very popular media to advertise in this century and it can also be access easily by everybody.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">What are the meaning and functions of the verbal and non-verbal messages of the printed public service advertisement?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to those problems, the aims of this study are to analyse the meanings and functions of the verbal and non-verbal messages of the printed public service advertisements.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, the research method can be described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data for this study were obtained from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">google.com</span><span class="font0"> because in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">google.com</span><span class="font0"> there are many examples of public service advertisement provided. Therefore, it makes this study easier to find the best examples that can give the best result.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">google.com</span><span class="font0"> there are two examples taken as the data source of this study. They are: Public Service Advertisement by Oddycentral, campaign the right of animal and public service advertisement by LCAnimal.Org.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">They were chosen as the data sources because they are the most important issue in the last few years in the world. It can be seen from the world summit about global warming in 2008 in Bali. Some countries discuss about the reasons why the global warming has happened. Care about animal and the environment is the important thing to do by all the people in this century to save the ecosystem and make people respect with animal and environment.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected using documentation method. The techniques which were done in collecting the data consist of three steps. The first step was obtaining the printed public service advertisement from the internet, the second step was identifying the structure of the public service advertisement, and the last was identifying the verbal and nonverbal signs of the advertisement. Internet was chosen because internet is one of the easiest media to be found nowadays, internet can be accessed through our mobile phone or other gadgets every time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The collected data were analyzed qualitatively based on the theories proposed by:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Leech who identifies the conceptual and connotative meanings (1981:9-11) and about functions (1974:47-50).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Color Psychology, (2000) ‘</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">How Colors Impact Moods, Feelings and Behaviors</span><span class="font0">’.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis Verbal and Non-Verbal Signs of Printed Public Service Advertisements.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Picture 1</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Picture 1 is a Public Service Advertisement by Oddycentral, campaigning, the rights of animal. The picture can be accessed by clicking the link below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.oddycentral.co. uk/advertising-campaign-the-rights-of-animals</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5</span><span class="font0">.</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meaning</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of meanings that found in picture 1 can be seen in the followings table:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">VERBAL SIGNS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">COMPONENT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">MEANING</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Headline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Thousands of animals are made homeless every month.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Illegal logging made a lot of animals homeless every month, because their home is broken by the human.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Body Copy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Help keep wildlife in the wild at bornfree.org.uk.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">We must keep the wildlife and don’t only exploited the wild for whatever reason, we can keep the wildlife with Born Free organization.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Signature Lines</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Born Free</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">That information shows us about the publisher of the advertisement.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Standing Detail</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">There is no information about the standing details of this advertisement. (The advertisement does not include standing details).</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">NON- VERBAL SIGNS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">COMPONENT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">MEANING</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Illustration(s)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">A gorilla which sit down in the street like homeless people.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The publisher of this public service advertisement shows us the effect of activities which is broke the wild.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The blue color of the background that advertisement.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Blue is the color of peace and depression. The publisher shows us depression of animal which is homeless and want get the peace.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The garbage which is there near with the Gorilla.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The publisher shows us the irony that animal which is homeless.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to picture, 1 the function of language in this Public Service Advertisement was informational function because the publisher of the Public Service Advertisement gave us the information about the bad effect of illegal logging to animals which live in the forest because broke the environment of the animal. Illegal logging is the most important international issue in the last few year, we must not only think the human life but also must think about the right of animal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Picture 2</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Picture 2 is a Public Service Advertisement by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">LCAnimal.org</span><span class="font0"> which respects animals. The picture can be accessed by clicking the link below: </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://photoblogchat.blogspot .com/2012/03/new-psa-last-chance-for-animal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meaning</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of meanings that found in picture 2 can be seen in the followings table:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">VERBAL SIGNS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">COMPONENT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">MEANING</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Headline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">It starts in the home.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">This statement states that we should always teach the family for respect with environment and animal.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Body Copy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">young and old respect</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">That statement means we should respect with the environment and animal start from young until old.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Signature Lines</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Evie Rose Valentine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Photo: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cristhoper</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ameruoso.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">That information shows us about the publisher and the actor of the advertisement.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Standing Detail</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><a href="http://www.LCAnimal.org"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">www.LCAnimal.org</span></a></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://www.LCAnimal.org"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">www.LCAnimal.org</span></a><span class="font0">, it was the official address of the website of the publisher.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">NON-VERBAL SIGNS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">COMPONENT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">MEANING</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Illustration(s)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The background of this public service advertisement represent in black color.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Black color associated with power, elegance, and formality.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The clothes of the baby in this public service advertisement represented in white color.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">White color of clothes the baby associated with light, goodness, innocence and purity.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The main picture in this public service advertisement represents in picture a baby which is looking the squirrel outside the window, with very eager to know.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">The position main picture of this advertisement make the readers can see the respect of the human with animals.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Function</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to picture 4, the function of language in this Public Service Advertisement was directive function because the publisher of this Public Service Advertisement influenced our behavior to always care with the environment and animals which live there. That behavior must always be told to children because it will be effective if we teach them since young old. If we are adult we will always remember with that behavior.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the previous discussion, there are some conclusions which can</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">be drawn as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This study identified two Public Service Advertisements taken from internet. Most of the printed public service advertisement used conceptual meanings which make the readers more interested in learning and knowing more about that advertisement, this is the main goal of the public service advertisement that is intended to get attentions from the reader.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The advertisements in this study have informational and directive functions. Having informational function to inform the people to more care and respect with animals and their environments, and having directive function to influence the behavior and attitude the readers.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>6. Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Bolen, William H. 1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font0">2<sup>nd</sup> edition. New York: John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Chandler, Daniel. 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics: The Basics</span><span class="font0">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dyer, Gillian. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font0">. New York: Methuen &amp;&nbsp;Co. Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, N. Geoffrey. 1966. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">English in Advertising: A Linguistic Study of Advertising in Great Britain.</span><span class="font0"> London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, N. Geoffrey. 1981. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning.</span><span class="font0"> London: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Prawira Kusuma, I Putu. 2005</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. “</span><span class="font0">A Semiotic Analysis of English Printed Cosmetics Advertisements” An (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pierce, Charles Sanders. 1932-1958. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Collected Papers Vols. I-IV</span><span class="font0">. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sudewa R, Agus Wirawan. 2007</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> “Semiotic Analysis of English Printed Advertisements At Cosmopolitan Magazine, January 2005 Edition” An (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sartini, Ni Wayan. 2005. “Semiotic, Semiology, Signs, Signifier, Signified” (jurnal). Airlangga University..</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Usop, Sanjaya. 2003. “A Semiotic Analysis of English Printed Advertisements” (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>