---
layout: full_article
title: "THE KINDS AND FUNCTIONS OF ADJECTIVE IN THE NOVEL HARRY POTTER AND THE GOBLET OF FIRE"
author: "Ni Putu Sri Dewi Ratnasari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">THE KINDS AND FUNCTIONS OF ADJECTIVE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">IN THE NOVEL HARRY POTTER AND</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">THE GOBLET OF FIRE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">By</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Ni Putu Sri Dewi Ratnasari</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam studi ini novel karangan novelis J. K Rowling yang berjudul Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire atau dalam buku terjemahannya Harry Potter dan Piala Api ini dipilih untuk dianalisis. Tokoh dalam novel ini yaitu Harry potter seorang penyihircilikyang berpetualang di sekolah sihir bernama Hogwatrs. Metode menganalisis data dalam studi ini adalah deskiptis. Data yang bersumber dari novel ini dianalisis berdasarkan teori dari Thomas, A. J and A. V Martinet (1986) menjelaskan tentang enam jenis kata sifat dan Quirk, Randolf dan Sidney Greenbaum (1973) menjelaskan tentang fungsi dari kata sifat. Di dalam novel ini sangat banyak ditemukan jenis kata sifat dan fungsi kata sifat. Dengan di lakukan studi ini diharap berguna bagi yang ingin mempelajari lebih dalam tentang jenis kata sifat dan fungsinya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Kata Sifat, Kata Benda, Fungsi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language as a means of communication plays an important role in human life. Everyday, in social interaction in the society, people often utter or produce many words to convey our mind to others. We do this by firstly ordering the words into the well- structured units before we utter the expression in order to have a clear</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">meaning and to make it easier for the listener to interpret what they have said. It is clear that in communication or in our daily conversation, they can not ignore the role of grammar, situation, and the audience.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The role of organizing the message into well structured units can help the listener understand and catch the information conveyed well. The organization of the message in the forms of the good structure influence the process of communication. So the message can be well caught by the addresses, if it is well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Now days English has an important role in our society. It is widely used as a means of communication in the world as an international language. English language itself consists of sentences used by humans to communicate each other. Sentences are composed of words to express statements. Words are single units of language which mean something and can be spoken or written.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sentence can be called a grammatical sentence, when the combination of the string of the word is permitted by the syntactical rules. Syntax refers to the structure of phrases or sentences. The largest unit of language is sentence which consists of words that are combined into phrases or clause. The words of a sentence can be analyzed into word classes; they are noun, verb, adjective, adverb, etc. Classes of words are also known as parts of speech. One classes of words that plays an important role in the sentence is Adjective.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Adjective is a word that describes a person or thing, for example, big, red and clever, in a big house, red wine and a clever idea (Oxford, 2006:16). A word can be an adjective if the word has characteristics as a formal adjective that can have a function as attributive in phrase, and as predicative in clause structure and it is also used with intensifier like very, too, rather and can be used in level of comparison. If the four characteristics have been owned by a word, it can be said that it is an adjective.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Adjective has subsystem which is very wide which also has certain characteristics like other word classes. Adjective is used to modify noun or commonly used to give more explanation about noun. The reason why this topic was chosen is because adjective has characteristics which distinguishes it from other word classes like describing thing and giving information about something</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and somebody. And because it also has many variations; therefore, it is very important to observe the functions and its kinds.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Two problems are discussed in this writing as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the kinds of adjectives found in Rowling's fiction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Goblet of Fire?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of adjectives found in her fiction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Goblet of Fire?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two aims of the writing:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the kinds of adjectives used in Rowling's </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Goblet of Fire?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the functions of adjective used in her novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Goblet of Fire?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Methodology is a systematic way to examine the object in accordance with the research procedure. The research method applied in this writing is library research. Research method includes data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Data source is the first element in methodology. It deals with the source from which the data are taken. The data were obtained in order to support the validity of the study. The data of this writing were classified as primary data which were taken from the novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and The Goblet of Fire</span><span class="font1"> written by </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">J</span><span class="font1">.K Rowling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">J.K. Rowling is the creator and author of the popular Harry Potter series. With seven official books published, the Harry Potter series has became popular with both children and adults. Since the conception and publication of the first Harry</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Potter fiction, J.K. Rowling has risen to fame through her books and the movies based on the series. As a result of her fame and wealth, Rowling has also become a philanthropist, she donates money to various charities, including ones that promote literacy and help children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The novel is chosen because it contains the required data needed in doing the research, besides the stories are really interesting to both children and adults in the world. Harry Potter novels began winning all kinds of awards including the Negtle Smarties Book Prize, the British Book Award, and even the Children's Book Award.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method of collecting data applied in this writing is observation method by reading the novel and some of books whish are related to the topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are three steps of collecting data in this writing:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first step the novel is read carefully and intensively understand the content.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentences which contain adjectives were found.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">3.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The data were noted and classified based on the categories.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed descriptively based on the theory in the theoretical framework. The analysis was focused on the kinds and functions of adjectives. The process of analyzing the data started by:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Checking the note taking of the kinds and functions of adjectives</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentences which contain adjective were classified according to the kinds and functions of adjective. And then they were analyzed using the descriptive method in which the selected data would be presented and explained based on the theories mentioned in the theoretical framework.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The study tried to analyze and discuss the kinds and functions of adjectives that were taken from the novel entitle Harry Potter and the goblet of fire. This was</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">carried out through reading the novel and quoting the sentences which are related to the topic. After the required data were collected, they were arranged according to their kinds and functions of adjectives. Then, the collected data were descriptively analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The theory in this analysis is taken from the book proposed by Thomson, A.J and A.V Martinet (1986) which explains the six kinds of adjectives and Quirk, randolf and Sidney Greenbaum (1973) their explains about the functions of adjectives. The analysis showed that there are many kinds and functions of adjectives found in the novel harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire; they are quantitative adjective which is an adjective which refers to an amount of things or persons such as many, few, little, much, some, numeral. Demonstrative adjective is an adjective that refers to noun like this, these, that, those. Possessive adjective is an adjective that is used to express the possession of thing or person such as my, your, their, his, her, its. Interrogative adjective is an adjective that is used to express a question about thing or person, such as which, what, whose. Distributive adjective is an adjective that refers to a number of people or things, such as each, every, either, and neither. Adjective of quality is an adjective that explains about the characteristic of noun such as white, small, young, and pretty. The adjective can be classified as adjective functioning as attributive, predicative, head of noun phrase and can function as exclamatory in adjective sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">At least, there are many kinds and function of adjective found in this novel. It is hoped that it can give a comprehension and well understanding to those who are interested in this topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Adjective is one of word classes in English and it is used to describe a person or thing and give information about something more detail. Adjective is used to modify noun or commonly used to give more explanation about noun and on the other hand adjective is used to point out noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A word can be started as an adjective if it has the characteristics as a formal adjective that can function as attributive in phrase, and as predicative in clause</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">structure and it is also used with intensifier like </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">very, too, rather,</span><span class="font1"> etc and can be used in level of comparison.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are six kinds of adjective which occur on the novel entitled Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire; they are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">quantitative adjective</span><span class="font1"> which is an adjective that refers to an amount of things or person such as many, few, little, much, some, numeral</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">., demonstrative adjective</span><span class="font1"> which is an adjective is an adjective that refers to noun like this, these, that, those., </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">possessive adjective</span><span class="font1"> which is an adjective that is used to express the possession of thing or person such as my, your, their, his, her, its, etc., </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">interrogative adjective</span><span class="font1"> which is an adjective that is used to express a question about thing or person, such as which, what, whose., </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">distributive adjective</span><span class="font1"> is an adjective that refers to a number of people or things, such as each, every, either and neither, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">adjective of quality</span><span class="font1"> is an adjective that explains about the characteristics of noun such as white, small, young, and pretty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the sentence, adjective has many functions; adjective can be function as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">attributive,</span><span class="font1"> adjective can function as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">predicative</span><span class="font1"> in terms as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">subject complement</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">object complement,</span><span class="font1"> adjective can function as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">head of noun phrase</span><span class="font1"> and can be function as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">exclamatory adjective sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Allen, W. Stannard. 1968. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Living English Structure.</span><span class="font1"> Fourth Edition. Longmans : PT.Dian Rakjat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Djauhari, Imam D. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mastery on English Grammar.</span><span class="font1"> Surabaya: Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A. S. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner's dictionary.</span><span class="font1"> London: Oxfords University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thomson, A.J and A.V Martinet. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical English Grammar.</span><span class="font1"> London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seriasih, Ni Ketut. 2009. Derivational Suffixes Forming Adjectives in the Novel Venom by Clin Falconer (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suyastini, Ari. 2007. English Adjective in the Short Story of the Colonel's Lady by W. Somerset Maugham (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiartha, I Made. 2005. A Syntactic Analysis of English Adjective used in Cynthia Victor's Novel entitled What Matters Most (thesis). Denpasar : Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rowling, J.K. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.</span></p>