---
layout: full_article
title: "IDIOMS AND THEIR MEANINGS IN THE BEATLES SONGS’ LYRICS"
author: "I Gede Mahadewa Wahyu Dana Pramixa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>IDIOMS AND THEIR MEANINGS IN THE BEATLES SONGS’ LYRICS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">I Gede Mahadewa Wahyu Dana Pramixa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The study entitled “Idioms and their meanings in The Beatles songs’ lyrics” focused on 2 aspects: (1) the types of idiom occurred in the song lyrics, and (2) how meanings of idioms convey the theme of the songs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The primary data was taken from the song’s lyrics on Famous song of the Beatles, written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney as data source. The data was collected by using documentation method by applying note taking technique. Thus, the data were also checked with source which provides the information and list of English idioms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">In the analysis, the types of idioms were presented first. The main theories used in the analysis of the data consist of the types of idioms proposed by Palmer (1976). The analysis of meaning comes afterward in order to categorized the types of meaning of idioms occurred in data source. The theory of meaning comes from Leech (1974).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Based on the result of analysis it was found that the three idioms are found in the song. The meaning of idiom had a strong relation with the meaning of the song, as the consequences the meaning of idiom should be analyze of first to find the theme and the message of the song. Discover the types of idioms. They are phrasal verbs, prepositional verb, and partial idiom. Obtain also meaning each idiom of songs. Each song has different meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key word: Types of idiom, meaning, types of meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Language is known as a means of communication which is used for communicating each other. People can also express their feeling through language. There are plenty of ways to express the feelings through language such as by writing novels or poetries, or, moreover people can compose a song. As a means of expressing feelings, a song seems interesting to be analyzed since it is a unique way to express one’s feeling and it provides various combination of vocabulary and a unique set of wordings which has its own function. The language of the song is built in such a specific way; therefore, it becomes different from ordinary language. It is interesting and usually written in beautiful and nice words to attract listeners and hold their attention.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Song is one of the best forms of entertainment to be enjoyed, it is full of melodious music, in which at the same time, present new world while the listeners enjoy the day. At this stage, the listeners will have two advantages such as having a pleasure and obtaining significant information whether about the situation of world or about love feelings that are experienced by the composer of or rather by the figure or the personal in the song. Moreover, the listeners can obtain the knowledge through interpreting the words in song lyrics while they have more time to listen and explore the deepest meaning of the song. There are plenty of variations in language which can be found in the song, such as the figurative language, etc, including idioms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Many people are often confused when they are listening to a song in English expression; there are some expressions whose meanings are uneasy to be interpreted. Even though they understand every single word, but they still grasp what the sentence essentially means. Those expressions could be idioms. Idioms are expressions of at least two words which are not understandable literarily and which function as a unit semantically. (Larson: 1984) it means something different from the meaning of the separate words that has made them up. In general, idioms can be classified into phrasal verbs, prepositional phrases, and partial idioms. Like example in The Beatles song Lyric from Across the Universe song, “they </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">slip away </span><span class="font4">across the universe”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Being interested in studying idioms particularly the idioms that can be found in the song lyrics, this study analyzes the idioms used particularly in the song lyrics taken from The Beatles’s which were composed by John Lennon, Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, and George Harrison. The analyzed songs will be taken from their popular songs. The Beatles is a British Rock Band from Liverpool, England. The members were John Lennon (as the lead vocal, who also handled guitar, rhythm, harmony vocal, acoustic guitar, and organ), Paul McCartney (as the lead vocal, harmony vocal, and backing vocal, who also handled bass guitar, piano,), Ringo Star (who handled drums, tambourine, castanets), George Harrison (as the backing vocal, who also handled tambourine, sitar, lead guitar, acoustic guitar).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PROBLEM OF STUDY</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In analyzing the song lyrics there are some problem that can be formulated related to the use of idioms in the song lyrics of The Beatles which are follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of idioms applied in the Beatles song lyrics?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AIM OF STUDY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The aim of this study, based on the above problem, is:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the types of idioms in the song lyrics of the Beatles.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHODE</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Research method is an important step and procedure when a scientific research is conducted. Research method is the way or procedure of understanding the objects that will become the target of the subject. Methodology is a system or procedure that is used in order to examine certain objects. It is the way or process and amount of procedures of how a researcher approaches the problems to find the answer by finding, collecting, and analyzing the data. The researches, which consist of obtaining a group of data, will determine the research method. The method is divided into three points, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Data source is the source from which the data are taken. This study applies data taken from the song lyrics, in this case, The Beatles’s songs. There are several songs used to meet the requirements of the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Beatles’s songs are chosen for this paper due to The Beatles is one of the most popular bands in the world. However, there will only be four songs analyzed that contain idioms. Those songs are </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I’m The Walrus, Across the Universe, While The Guitar Gently Weeps, Hard Day’s Night</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Those songs will be taken and used as the primary data collection, and analysis will be as the object of the study. The reasons for choosing those songs are due to they are such nice songs and contain many idioms to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In composing this study, the methods applied in collecting the data have observation method and documentation method. The steps to collect data are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Downloading the lyrics from the internet, in order to obtain accurate lyrics of the songs. There are several sites in internet which provide song lyrics such as </span><a href="http://www.sing365.com/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.sing365.com</span><span class="font4"> </span></a><span class="font4">,</span><a href="http://www.A-Zlyrics.com/"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.A-Zlyrics.com,</span></a><span class="font4"> etc. However, sometimes the lyrics might not be the correct ones, therefore, The Beatles’s official site, </span><a href="http://www.thebeatles.com/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.thebeatles.com</span><span class="font4"> </span></a><span class="font4">will be chosen as the source of the lyrics.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Then, the lyric will be read carefully, repeatedly and intensively in order to understand and find the major theme of each song and to understand the meaning or message behind each song.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The next step is to take notes of the words or phrases which are considered as idioms, then cite them on different papers to be analyzed later.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data have analyzed qualitatively based on the theory and also based on checking the existence on several sources such as other reference books and websites. The steps are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The collected data will be checked including the sources which provide the information and list of the English idioms. The sources are a dictionary entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Idiom Edisi Lengkap</span><span class="font4"> by Tim Primapena (2004) and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary 7<sup>th</sup> Edition</span><span class="font4"> (Oxford University Press 2005).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The idioms are categorized by their types. The type of idioms is determined based on the theory of idioms proposed (1976).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The analyses of English idioms found also include the analysis of the meaning. The meaning was found in a books mentioned above. The types of meaning also categorized based on the theory proposed by Leech (1974) as the main theory proposed by Nida and Taber (1982) as the supporting theory. The message of the song was discovered based on the meaning of idiom.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ANALYSIS OF IDIOMS IN THE BEATLES SONGS LYRICS</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Phrasal Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Phrasal verb is a very common type of idiom in English. What is usually called the phrasal verb is the combination of the combination of the verbs and adverbs (Plamer, 1976:9). The meaning of these combinations cannot be predicted from the individual verbs and adverbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the selected The Beatles songs analyzed, founds phrasal verbs:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I break down…..” (</span><span class="font0">Lennon</span><span class="font4">, McCartney, 1969) </span><span class="font2">“</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Since of the special features of some idioms, we have to learn the idioms as the whole and we often cannot change any part of it, except, perhaps, only the tenses of the verb (Seidl and Mcmordie 1980)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The idiom I </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">break down</span><span class="font4"> consist of two words formed by a verb (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">break</span><span class="font4">) followed by an adverb (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">down</span><span class="font4">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. ” Don’t </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">let </span><span class="font4">me </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">down</span><span class="font4">, please, don't let me down….” (Lennon, McCartney, 1969)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Phrasal verb can either be transitive verbs, i.e. with a direct object or intransitive verb, i.e. without a direct object (Seild and McMordie, 1980:115). In some transitive phrases, the verbs are separable which means the verb can be separated from the adverb by a direct object. The direct object which either a noun or pronoun can be inserted between them, e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Please</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> send </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">them</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> in-</span><span class="font4">the phrasal verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">send in</span><span class="font4"> separated by a pronoun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">them.</span><span class="font4"> Unlike transitive phrases, the intransitive phrases cannot take a direct object or the verb can never be separated from the adverb, e.g. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">the </span><span class="font1">5</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">project</span><span class="font4"> has </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fallen behind </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">the schedule</span><span class="font4">-the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">fallen behind</span><span class="font4"> cannot be separated or inserted by an object. To know exactly where the direct object and adverb or prepositional stand, it is indicated by the use of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">someone</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">something</span><span class="font4"> to stand for the object in its proper place, e.g.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">See something through, see trough something (Seild and McMordie, 1980:115).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The expression don’t </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">let me down</span><span class="font4"> is considered as a transitive phrase the verb (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">let</span><span class="font4">) and the adverb (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">down</span><span class="font4">) separated by direct object me(someone).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Prepositional Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on Palmer (1976:99), prepositional verb is the sequence of verb and preposition or verb, adverb and preposition. It can be seen in the examples given such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">look after, go for, put up with</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">do away with.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">19 . “Your mama's </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">waiting for </span><span class="font4">you…” (Lennon, McCartney, 1970)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Expressions waiting for belongs to prepositional verb since it is a sequence of verbs plus preposition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Partial Idiom</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another type of idioms exists in what is called partial idiom. It is where one of the words has its usual meaning and the other has a meaning that is peculiar to particular sequence (Palmer, 1976:99). A number of idioms of this type were found in the song lyrics used as the data source:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">21 .”</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">He blew his mind out in a car</span><span class="font4">…” (Lennon, McCartney, 1967)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The expression </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">He blew his mind out in a car is</span><span class="font4"> concerned with occurrence of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">blew his mind out</span><span class="font4"> which has the meaning peculiar to particular sequence </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">in car</span><span class="font4"> in its usual meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6.</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the analysis, the conclusion can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In views of the types of idioms, the three types of idioms consisting phrasal verb, prepositional verb, and partial idiom were found in the song lyrics and collected as the data source in the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Phrasal verb can be classified onto transitive phrasal and intransitive phrasal. The analysis explains that intransitive phrasal which was most collected in the song lyrics written by The Beatles. It seems that the song writers preferred to elaborate phrases without taking a direct object or applying the verbs that are not separated from the adverb, such as “It took me so..... Long to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">find out</span><span class="font4"> and I found out……” and “Dear Prudence, won't you </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">come out</span><span class="font4"> to play……” Secondly, phrases using partial idiom is mostly applied in the collected The Beatle’s song lyrics, where one of the words has its usual meanings while the other has a meaning that is intended to a particular sequence. For instance in the sentence “Now I find </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I've changed my mind…”</span><span class="font4">, “Now I find” has a partial meaning that is still as incomplete idiom after it is followed by the phrase of “I’ve changed my mind” that provides a meaning to a specific condition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>7.</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Adnyani, Arik,2011. The Translation of English Idioms to Indonesian in Harry Potter and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Half Blood Prince and Its Translation:Denpasar, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Choliludin, S.Pd. 2007. The </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Technique of Making Idiomatics Translation</span><span class="font4">, Jakarta: Divisi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kesaint Blanc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hornby, A.S 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s dictionary</span><span class="font4">. Great Britain: London, Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kurniati.2010. The Translation of English Idioms in Sidney Sheldons Novel Tell One Yours</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dreams into Ceritakan Mimpi-mimpimu: Denpasar.Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Larson, M. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: Aguide to Cross Language Equivalence</span><span class="font4">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lanham: University Press of America</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics. Great Britain</span><span class="font4">: Hazell Watson &amp;&nbsp;Viney Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nugraha.2005. The Translation Equivalence of English Idioms into Indonesian with</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Reference to John Grisham’s The Rain Maker and It’s Translation:Denpasar,Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Palmer, F.R. 1976</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">. Semantic A New Outline</span><span class="font4">. Melbourne: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Seild, W.Mcmordie. 1989. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">English Idioms London Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Beatles Great Hits Song. Serial Online </span><a href="http://www.thebeatles.com/"><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.thebeatles.com</span><span class="font4">)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Beatles Behind The Beatles Song Lyrics. Serial Online </span><a href="http://www.beatleslyrics.eu/"><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.beatleslyrics.eu</span></a><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tim Primapena, 2004. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Idiom Edisi lengkap</span><span class="font4"> : Jakarta, Gita media Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Yunnan, Linli Chen. 2009. Literal Translation of English Idioms Vol.2, No.2: RTV University.</span></p>