---
layout: full_article
title: "The Investigation of The Imperative Sentences  In The Oral Language of Geliting Community"
author: "Novita Fadhillah Makuasong, Novi ."
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-73368 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-73368"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-73368"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 5 No. 1, Februari 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2021.v05.i01.p05"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2021.v05.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">| </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">35</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Investigation of The Imperative Sentences In The Oral Language of Geliting Community</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novita Fadhillah Makuasong<sup>1</sup>, Novi<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Department</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Faculty of Social Sciences Education and Humanities, Muhammadiyah Maumere Teachers Training Institute Maumere, NTT </span><a href="mailto:wawanlabira@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wawanlabira@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Every language has its way of switching a positive sentence to a question form. However, the way each language does this is based on a grammar set. Besides this, in every language of the world, there are polar questions and there are content questions. In polar questions, a yes/no answer is adequate as a response; while content questions require sentential structure as an answer. In this study, the writer describes the polar questions formation and content questions formation in Geliting dialect, a language situated within Sikka speech form, spoken in Maumere, Flores island Southeast island. This study shows that Geliting dialect operates a kind of derivation in its interrogative formation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: Imperative Sentences, Geliting dialect, Sikka Krowe language</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction<sup>1</sup></span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Flores is one of the islands in South East Island Province which has many regions along with its countless regional language. The languages in Flores Island are languages belonging to the Austronesia language family. Keraf (2001) emphasized that the Polynesian Malay group which is a derivative of the Austronesian language consists of two groups, namely the West Polynesia Malay group and the Central/Eastern Polynesia Malay group. West Polynesia Malay Group down languages in the Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam, Malagasy, western Indonesia (Sumatra, Java, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Bali, Lombok, and western Sumbawa) while middle/eastern Indonesia decreases languages on the islands of Sumba, Flores, Timor, Central and southern Maluku.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Geliting dialect is a language is used by local people in Geliting village, a small village to the east of Sikka regency. The population of the village is originally Wajo tribe and Bugis tribe from southeast Sulawesi who migrated around a century ago along with their cultures and language. After years of living side by side with native people, they started using native local language mixed with their dialect and created a new dialect. This dialect is later on called Geliting dialect since the inhabitants use it in their daily activities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stulpinaitė (2016) said that each language has a specific way of putting words together (syntax), forming new words and parts of speech (morphology), rules for pronunciation (phonology), and more. He added, within a given language, there are dialects, which consist of further variations in pronunciation (accent), sentence construction (syntax), and the word used to name things (accent), sentence construction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">introduces the use of differences in spelling conventions, like English, Bahasa Indonesia and Geliting dialect of Sikka Krowe language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On the other hand, Mukoroli (2011) stated that humans use language for varied functions; to request, negate, question, or to provide information; to complain, promise, or apologize to other humans. In this case, language follows every human in works and activities in their daily life. By using language, more experiences are known by the language's users, so more chances have to know with many different kinds of culture in the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Akrofi-Ansah (2010) stated that three types of clauses; are declarative, imperatives, and interrogatives. Each of these clause types is associated with particular speech acts. Konig and Siemund stated that declarative is used for asserting, claiming, stating, accusing, criticizing, promising, and guaranteeing; imperatives are employed in issuing commands for a certain action to be taken by the addressee. Interrogatives are conventionally associated with the speech act of requesting information. Besides, based on their syntactic and semantic properties, interrogatives are divided into two broad types, namely, polar interrogatives and constituent interrogatives. These two categories of interrogatives are also known in the literature as Yes/No questions and content questions respectively. Yes/No questions or polar questions are so-called because they require just Yes or No for an answer. This does not mean that the answer could not be more than Yes/No, but it suffices to respond with Yes/No as answers for such questions. But on the other hand, content question or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">WH</span><span class="font2">-question requires a sentential answer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Azar (2003) who stated that imperative sentences are used to give commands,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">make a polite request and give directions. It seems that the use of imperative sentences is wide and varied. This sentence is also called the sentence order or request. An imperative sentence is a sentence that aims to give orders to others to do something. In oral form, sentence intonation is characterized by the high command. An imperative sentence is a sentence that is set up to provoke the response in the form of the action. Based on the definition above, the writer concludes briefly those imperatives sentences are sentences that are used by someone to give commands, requests, and directions to other people for doing something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Here are some illustrations of Yes/No interrogatives in English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. Have you taken the book?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will John eat the food?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do the people know that you have gone?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Can I buy a car for you?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shall I go with them?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">While constituent or content interrogatives demand answers that provide the kind of information indicated by the interrogative word or phrase that is used to ask the question. For example in (2) below, each question requires different information in the answer. For instance, in (2a), location is being enquired, in (2b) personality is the focus, in (2c), time is what is being asked for, in (2d) something of [±animate] in nature is what is being queried while in (2e) it is the manner of doing </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">x</span><span class="font2"> that the person asking the question is seeking to know, while in (2f) the reason for doing </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">x</span><span class="font2"> is the focus. The questions that are considered above are as follow.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. Where is the car?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who is coming?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When are you going?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is this?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How were you beaten?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why were you beaten?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Constituent/content questions are called WH-questions because such questions, in most cases in English, are signaled by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">WH</span><span class="font2">-words such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">who, what, where, when,</span><span class="font2"> etc. It is from these shortcut symbols that linguists have adopted the nomenclature even though there is no such acronym in the types of question formations in Sikka Krowe language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This paper studied both the polar and content questions in Geliting dialect of Sikka Krowe language. Like many other languages, both Yes/No and content interrogatives are attested. Each of these question types requires a question marker that signifies that the sentence or utterance is interrogative and that it requires an answer. As far as the writer is concerned, there is no literature about Geliting dialect of Sikka Krowe language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>II.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This research took place in Geliting village of Sikka Regency and focused on the analysis of Geliting dialect in Sikka Krowe interrogative sentences. This study was done through the following steps: collecting the data, analyzing the data, and presenting the result of the data analysis. The data were obtained from 25 adults from Geliting community through interviews, observation, and library research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The objective of the study is to classify the types of interrogative sentence found Geliting dialect. This research is descriptive qualitative, because of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">purposes it to find out and classify the types of interrogative sentence found Geliting dialect, Darmawan, (2019) stated that descriptive-qualitative research to examine social phenomena from participant’s angles where researchers are key instruments. The current research adopted the fundamental approaches in analyzing the output from the interview. The analysis includes data reduction, transcription of interviews, data display, and the conclusion</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1">III.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion </span><span class="font1">Historically </span><span class="font2">FINDING</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes/No Questions in Geliting dialect of Sikka language</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The markers Yes/No Questions in English imperative sentence marked by an auxiliary verb or do/does and by using a question mark which is placed in the final position of the sentence. The other way is by raising the ends of the word within the sentence. The example is raising the form of the last word of the sentence, the tone is different.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">For examples</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will you come with me?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Does he go to the cinema?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do I have to go with him?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the other way, there are two ways by which yes/no or polar interrogatives are formed in Geliting dialect of Sikka language. Yes/No Questions in Geliting dialect of Sikka language started by subject and raising the last sound that ends the verb within the sentence. The other way is by marking with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">eh, ka,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ko</span><span class="font2"> in the middle of the last of the sentence, and every marker has a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">different function. Base on some examples above, it can be derived that the interrogative sentence in Geliting dialect of Sikka Krowe language formation is S + Auxiliary verb + verb + object. For examples</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will you go to the school? ( Au ga’i bano e sikola ko)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Au</span><span class="font2"> means You, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ga’i</span><span class="font2"> means will, and sometimes its function like an auxiliary verb in English, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bano</span><span class="font2"> means go, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sikola</span><span class="font2"> means school, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Does he go to the cinema? ( </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nimu bano e bioskop ko</span><span class="font2">? )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nimu</span><span class="font2"> means him, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bano</span><span class="font2"> means go, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do I have to go with him? ( </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A’u bano nora nimu ko?</span><span class="font2"> )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A’u</span><span class="font2"> means I, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bano</span><span class="font2"> means go, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nora</span><span class="font2"> means with, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nimu</span><span class="font2"> means him, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Did you eat this morning? (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Au gea kawu he’i ko</span><span class="font2">? )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Au</span><span class="font2"> means you, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gea</span><span class="font2"> means to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">eat</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kawu</span><span class="font2"> means morning, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">he’i</span><span class="font2"> means this, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have you eaten this morning? (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Au gea ba kawu he’i ko</span><span class="font2">? )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Au</span><span class="font2"> means you, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gea</span><span class="font2"> means to eat, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kawu</span><span class="font2"> means morning, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">he’I</span><span class="font2"> means this, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Should I go to the doctor? (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A’u naha bano e dokter ko</span><span class="font2">? )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A’u</span><span class="font2"> means I, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">naha</span><span class="font2"> means should, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bano</span><span class="font2"> means go, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font2"> is used as a question mark</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Would you buy the book? (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A’u</span><span class="font2"> ga’i ko boter buku he’i )</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ga’i</span><span class="font2"> means will and sometimes its function as an auxiliary verb in English, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">au</span><span class="font2"> means you, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boter</span><span class="font2"> means buy</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">[6] Stulpinaitė, M., Horbačauskienė, J., &amp;&nbsp;Kasperavičienė, R. (2016). Issues in Translation of Linguistic Collocations. Studies About Languages, (29), 31-41.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark6"></a>IV. </span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;">Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis that has been done, it can be concluded that the formation of imperative sentences in the Geliting dialect of Sikka Krowe, Kewapante District, Sikka Regency as follows; the imperative sentence is marked by the raising the last sound of the sentence, imperative sentences are marked by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">eh, ka,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ko</span><span class="font2"> in the middle of the last of the sentence and every marker has a different function, imperative sentences are marked by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">eh</span><span class="font2"> in the initial sentence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are still many aspects that can be analyzed about imperative sentences, their types, and the characteristics of each imperative sentence type. Finally, the researcher can analyze aspects of imperative sentences and their types and characteristics in the Geliting dialect, and the results studies can be used as early as possible information to conduct further research.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>References</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Azhar Arsyad. 2013. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Media Pembelajaran.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Akrofi-Ansah, M. 2010. Focused constituent interrogatives in Larteh. Nordic Journal of African Studies, 19.2. 98 – 107.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Darmawan &amp;&nbsp;Suryoputro, 2019, The Comparison of the Phonological Features of Sikka Language and English</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font0">Vol. 4, No. 1, 2019, 64-72 DOI: 10.22236/JER_Vol4Issue1</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keraf, G. (2001). Komposisi: Sebuah Pengantar Kemahiran Berbahasa, Cetakan XII. Ende: Nusa Indah.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mukoroli, J. (2011). Effective vocabulary teaching strategies for the English for academic purposes ESL classroom.</span></p></li></ul>