---
layout: full_article
title: "The Role of Cultural Values in Motivating the Competencies of Hindu Balinese Human Resources in Tourism to Gain Manager Level Positions in Rated Hotels in Bali"
author: "Sulistyawati Sulistyawati"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-25255 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-25255"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-25255"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.3. No.2. (2016): 96-119</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Role of Cultural Values in Motivating the Competencies of Hindu Balinese Human Resources in Tourism to Gain Manager Level Positions in Rated Hotels in Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sulistyawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Doctorate Program in Tourism </span><span class="font2">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Corresponding author: </span><a href="mailto:prof.sulistyawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">prof.sulistyawati@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ARTICLE INFO &nbsp;&nbsp;ABSTRACT</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">Received</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">20 March 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">30 August 2016 Available online</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">15 September 2016</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">In response to the new era of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) since year 2015 – Bali, as the primary gateway of Indonesian tourism, must improve the quality of Hindu Balinese human resources in tourism (HB HRT). Winata (2014: 6) explained that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adat istiadat </span><span class="font2">(customs and traditions) is one of the cause for their low commitment in their job, as HB HRT often take leave due to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">adat</span><span class="font2"> obligations. Therefore, one of the impact, as in the case of a hotel in Kuta, is that hotels often avoid recruiting HB HRT. Hence, issue to be discussed in this study is to understand the role of Balinese Cultural Values as a potential and as an obstacle in HBHRT’s competency to achieve managerial positions in star-rated hotels in Bali. The research will use a concurrent triangulation method on data collected through interviews and questionaires.While sampling will be done with Purposive Sampling method on star-rated hotels located in Sanur, Kuta and Nusa Dua. Finally, the data analysis will be carried out by referring to Motivation Theory (McClelland, 1976), Competency Theory (Spencer and Spencer, 1993), Value Orientations Theory (Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck, 1961), through a descriptive interpretative qualitative approach as well as a quantitative approach based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA) statistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The research results will show that based on the data, HB HRT have good set of competencies, and these good competencies are inseparable from their background of Balinese Cultural Values (BCV), mainly derived from Hindu culture and religion. As part of upholding their culture, a HB HRT is a person with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> concept of harmonious relationship between human beings indicated by 79.1% people with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tresna</span><span class="font2"> (love), the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> concept of harmonious relationship between human beings and God indicated by 75% people engaging in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dharma yatra</span><span class="font2"> pilgrimages and study, and the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan </span><span class="font2">concept of harmonious relationship between human beings and nature indicated by 69.8% people valuing Bali </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shanti</span><span class="font2"> (a peaceful Bali). On the other hand the obstacles in occupying manager positions in starrated hotels in Bali are mostly due to internal factors – namely, their own personal motives which are often based on erroneous understandings of BCV. Therefore, in order to increase the Spiritual</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quotient (SQ) of HB HRT in achieving managerial positions, the strategy will be through career development with motivation programs while redefining their Balinese Cultural Values to give positive impact to their living standard, to the company, to the environment, and to God.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: </span><span class="font2">hindu human resources, motivation, manager position, rated hotels, bali</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Introduction</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Bali, as the primary gateway of Indonesian tourism, is growing rapidly. This rapid development of tourism on the island has become a magnet for job seekers from local, from other Indonesia provinces, and even from overseas, who have their eyes set on strategic positions in Bali tourism industry. The activation of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) has imposed greater challenge in Tourism Human Resources market for balinese. In facing this challenge, Bali must improve the quality of its Hindu Balinese Tourism Human Resources (HB HRT). Therefore, strengthening the competencies of HB HRT is a prioritiy in order to increase their competiveness. Competencies must be mastered by HB HRT if they aspire to compete for top manager positions in star-rated hotels in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is certainly an irony for Bali tourism given the fact that the majority of hotels in Bali employ foreign human resources for the top manager positions. The reason is mainly because foreign HR has proven record of their competencies and because they have stronger commitment than HB HRT. Hence, hotels prefer foreign tourism HR for manager positions rather than HB HRT. According to Spencer and Spencer (1993:9), competent people are those who possess motives, knowledge, skills, a self-concept, and traits in accordance with the job requirements to actively participate in the work place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In respond to the increasing number of foreign workers occupying strategic positions in Bali tourism industry, Balinese people must dare to undergo a change of mindset about their customary and religious practices and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">make greater effort to improve the competencies of HB HRT. Hindu Balinese tourism human resources must play an active role to become leaders or managers, so that they do not merely occupy operational level positions without having any share in the decision-making process of a company. For this, HB HRT are required to have strong motivation for achievement in order to compete for a strategic role in the company where they work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Motivation is a very important aspect for HB HRT because with strong motivation for achievement they can reach higher level of productivity and can demonstrate their accomplishments to be able to compete in obtaining a strategic position in the company; namely a top manager post in a star-rated hotel in Bali. Given the above, this study will further explore The Role of Cultural Values in shaping the Competencies of Hindu Balinese Tourism Human Resources to achieve Manager Level Positions in Star-Rated Hotels in Bali. Specifically, as described in the introduction and based on theoretical and empirical ideas, this paper will explore and explain about the role of Balinese Cultural Values as a potential and as an obstacle in HBHRT’s competency to achieve managerial positions in star-rated hotels in Bali.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Literature Review</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">A simple fundamental understanding of competency is an ability or adroitness (Syah, 2000: 229). Spencer and Spencer (1993: 9-11) suggested that there are five types of competency characteristics, which are: (a) motives; (b) traits; (c) self-concept; (d) knowledge, and (e) skills. Pelly (1994: 1) added that each human resource should</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">possess competencies – these being abilities or adroitness which illustrates a person’s qualifications or capabilities. Motivation is an important force for a person to improve their competence. Motivation originates from the Latin word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">movere</span><span class="font1"> meaning an impulse, desire, cause, or reason for someone to do something. According to Manullang 1982:150), motivation provides employees passion to work; in other words, it stimulates human resources to optimize their competencies. McClelland (1976, see also Robbins, 2001: 173) put forth Achievement Motivation Theory which asserts that human beings essentially have an ability to excel beyond others. This theory has an assumption that the need for achievement is different and is distinguishable from other types of needs. According to McCelland, there are three types of human needs, which are the need for achievement, need for power, and need for affiliation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are a number of cultural values in the human society which are interrelated in such a way that they appear as a system. This system is a guideline for the ideal concept of any culture which influences the direction and orientation of community living. Anthropology experts, Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck (1961) explained that any culture consists of five basic human problems for determining value orientations, namely: 1) the character of human nature; 2) human beings relationship to the nature environment; 3) human beings sense of space and time; 4) the modality of human activity; and 5) the nature of human beings relationship to other people.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Methodology</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">A concurrent triangulation design will be used to collect both qualitative and quantitative data through in-depth interviews with twenty-three informants and distribution of questionnaires to 182 respondents. All results will be analyzed with descriptive interpretative method through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) statistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data sampling with purposive sampling technique on informant and sample selections have lead to: three, four, or five-star hotels that are strategically located in dense tourism areas and easily accessible. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">sampling location will limited to three well-known tourist areas in Bali, which are Sanur in the Denpasar municipality as well as Kuta and Nusa Dua in the Badung regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The role of Balinese Cultural Values as a potential and as an obstacle in HBHRT’s competency to achieve managerial positions in star-rated hotels in Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">HB HRT have good competencies. Results from the interviews conducted with twenty-three informants occupying managerial positions in star-rated hotels in Bali, based on the five types of competency characteristics according to Spencer and Spencer, (1993: 911), show that more than 50% agree that HB HRT are competent in their self-concept, knowledge, and skills. These three competency characteristics are considered the key sets of competences for managerial positions. Therefore, HB HRT are supposed to be able to occupy manager positions in starrated hotels in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The good competencies that HB HRT possess are inseparable from their Balinese Cultural Values derived from Bali Hindu cultural and religious concepts. Result of the quantitative analysis about HB HRT based on cultural variables, shows that most HB HRT firmly uphold the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font1"> concept of harmonious relationship between human beings evidenced by a weight factor of 94.3%. This is followed by a 92.6% weight factor for the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font1"> concept of harmonious relationship between human beings and God and then an 87.9% factor for the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan </span><span class="font1">concept of harmonious relationship between human beings and nature. HB HRT tend to care most for </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font1"> – harmonious relationships between human beings indicated by 79.1% agreeing to the importance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tresna </span><span class="font1">(love) and always serving with smile.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The second strongest cultural value for HB HRT is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font1"> – the harmonious relationship between human beings and God indicated by 75% engaging in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma yatra </span><span class="font1">pilgrimages and study of nature. HB HRT selfconcept always adheres to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma yatra</span><span class="font1"> or value of integrity. By upholding such value, HB HRT completely avoid any dishonesty in competition to achieve successful career, rather, they believe that learning to advance</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">their knowledge to achieve such success is a form of worships to God. The third strongest cultural variable for HB HRT is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font1"> – the harmonious relationship between human beings and nature, indicated by 69.8% valuing Bali </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">shanti</span><span class="font1"> (a peaceful Bali). This is evidenced by high HB HRT preference for peaceful work environment where all people feel calm and happy to complete their respective tasks without conflicts, or in simple term, Bali </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">shanti</span><span class="font1"> (a peaceful Bali), which eventually affects HB HRT’s motivation. So, based on the description of these cultural variables, a HB HRT is a person who feels </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tresna</span><span class="font1"> (love), shows friendliness, engages in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma yatra</span><span class="font1">-likes to study, and aspires to create Bali </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">shanti </span><span class="font1">(a peaceful Bali). These Balinese Cultural Values influences HB HRT’s competencies to be good and distinctive, making it an outstanding quality of HB HRT to able to occupy the position of manager in star-rated hotels in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">However, there are still some HB HRT that have a different way of understanding and application of Balinese cultural values, fundamentally affects their competency and impedes their work performance, stopping them in achieving managerial positions in their work place. This is mostly influenced from the physical, social, cultural, and educational environment of their place of origin during their childhood as well as the low exposure of the economies of tourism industry. These factors cause differences in the orientation toward cultural values, which affects their approach of decision-making. These variations in the orientation toward cultural values of HB HRT can be classified into three types: immutable, transitional, or mutable in relation to the five basic problems of human beings according to the theory of Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck (1961) described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first problem concerning the character of human nature of HB HRT</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In some cases there are some HB HRT who are influenced by conservative cultural values </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karma phala, punarbhawa </span><span class="font1">(reincarnation) and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tembang</span><span class="font1"> song phrase of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ede ngaden awak bisa, depang anake ngadanin</span><span class="font1"> – meaning one should always be humble in this life, a misunderstanding about the cultural values which influence attitudes</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and insights of decision-making process in their work. This misunderstanding leads to the perception that life is bad (conservative), work only adds to a series of reincarnation (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Punarbawa / samsara</span><span class="font1">) and the power as a leader can prevent one from achieving nirvana, so that the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tembang</span><span class="font1"> song phrase of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ede ngaden awak bisa</span><span class="font1"> is interpreted as there is no need for competition. This interpretation translates to HB HRT having humble personality, not showing off despite of having good leadership skills, and not participating in the competition to occupy the manager position. This nocompetion and no-show off value indicator have popular response from HB HRT with a weight value 68%. However, there are some HB HRT who have the understanding that life is bad but can transform into good karma (cultural transition), so they have the motivation and passion in working to improve the economic conditions. Strong response to indicators to do good job and work optimally got a weight value of 70.7%, as well as indicators of doing work with all the ability has weight value of 64.5%. There are also many HB HRT that interpret that this life is good (cultural progressive), need to work enthusiastically with high creativity to perform well, to improve their skills, and have high innovating initiative in their profession. Indicators of the ability to create and innovate have a strong response with a weight value 82.80%.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The second problem concerning the relationship of human beings to the nature and environment</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">HB HRT believe that nature is magnificent, an essential proof of God’s Power and Grace in which human must submit to and respect (conservative culture), this is seen from the strong response to indicators of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma yatra</span><span class="font1"> culture (pilgrimage and learn from nature) with a weight of 75%. Some HB HRT like to seek harmony from the nature (transition), so they strongly respond to cultural concepts of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karma phala</span><span class="font1"> with a weight of 73.7% and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Asih</span><span class="font1"> (feeling of love towards nature) with a weight of 68.9%. However, there are also HB HRT who see nature as a mystery to be solved and to be ruled over as a gift from the God to mankind (progressive), by responding to the strong cultural concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma karya</span><span class="font1"> with a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">weight of 73.4%. These three point of views can be seen from the way HB HRT interact with his natural and work environment, in which one or more will be applied appropriately to create the working environment with local talent that is based on the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The third problem concerning human beings sense of space and time</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">One of HB HRT’s personalities is to uphold the importance of the ancient culture value (conservative) as an orientation with strong values of patience and persistence. These HB HRT with such personality are usually diligent workers who respond strongly to work with a smile (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tresna</span><span class="font1">) indicator with a weight of 79.1 %, work responsibly (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cucud</span><span class="font1">) indicator with a weight of 75%, and the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ngayah</span><span class="font1"> culture with a weight of 56.9%. On the other hand, some HB HRT focus on the present (transition) during their effort to achieve success, these people are usually very resilient in work, they respond strongly to the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jemet</span><span class="font1"> culture with a weight of 67.6%. Some other HB HRT look far into the future (progressive), select personal progress as their achievement, diligently fulfilling themselves with adding insights through education and training. They strongly respond to three indicators: 1. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jengah </span><span class="font1">culture (increasing knowledge, skills, experience and insight to advance) with a weight of 70.2%, 2. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karang awake tandurin </span><span class="font1">culture (hone themselves) with a weight of 68.4%, and 3. the cultural concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma karya</span><span class="font1"> (work ethic and high creativity) with a weight value of 73.4%.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fourth problem concerning work and work productivity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Some of HB HRT are still very conservative in their view of work, for them it is merely an attempt for survival (survival), so they are less interested in hard work, evidenced by the lack of response to the indicator 'working for unmet needs' with weight of 45.2%. But other HB HRT embrace transition culture who considers 'hard work to get status, position, accession of power as a measure of achievement', thus reaching the manager's position as a powerful symbol of high status. Can be seen from the strong response to the indicators of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cucud</span><span class="font1"> culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">with a weight value of 75%, the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karma phala</span><span class="font1"> with a weight of 73.7%, and cultural concepts </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jemet</span><span class="font1"> 67.6%. However, most HB HRT‘s orientation is progressive culture, working towards the highest achievement, work to produce work results, not the status, lacking care for the manager position (weak motivational power). But when given such managerial task, they will perform successfully (do not want the competition). Such HB HRT strongly responds to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma karya</span><span class="font1"> culture (work ethic high creativity) indicated by 73.4% weight value.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fifth problem concerning the nature of human relationship to others</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Some of HB HRT who emphasize on the importance of vertical relationships prefer to refrain themselves from expressing their personal opinion (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">koh ngomong</span><span class="font1">), seen from the strong response to indicators of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">de cara goake ngadanin iba</span><span class="font1"> culture- do not like to boast and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tembang</span><span class="font1"> song phrase of</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ede ngaden awak bisa, depang anake ngadanin</span><span class="font1">– meaning that one should always be humble in this life with a weight of 74.1%. But there are also some of HB HRT who prefer to emphasize on horizontal relationships (collateral) between individuals. Which can be seen from the strong response to the indicators of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tat twam asi</span><span class="font1"> culture with a weight value of 74.1% followed </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">asta brata</span><span class="font1"> culture with a weight value of 71.8% and supported by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sagilik saguluk salulung sebayantaka</span><span class="font1"> culture (united either in safety or in danger) with a weight value of 71.5%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Another group of HB HRT believes in individual self-reliance, so their leadership style will be authoritarian. It relates to strong response of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">asta brata</span><span class="font1"> culture with a weight value of 71.8%, followed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karang awake tandurin</span><span class="font1"> culture indicator (hone themselves) with a weight value of 68.4%, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jemet </span><span class="font1">culture with a weight of 67.6%, while </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">polos </span><span class="font1">culture (honest and forthright) has a weight of 61.2%. All of which coresponde to strong response of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dharma karya</span><span class="font1"> culture (work ethic with high creativity) indicated by 73.4%, and cultural concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tri kaya parisudha </span><span class="font1">(thoughts, words and actions that must be purified in order to be good and right) with a weight of 67.5%.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Conclusions and Recommendations</span></h1>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">References</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">The conclusions of this study, indicates that HB HRT are equipped with good competences, they are capable of working and occupying managerial position at star-rated hotels in Bali. These good competences are inseparable from their BCV background which is derived from the concepts of Hindu Balinese culture with the accurate understanding and interpretation. With such unique qualities, most HB HRT has comparable competence and even superior in comparison to human resources from out of Bali, foreign or local. HB HRT’s BCV will be able to improve CuQ and SQ as a stimulus for the growth of SoQ, AQ, CQ, and XQ that are based for HB HRT’s LQ.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">However, a wrong interpretation of the BCV, specifically about leaders controlling power can translate to low CuQ and SQ about the importance of the manager's position for some HB HRT. A special strategy is required to convince HB HRT about the importance of manager positon for HB HRT by strengthening its CuQ and SQ. One approach is to give motivational programs for career development through internal development, such as programs to align the understanding of the role of leadership in their BCV, as contributing factor towards the improvement of living standard, the company's betterment, and the surrounding environment, ultimately fulfilling God’s mission for human beings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on this conclusion, we can derive a general theory that with the five criteria of competence specified earlier, together with the accurate and positive understanding of the BCV, there are prospective HB HRT for managerial positions who will continuously adapt and integrate Balinese culture value and Hindu religious value with the values of tourism, in the development paradigm of cultural tourism in Bali. With this theory, Bali will be able to produce HB HRT that has high CuQ and SQ, broad-minded, and thoughtful to the dynamic needs of the Balinese Modern People, which will finally lead to new sets of intelligence as part of growing intelligence of leadership (LQ) HB HRT in the tourism field, especially star-rated hotels in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kluckhohn, F. R. and Strodtbeck, F. L. (1961) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Variation in Values Orientation:A Theory Tested in Five Culture</span><span class="font1">. Evanston, Illinois: Row, Peterson and Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Manullang, M. (1982) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen dan Personalia. Cetakan ketiga</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Aksara Baru.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pelly, U. (1994) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori – Teori Sosial Budaya, Proyek Pembinaan Dan Peningkatan Mutu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenaga &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kependidikan</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Direktorat Jenderal Pendidikan Tinggi Dan Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Robbins, S. P. (2001) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Organizational Behavior, 9th Ed</span><span class="font1">. Upper Saddle River New Jersey: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prentice Hall</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">International.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Spencer, L. M. and Spencer, S. M. (1993) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Competence Work: &nbsp;&nbsp;Model for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Superior Performance</span><span class="font1">. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Syah, M. (2000) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Psikologi Pendidikan dengan Pendekatan Baru</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: &nbsp;PT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">119</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN: 2407-392X. p-ISSN: 2541-0857</span></p>