---
layout: full_article
title: "AN ANALYSIS OF SUBTITLING STRATEGIES IN THE MAGIC OF BELLE ISLE MOVIE"
author: "I Nyoman Aditya Dharma"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">AN ANALYSIS OF SUBTITLING STRATEGIES IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE MAGIC OF BELLE ISLE</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I NYOMAN ADITYA DARMA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Extension Program Faculty of Letter and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Permasalahan yang dikaji dalam penelitian ini adalah (1) Strategi pernerjemahan yang digunakan oleh penerjemah pada film “The Magic of Belle Isle”, (2) Strategi penerjemahan yang sangat sering digunakan dalam proses penerjemahan film “The Magic of Belle Isle”. Adapun tujuan dari penelitian ini yaitu menganalisa strategi penerjemahan yang digunakan dalam film dan mengungkapkan strategi-strategi penerjemahan dalam subtitling film dan juga menentukan strategi penerjemahan yang sangat sering digunakan pada proses penerjemahan. Jenis penelitian ini adalah deskriptif kualitatif. Objek penelitian ini berupa terjemahan film “The Magic of Belle Isle” dimana teks bahasa inggris menjadi teks sumber dan bahasa indonesia menjadi bahasa tujuan yang kemudian dianalisa dengan menggunakan teori 10 strategi penerjemahan dari Gottlieb (1998) dan 1 strategi penerjemahan dari Hariyanto (2005). Hasil penelitian menunjukan bahwa penerjemah menggunakan semua strategi penerjemahan dimana strategi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transfer</span><span class="font2"> merupakan strategi yang sangat sering digunakan oleh penerjemah dalam menerjemahkan subtitle film “The Magic of Belle Isle”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BACKGROUND</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Foreign films especially Hollywood films have dominated the movie industry in Indonesia. The audiences are not only adults or teenagers but also children. The high quality pictures and also interesting in terms of the story, make Hollywood films increasingly in demand by the Indonesian. Almost all of Hollywood movies/films are produced in English, which are difficult to understand by Indonesians , this condition can be a problem, i.e. the difference of language used. Therefore, the film producers must transfer English as the source language to certain target language, in this case Indonesian language, in order to make audience easier to understand and enjoy the films. So, the field of film translation began to set the pace in translation study and screen translation or Audiovisual Translation (AVT) is the central to it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">AVT is conventionally categorized into subtitling and dubbing. Each of them interfered with the original text to different extent. Basically, dubbing is refered to any technique of covering the original voice in an audio-visual production by another voice. On the other hand, the activity of subtitling is the process of translation where one language as source language is transffered into other language as the target language. It involves transferring the characteristics of spoken dialogue to the written mode. For the subtitler, subtitling is not always an easy job because it has some constraints and limitations. Many of the translators have tried various ways to cover the constraints, attempts have been done to observe what strategies are adopted in subtitling work. Gottlieb has devised ten strategies which he classifies as expansion, paraphrase, transfer, imitation, transcription, dislocation, condensation, decimation, deletion, and resignation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the facts explained above knowing and studying subtitling strategies which are used in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie is interesting since this drama movie contains many dramatical sentences and the transfered idea to Indonesian subtitle will give many findings to be analyzed. Thus, if the subtitler of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie could not translate and transfer the subtitle and the main idea of that movie well, misunderstanding and misinterpretation will happen. This study attempts to classify the subtitling strategies used in transfering the meaning from English into Indonesian subtitle.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The study aims to provide answer to these following questions :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of subtitling strategies were found in the movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which strategies mostly occured in the subtitling </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two major purposes by which the researcher expected to find out as the answer to the problems mentioned earlier :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the subtitling strategies found in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the mostly used subtitling procedures to translate script of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie into Indonesian.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The study employed a qualitative research and the technique of analysis descriptive research method. This is descriptive research, which attempts to describe the subtitling strategies which are used in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic Of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie. Descriptive research studies are designed to obtain information concerning the status of phenomena. They are directed toward determining the nature of a situation, as it exists at the time investigated. In this research, the researcher chooses descriptive qulitative method because the purpose of this study is to describe the phenomena of translation, especially the subtitling strategies which are used in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic Of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Subtitling strategy found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transfer, </span><span class="font2">there is no added explanation or modifying of view, because the subtitler translates the dialogue by literal word. In addition, the usage of this strategy also maintains the structure of the original text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Monte: I Need a drink</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Monte: Aku butuh minum</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This subtitling uses transfer strategy. There is no addition or deletion in that phrase. The subtitler translates the dialogue literally. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I need a drink”</span><span class="font2"> which was translated “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Aku butuh minum”</span><span class="font2"> and was very similar in the syntax and meaning. Transfer strategy was used in this translation process because all the words were translated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expansion </span><span class="font2">is used when the original text (SL) requires an addition explanation in translation because of some cultural nuance not retrievable in TL.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Clown: I’m attempting to defraud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Clown: Aku berniat defraud (menipu)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’m attempting to defraud</span><span class="font2">” was translated into “a</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ku berniat defraud (menipu)</span><span class="font2">”. The explanation word in the bracket was purposively added by the subtitler to clarify the dialogue. For some people in TL, word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">defraud</span><span class="font2">” was not strange, but for most of the TL speakers this word could be unusual; therefore, the subtitler tries to retain the word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">defraud</span><span class="font2">” by explaining the word that contain punchline with bracket.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paraphrase </span><span class="font2">is used when the subtitler does not use the same syntactical rules in subtitling the dialogue. In other words, using this strategy the subtitler changes the structures of the subtitle and makes it easier to understand and readable by the audience. Example: Monte: She’s black-hearted whore and i’m done with her.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Monte: Dia pelacur berhati jahat dan aku sudah tak mau berurusan dengannya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of paraphrase strategy could be seen on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“black- hearted”</span><span class="font2"> which was translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“berhati jahat”</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“black hearted”</span><span class="font2"> which was a figurative language meaning “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">disposed to doing or wishing evil”</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“without any moral quality or goodness”</span><span class="font2">, and black was close to the dark and evil world so the subtitler translated it “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">berhati jahat”</span><span class="font2"> which had a similar meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Condensation </span><span class="font2">is making the text brief to miss unneccesary utterance using the shorter utterance, but it does not lose the message. Sometimes pragmatic effect can be lost by using condensation strategy. Therefore, the real aim of the text must be conveyed.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Monte: Ah, I don't believe I will.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Monte: Aku takkan bisa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On the subtitle above, it could clearly be seen that the subtitler used condensation strategy, if it was translated into word-to-word the sentence structure in TL, the meaning is the same as SL text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Decimation </span><span class="font2">is used to translate when the actors are quarrelling with the fast speaking. So, the translator is also condensing the utterance because the utterances have difficulty absorbing unstructured written text quickly.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Monte: You're not, by any chance, referring to Spot, are you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Monte: Maksud anda Spot?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You’re not, by any chance, referring to Spot, are you?</span><span class="font2">” was translated “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Maksud anda spot</span><span class="font2">?” It was not translated word-to-word because it was represented by “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">are you?</span><span class="font2">” which in TL could be translated “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">maksud anda?</span><span class="font2">”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Imitation </span><span class="font2">is re-writing the word the original text. Imitation is ussualy used to deal with the name of person, place, names of magzine, journals, newspapers, the titles of as yet untranslated literary works, name of company and instituitions, addresses, etc.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Charlotte: Did your Jubal McLaws ever love a woman?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlotte: Apa Jubal Mclaws pernah jatuh cinta?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Jubal McLaws”</span><span class="font2"> was a name of a character in a story; therefore, the subtitler did not have to translate it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transcription: </span><span class="font2">is used in those case where a term is unusual even in the source text; for example, the use of a third language, or nonsense language.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Monte: Railroad Pinkertons are hot on our trail, amigo</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Monte: Jalur kereta Pinkertons sasaran kita, teman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Transcription strategy was used in translating the dialogue. It could be seen in word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">amigo</span><span class="font2">” which was translated into “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">teman</span><span class="font2">”. The word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">amigo</span><span class="font2">” was a third language which was a Spanish word meaning friend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dislocation </span><span class="font2">is adopted when the original employs some sort of special effect; for example, a silly song in cartoon film, where the translation of the effect is more important than the content.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deletion </span><span class="font2">is refers to the elimination of parts of a text.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Charlotte: That’s enough</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlotte: Cukup</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The words “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">that’s enough</span><span class="font2">” into “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cukup”</span><span class="font2">. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“that’s</span><span class="font2">” in this term carry less semantic meaning; therefore, it can be deleted without changing the information to the audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">j. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resignation </span><span class="font2">is used to describe the strategy adopted when no translation solution can be found and meaning is inevitably lost.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">k. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Taming: </span><span class="font2">proposed by Hariyanto (2005) is used to translate the impolite word to be polite word in order to be received by audiences.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Example: Willow tree: If my phone’s ruined, you’re dead!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Willow tree: Kalau ponselku rusak, habislah kau!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dead</span><span class="font2">” has similar meaning to “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">habislah</span><span class="font2">” in TL, but was translated to be more polite. The word “dead” in context means no longer felt, ended, extinguished. Therefore, the subtitler translated it into “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">habislah</span><span class="font2">”. The word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dead</span><span class="font2">” can also be translated “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mati</span><span class="font2">” but this word sounds rude in TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>l. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is a qualitative study. After analyzing and classifying the subtitling strategies, the researcher builds several conclusions. First, the subtitler used the ten subtitling strategies devised by Gottlieb and taming strategy by Hariyanto in translating </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Magic of Belle Isle</span><span class="font2">’s movie subtitles. The research found that transfer strategy is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">mostly used by subtiltler in this movie, where the subtitler translated the dialogues completly and accurately. It might be as a result of the fact that the dialogues in this movie are using homely language, with the purpose that , the dialogues/ subtitles are easy to be translated. This point makes the target audience still easy to understand since the meaning of the dialogues/subtitles are still maintained by the subtitler. Even though the structure of some dialogues are changed syntactically and semantically, the target audience is still easy to enjoy the movie. However, the use of transfer strategy in translating the movie’s subtitles is very simple, since this strategy is the best choice to translate simple and short dialogues.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Anonymous. 2011. Movie. Available from: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Film</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anderman, Gunila &amp;&nbsp;Margaret Rogers. 2003. “Translation Today : Trends and Perspectives. Available: </span><a href="http://books.google.co.id/books?id"><span class="font2">http://books.google.co.id/books?id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Astuti, Rina Astrini Puji. 2009. “Subtitling Strategies in Cartoon Film: An Analysis of English – Indonesian Subtitling of The Simpson Movie”. Available: </span><a href="http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?no_skripsi=397"><span class="font2">http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?no_skripsi=397</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Augustian, Indra. 2008. “An Analysis of Applied Subtitling Strategies In The Subtitles of The Film ‘The Interpreter’”. Available: </span><a href="http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?no_skripsi=1228"><span class="font2">http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?no_skripsi=1228</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cintaz, Diaz. Workshop; Subtitling. 2000. Available:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">http//wwwliterarytranslation.com/workshops/subtitling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coehl, Leonardo Jordao. 2003. “Subtitling and Dubbing: Restrictions and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Priorities”. Available from: (</span><a href="http://www.translationdirectory.com/article3"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.translationdirectory.com/article3</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> 26.htm</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Elam, Aldo. 2001. “Analisis Makna Implisit Pada Novel Harry Potter and The Prisoner of Azkaban Karya J.K. Rowling dan Terjemahannya”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Padjajaran. Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ghaemi, Farid and Benyamin, Janin. 2010. “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Strategies Used In Translation Of Interlingual Subtitling</span><span class="font2">”, &nbsp;Islamic Azad University, Science and Research</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Branch. Available from:(</span><a href="http://www.sid.ir/en/ViewPaper.asp"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.sid.ir/en/ViewPaper.asp</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gottlieb, Henrik, 2005, Multidimensional translation: Semantic Turned</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Semiotics. Available from: </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">htt.p://</span><a href="http://www.transedit.se/Bibliography.htm"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.transedit.se/Bibliography.htm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Harvey, S., Higgins, I, 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thinking Translation. A course in Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Method: French-English.</span><span class="font2"> London/ New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hastuti, Endang Dwi, dkk. 2011. “Analisis Terjemahan Film Inggris- Indonesia Studi Kasus Terjemahan Film </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Romeo And Juliet</span><span class="font2"> (Kajian Tentang Strategi Penerjemahan”. Universitas Bantara Sukoharjo. Sukoharjo</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Munawaroh, Ulyatul. 2007. “Subtitling Strategies Of Translation In Babel Film.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Islam Negeri. Malang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter, 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Textbook Of Translation: Centre For Translation And</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Studies Universities Of Surrey.</span><span class="font2"> London and New York: PrenticeHall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pramana, I Gusti Bagus Bayu. 2012. “The Translation of Implicit Meaning In English Indonesian Subtitle of The Movie Sherlock Holmes”, Universitas Udayana. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Reich, Pavel. 2006. The Film And The Book in Translation. Masaryk University, Faculty of Arts, Departement of English And American Studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: </span><a href="http://is.muni.cz/th/64544/ff_m/Diplomova_prace.doc"><span class="font2">http://is.muni.cz/th/64544/ff_m/Diplomova_prace.doc</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schwarz, Barbara. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation in a Confined Space – Film subtitling With Special Reference to Dennis Potter’s “Lipstick on Your Collar’. [online] Available: </span><a href="http://accurapid.com/journal/22subtitles.htm"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">http://accurapid.com/journal/22subtitles.htm</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Taylor, Christoper. 1999. The subtitling of Film Dialogue: An Aconomic Use of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language [online] Available:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">http//clawed.cla.unipad.it/CITALAL/document/trieste/subtitling.rtf</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tumangger, Rio Maha Pratama. 2010. “The Subtitling Strategies Used in Fiction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Film: An Analysis of Translation Errors in Translating Subtitles of Evan Almighty Film.” Available:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?start=10833"><span class="font2">http://repository.upi.edu/skripsiview.php?start=10833</span></a></p>