---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF ENGLISH TABOO WORDS USED IN FIFTY SHADES OF GREY NOVEL BY E. L. JAMES"
author: "Rashida cs"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF ENGLISH TABOO WORDS USED IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">FIFTY SHADES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">OF GREY</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> NOVEL BY E. L. JAMES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">RASHIDA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul tulisan ini adalah analisis kata-kata tabu bahasa Inggris yang digunakan dalam novel Fifty Shades of Grey oleh EL James. Kata tabu adalah adat budaya atau agama yang tidak memungkinkan melakukan, menggunakan atau berbicara tentang hal tertentu oleh orangorang. Tapi, pada kenyataannya, dalam novel berbahasa Inggris banyak kata-kata tabu yang digunakan karena mereka berhubungan dengan plot dan keseluruhan cerita. Menurut alasan tersebut, kata-kata tabu dipilih sebagai topik utama dari penelitian ini. Penelitian ini berusaha untuk mengetahui jenis dan fungsi kata-kata tabu yang ditemukan dalam novel. Data diambil dari novel Fifty Shades of Grey oleh EL James. Penelitian ini dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode penelitian pustaka. Data yang terkumpul kemudian dianalisis dengan penjelasan deskriptif yang menjelaskan serangkaian kata-kata.Temuan menunjukkan bahwa fungsi kata-kata tabu yang ditemukan dalam novel seperti, untuk menciptakan perhatian, mendiskreditkan, memprovokasi konfrontasi kekerasan, ungkapan sayang, membuat identifikasi intrapersonal yang kuat dan memberikan katarsis. Selain itu, kata-kata tabu yang digunakan oleh karakter kebanyakan berfungsi untuk mendiskreditkan orang lain, mengurangi tekanan emosi mereka dan untuk menunjukkan kasih sayang kepada seseorang yang memiliki hubungan dekat dengan mereka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: tabu, jenis, fungsi, kata-kata tabu</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In our daily conversation, especially in informal situation, people usually use taboo words in communication. In the literary language like novels and magazines, taboo words are used to support the plot of the story. However, in some cases the use of taboo words might seem impolite, especially when we talk in public places and to someone older than us. In this study, the use of taboo words is specially mentioned in informal condition or in a certain situation that may qualify in suitable manner and purpose.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, in this investigation, the research problem is: What are the functions of English taboo words in conversation in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font1"> novel by E. L. James?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">To find out the communicative functions of taboo words used in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font1"> novel by E. L. James</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The primary data in this study were taken from the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font1"> Novel by E. L. James about erotica published in 2011 by The Writer’s Coffee Shop Publishing House. The data were only taken from the conversations that provided English taboo word. The conversations that do contain taboo words were taken out of the observation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this writing, the method used was library research and the data were limited only to the conversations that contain taboo words to make the writing not excessive. The observation was done through reading the novel. In this case, the data were found by searching the novel. Note taking was done while reading the whole content of the story. All of the sentences that contain taboo words found in this novel were noted down to get the relevant data. The data were listed in order to make the identification easier. After all the data were listed, then every taboo word was indentified in order to find out the meaning and function of every taboo word found in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were qualitatively analyzed by descriptive explanation based on the theory of Functions of Taboo Words proposed by Raymond D. Liedlich (1973).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Functions of Taboo words Used in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study five functions of taboo words were found from the six functions of taboo words based on the theory proposed by Liedlich.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Create Attention</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Sometimes people launched taboo words in order to get attention from their surroundings or the listener. Someone has to speak the verbal obscenity out loud when he wants to get attention of the society. These are examples of taboo words used to create attention found in the novel:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘Shit’ can be definedas something that is considered disgusting, having a poor quality or otherwise totally unacceptable. Shit is a slang word used to describe a small or worthless amount. As shown in the conversation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Suddenly we both become aware of voices in the hall outside his bedroom door. It takes a moment to process what I can hear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MRS. GREY: But if he’s still in bed, then he must be ill. He’s never in bed at this time. Christian never sleeps in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TAYLOR: Mrs. Grey, please.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MRS. GREY: Taylor. You cannot keep me from my son.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TAYLOR: Mrs. Grey, he’s not alone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MRS. GREY: What do you mean he’s not alone?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TAYLOR: He has someone with him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">MRS. GREY: Oh…</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Even I hear the disbelief in her voice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Christian blinks rapidly, staring down at me, wide-eyed with humored horror.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Shit! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">It’s my mother.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the conversation above, Christian Grey said ‘shit!’; it did not mean that he was going to poop, or that he was cursing at Ana. He was saying the epithet word ‘shit’ in order to express his disbelief and to get attention from Ana, because his mother was coming to see him. This was an intense situation for Christian Grey because he has just had sexual intercourse with Anna, and therefore it would not be pleasant for his mother to suddenly come to his house without him being prepared.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discredit</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Some people expressed their dislike or unsatisfaction with some persons, institution or government by launching some words. Below is the discredit function of taboo words found in Fifty Shades of Grey novel:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dickless means someone who does not have a male sex organ or someone with a lack of courage. Dickless can also be used as an insult to call a sissy boy. As shown in the conversation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">KATE: My first time was horrid</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">She continues, making a sad comedy face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: Oh?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">This has me interested, something she’s never divulged before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">KATE: Yes, Steve Paton. High school, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dickless </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jock.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">She shudders.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">KATE: He was rough. I wasn’t ready. We were both drunk. You know – typical teenage post-prom disaster. Ugh – it took me months before I decided to have another go. And not with him, the gutless wonder. I was too young. You were right to wait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word ‘dick’ is a slang word for male genitals or penis. Kate said the word ‘dickless’ in order to describe the man who took her virginity. Kate was not saying the word to describe that Steve Paton do not have a penis. She said that word in order to describe her dislike and disgust toward him. She was feeling so dissatisfied with him because he was not the right man to take her virginity. Without realizing it, Kate was saying the cursive word because she regrets her behavior in the past.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endearment</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of taboo words in several conversations also helps a person to gain intimacy between the speaker and the listener. Several kinds of taboo words usually have this kind of use to point out that the high level of intimacy is involved in a certain group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bastard is a derogatory term used when a person was born with parents who are not married or an illegitimate child. It can be also defined as something that is irregular, inferior, or dubious origin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: She wouldn’t do that, and I wouldn’t tell you anything she tells me about Elliot – if she were to tell me anything</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I add quickly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: Well, the difference is that I don’t want to know about his sex life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Christian murmurs dryly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: Elliot’s a nosy </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bastard</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. But only about what we’ve done so far</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He warns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: She’d probably have my balls if she knew what I wanted to do to you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He adds so softly I’m not sure I’m supposed to hear it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: Okay</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I agree readily, smiling up at him, relieved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word ‘bastard’ is a slang usually used to insult somebody especially a man who has been rude, unpleasant or cruel. In this situation, the word ’bastard’ was said by Christian Grey not to insult his brother Elliot. He was saying that word as a way to show how close he is to his brother which makes it okay for him to talk about him using that kind of language. If Christian Grey and his brother Elliot were not close, they would not have said the word ‘bastard’ in a usual way. He would have said it in an angry or disgusted tone of voice.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Creation of Strong Intrapersonal Identification</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of taboo words in a conversation also helps a certain person to create a kind of strong intrapersonal identification. This kind of taboo words are used when someone wants to state what kind of person he is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘Fucked up’ can be defined as a failure or someone who really messes up. It can also mean acting carelessly, foolishly or incorrectly. This word can also be used to say shut up in a more excessive way.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: Don’t</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He murmurs, then kisses me lightly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: Why don’t you like to be touched?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I whisper, staring up into soft gray eyes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: Because I’m fifty shades of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">fucked-up</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, Anastasia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oh… his honesty is completely disarming. I blink up at him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: I had a very tough introduction to life. I don’t want to burden you with the details. Just don’t.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He strokes his nose against mine, and then he pulls out of me and sits up.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word ‘fucked up’ was said by Christian Grey to create a strong intrapersonal identification about him. The word ‘fucked-up’ means someone that is so ruined or not in a good condition. By saying this word, he wants Anna to know that he is not as perfect as she think he is. In the conversation above, Christian Grey said that he is fifty shades of fucked up, in order to explain to Anna that all parts of him and all her sides of personality is a mess or something that is ruined.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Provide Catharsis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">One of the essential functions of taboo words is to provide catharsis. The idea is that the user of taboo words uses the offensive words in order to release their frustration. And so, by acquiring taboo words can help them feel more relieved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘Shit’ is a vulgar term for feces. The word ‘shit’ is often used as an appropriate gesture of surprise, or disgust. When it is combined with certain words, the meaning can change.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I glance at my alarm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: It’s 7:30.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: 7:30… </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He scrambles out of bed and drags on his jeans.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">It is my turn to look amused as I sit up. Christian Grey is late and flustered. This is something I have never seen before. I belatedly realize that my behind is no longer sore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">CHRISTIAN GREY: You are such a bad influence on me. I have a meeting. I have to go – I have to be in Portland at eight. Are you smirking at me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ANA: Yes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He grins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the conversation above, the word ‘shit’ was said by Christian Grey in order to express his frustration at the situation he is facing. The word was said because he was late for his meeting in Portland. This was such a disturbing thing for him because he is the person who is never late. Also, in some way it amuses him that when he was with Anna, he was so relaxed and distracted from his corporate life that he was late for a meeting. Therefore, by saying the taboo word, it could become the therapy for him in order to turn down the tension and anger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study the use of taboo words to provoke violent confrontation was not found because there were no such taboo words that caused a confrontation between the characters in the book.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that, regarding to its function, taboo words has six categories namely: to create attention, discredit, endearment, creation of strong intrapersonal identification, and provide catharsis. The function of taboo words which provoke violent confrontation was not found in this novel because there was no situation which included violent confrontation. Taboo words were used to create attention in order to get attention from their surroundings or the listener. Discredit is used taboo words to express their dislike with some persons. Taboo words were used as endearment in order to gain intimacy between the speaker and the listener. The use of taboo words in conversation also helps certain kinds of persons to create a strong intrapersonal identification. And last, one of the essential functions of taboo words is the user of taboo words uses the offensive words in order to release their frustration.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English 7<sup>th </sup>edition</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English 6th edition</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">James, E L. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fifty Shades of Grey</span><span class="font1">. Australia: The writer’s Coffee Shop Publishing House.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Liedlich, Raymond D. 1973. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Coming to terms with language: an anthology,</span><span class="font1"> New York, Wiley.</span></p>