---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE POLITENESS STRATEGIES IN OPRAH WINFREY SHOW WITH THE GUEST J.K. ROWLING"
author: "Ni Putu Verayanti Utami"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE POLITENESS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">STRATEGIES IN OPRAH WINFREY SHOW WITH THE GUEST J.K.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ROWLING</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">NI PUTU DWI VERAYANTI UTAMI</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURES UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Komunikasi melalui media adalah komunikasi yang disampaikan langsung kepada publik. Secara khusus, komunikasi antara pembawa acara dan tamu di televise sangat penting diperhatikan karena mempengaruhi baik tamu dan citra public pembawa acara. Pembawa acara dapat mengajukan pertanyaan sensitive dan membuat ketidakpuasan tamu, dan dapat mengakibatkan konflik antara tamu dan pembawa acara. Oleh karena itu, teori kesantunan bias meminimalkan konflik</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari skrip talk show Oprah Winfrey dengan bintang tamu J.K Rowling. J.K Rowling adalah penulis novel fiksi “Harry Potter” yang terkenal. Data dibaca dengan teliti, dicatat, dan diklasifikasi sedemikian rupa untuk mengidentifikasi strategi kesantunan positif, strategi kesantunan negative dan alasan bagaimana strategi kesantunan diterapkan di Oprah Winfrey Show. Berdasarkan analisis dan pemaparan terdapat tiga jenis kesantunan positif dan dua jenis kesantunan negatif yang diterapkanoleh Oprah Winfrey berdasarkan teori seperti yang diusulkanoleh Brown dan Levinson ( 1978:28 ) dan didukung oleh teori Dell Hymes ( 1974)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Oprah winfrey,StrategiKesantunan,Talk Show</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Politeness is the way in which the speaker appreciate and maintain the situation of the hearer in the interaction, but it is not a simple thing. According to Ramanwong (2009:1), the appropriate way of speaking to the people in the different hierarchy depends on the speaker’s rules in the context when making a communication or process of information imparted by a sender to a receiver. The Oprah Winfrey Show won scores of Emmy Awards. She can conduct interviews with</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">few problems or conflicts with her guest(s). Therefore, this talk show is very interesting to explore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Brown and Levinson (1993:1) politeness strategies are developed in order to save the hearers face. There are two types of politeness strategies. The first is positive politeness and the second one is negative politeness. Positive face is a person’s wish to be well thought of. Its manifestation may include the desire admired by others. Negative face is our wish not to be imposed on by others and to be allowed to go about our business unimpeded. The theory above means that when somebody has a conversation, he also has to pay attention to the hearer’s feeling. The writer chose one interview transcript of the guest invited to Oprah Winfrey Show. His name is J.K. Rowling. It’s provided sufficient data to analyze the politeness strategies by Oprah Winfrey.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In analyzing the talk show script there are some problems formulatedin the present study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What positive politeness strategies were used by Oprah Winfrey?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What negative politeness strategies were used by Oprah Winfrey?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the politeness strategies applied in the Oprah Winfrey Show?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on problems above, the aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the positive politeness strategies used by Oprah Winfrey</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the negative politeness strategies used by Oprah Winfrey</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the politeness strategies applied in the Oprah Winfrey Show</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Research method explains how we conduct the research. It can be defined as the procedure or the method used in writing a scientific paper. In this case it includes</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the method of determination of the data source, the process of collecting data, and how to the data leading to finding the research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data source in this study was on the transcripts of interviews by Oprah Winfrey which was taken from the websites information especially the site: </span><a href="http://www.oprah.com/omagazine/Oprah-Interviews-Julia-Roberts/11"><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.oprah.com/omagazine/Oprah-Interviews-Julia-Roberts/11</span></a><span class="font0">a dialogue between the host and the guest. Besides, the writer also watched the video downloaded from YouTube to analyze and to understand how the expressions used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The methods used in collecting the data in this writing were observation and documentation methods.All the data was taken from the Oprah Winfrey talk show script with one gueststar. The first technique was done by watching the Oprah Winfrey’stalk shows and then read the scripts of the Oprah Winfrey’s talk show. After that theprocess of collecting data also was done by re-watching the talk show and did thetechnique of collecting data while re-reading the Oprah Winfrey’s talk show script.Then after the all data was collected, the data was divided into positive and negative politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were qualitatively analyzed and descriptively presented. The technique of analyzing data were done as follows: First the data were classified, the transcriptions of the dialogues were worked out, followed by the selection and classification of the positive and negative politeness strategy based on theBrown and Levinson theory. Nextthe data were reduced. Finally the data were checked based onthe theories and perspective proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978:28). This theory was supported by the theory proposed by Dell Hymes (1974) about context of situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Oprah Winfrey’s talk show scripts with the guest J.K. Rowling</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis the positive politeness strategies used by Oprah Winfrey in the Talk Show</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Positive politeness strategies seek to minimize the threat to the hearer’s positive face. The dialogue presented positive politeness strategies used:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">a.Strategy 1: Notice, attend to H (his interests, wants, needs, goods)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Example: </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“That’s such a great analogy.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Description: This output suggests that she should take notice of aspects of Rowling’s condition, notice and indicate that S Oprah from the talk show was not embarrassed by it. By stating that S Oprah and H Rowling belong to some set of persons who share specific wants, including goals in the talk show.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2: Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H)</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Example: “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">It’s so interesting”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Description: the expression “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">it’s so interesting” </span><span class="font0">illustrates another feature of this positive-politeness output</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font0">She used this strategy to show her good intention to Rowling in order to make her feel good in the talk show. Oprah shows that she is interested in her guest.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3: Intensify interest to H</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Example: “In the United States you’re known as </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">the first billionaire author.” </span><span class="font0">Description: In the talk show Oprah and the guest Rowling talked about her successful carrier. After selling more than four-hundred million copies of this series, it’s hard to believe that twelve publishers rejected the Sorcerer’s Stone. Therefore, S Oprah exaggerated facts as well as she made a good story to draw H Rowling as a participant to the conversation, she used this strategy when she wanted to draw</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rowling’s attention to her own feelings by saying “in the United States you’re known as </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">the first billionaire author.” </span><span class="font0">by express them dramatically.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.3Analysis the negative politeness strategies used by Oprah Winfrey in the Talk Show</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Negative politeness strategies are oriented towards the h negative face and emphasize avoidance if imposition on the H. In the dialogue, several kind strategies of negative politeness were found, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2: Question, hedges</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Example: “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Will you?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Description: According to Brown and Levinson (1978), in some languages there are particles which encode such hedges in linguistic structure. They often constitute among the most commonly used word in language, but are typically omitted from dictionaries and given little theoretical attention. By stating “</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Will you?” </span><span class="font0">to ask someone to do something is to presuppose that they can and are willing to do it and have not already done.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 7: Impersonalize S and H</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Example: “And </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">my producers </span><span class="font0">tell me that your real name is Jo. All this time I thought you were ‘J. K.’.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Description:With impersonalization, the interviewer does not personally question the opinions of the interviewee, but rather quotes a different person or uses a vague description, such as “some people” to present the agent and then asks her guest for reaction. The interviewee cannot thus feel personally offended, as the interviewer does not express his own opinion. By stating “and</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">my producers </span><span class="font0">tell me that your real name is Jo. All this time I thought you were ‘J. K.” Oprah indicates that she doesn’t want to impinge on Rowling is to phrase the FTA as if the agent were other</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">than Oprah, or at least possibly not Oprah or not Oprah alone, and the addressee were other than Rowling, or only inclusive of Rowling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.3The Reason how Politeness Strategies applied in the Oprah Winfrey Show</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to Dell Hymes (1974), the following of positive politeness strategies also comes from an interview with actress J.K. Rowling. The atmosphere of the interview was easy-going.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Setting and Scene</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">: The setting of this speech event is in Oprah studio. This is the first time they meet, but Oprah can make the talk show more fun and have a friendly talk.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Participants</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">: J.K. Rowling and Oprah, the close relationship is obvious from their warm greeting and the way they talk to each other. She even jokes about what might have happened to her, so Rowling feels quite comfortable to tell them her kind of personal story.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Ends</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">: The overall end of this speech event seems to be asking Rowling what has happened and at the same time making her feeling comfortable, by asking question about her experiences, her creativity when writing a book, her personal life, her husband, and her motivation.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Act sequence</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">: The words used are some how informal and friendly and the content of speech is greeting, introducing and telling the story. First introduction and they talk very generally about her fantastic book and her personal life.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Key</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">: The manner of the talk between Oprah and Rowling is quite friendly but serious</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Instrument</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">: The channel is totally oral and the register is totally informal.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Norms of interaction</span><span class="font0">: Oprah’s greeting with Rowling is the way that shows her happiness to see her and how much she is excited. The way Oprah calls Rowling’s name shows how much surprised she is to see Rowling to share the experiences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Genre</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Friendly chat</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Oprah never interacted with Rowling before, and in communicated with a new guest in the circumstance, Oprah tended to choose negative politeness strategies using addressee “J. K.”, by stating </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">“so, this is the first time we’ve met and my producers tell me that your real name is Jo. All this time I thought you were ‘J. K.’ </span><span class="font0">Oprah can pay respect, deference, to the addressee in return for the FTA and maintain social distance. This is great social distance between Oprah and guest J.K. Rowling. For the power rating, Oprah and Rowling has equal power in this case as the host and the guest. But, still to honor the guest, Oprah applied the politeness strategy to create appropriate way in the conversation. The size ranking of imposition (R) depends on the situation that potentially leads to the threat of the hearer’s positive face. The talk show in one room indicates that this circumstance is formal. In this situations the speaker does not only shows positive interest in the addressee by asking personal questions and expressing personal opinions, but also show respect and trust by disclosing the circumstances of his or her own life, experience, or emotions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the analysis and discussion, conclusions can be drawn from this research as follows: in this analysis, Oprah Winfrey used three strategies. They are strategy of notice, attending to H (his interest, wants, needs, goods), exaggerating, and intensifying interest to H. Meanwhile, there are two negative politeness strategies applied in this talk show. They are question, hedge and impersonalize S and H. This strategy has the main focus on assuming that you may be imposing and intruding on H’s space.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The reason how the politeness strategies applied in this talk show because of eight factors, they are setting and scene, participants, ends, act, key, instrumentality, norms, and genre. This was found in the entire of the data. Meanwhile, the circumstances include three factors, among them are social distance (D), power rating (P) and the size of imposition (R).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Brown, Penelope and Stephen C. Levinson. 1987. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: Some universals in language usage.</span><span class="font0"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hymes, Dell. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Foundations of Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach</span><span class="font0">. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 1974.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ramanwong. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language used by Oprah Winfrey in her interviews.</span><span class="font0"> LA: Language and Communication National Institute of Development Administration</span></p>