---
layout: full_article
title: "VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS OF NIKE ADVERTISEMENT: A SEMIOTICS ANALYSIS"
author: "I Gusti Bagus Ngurah Somashrawa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS OF NIKE ADVERTISEMENT: A</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SEMIOTICS ANALYSIS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Gusti Bagus Ngurah Somashrawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini membahas tentang &quot;Tanda Verbal dan Visual di iklan NIKE: Sebuah Analisis Semiotika&quot;, yang menggambarkan tanda-tanda verbal dan visual dalam iklan. Penelitian ini juga menganalisis tanda-tanda verbal dan visual yang mendukung iklan NIKE, dan fungsi dan makna dari tanda-tanda verbal dan visual yang ada di iklan. Ada empat teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini yaitu teori tanda visual dan verbal yang diusulkan oleh Dyer (1993), teori makna dan fungsi yang diusulkan oleh Leech (1977), teori tanda yang diuraikan oleh Chandler (2001), dan teori warna diusulkan oleh Chapman (2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tanda-tanda verbal iklan menggunakan makna afektif untuk menarik orang tertarik pada produk. Fungsi ekspresif digunakan untuk mengekspresikan perasaan dan sikap pencetus nya. Arti konseptual juga digunakan dalam memberikan informasi dari pesan agar pembaca menangkap pesan dari iklan. Informasi Fungsi cenderung yang paling penting, yang menyampaikan informasi dari pembicara / penulis pendengar / pembaca. Makna konseptual dominan dalam penggunaan informasi bahasa. Mengenai hasil, makna dan fungsi dari tanda-tanda telah ditemukan dalam iklan. Arti dan fungsi tanda-tanda dapat dideteksi dari pembuat iklan yang memberitahu informasi tentang NIKE dan membujuk pembaca atau orang untuk mengunjungi toko.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: NIKE, tanda verbal, tanda visual, arti, fungsi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The advertisement chosen to be analyzed as a case study is NIKE.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NIKE is well known around the world as the best quality of shoes that can be used for doing sport activities such as: dancing, running, football and else. The good features of NIKE shoes: Made of skins, using high technology. NIKE shoes has a competitive price with the other and then can make people satisfied when having it. Then, people can get the selection quality of the shoes with a better price. This is the reason why people choose NIKE than other brands.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background stated above, the problems of the study can be formulated into research questions as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What verbal and visual signs are used in NIKE</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">advertisement?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meaning and function of the verbal and visual signs used in the NIKE advertisement?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Every scientific study should have certain aims to be achieved in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">relation to the formulated research problems. The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the verbal and visual signs supported the NIKE advertisement.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the function and meaning of verbal and visual signs that exist in advertisement.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this study were taken from Nike Ad on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Behance</span><span class="font1"> website (</span><a href="http://www.behance.net"><span class="font0">www.behance.net</span></a><span class="font1">) and (</span><a href="http://innakristiannepalacios.files.wordpress.com"><span class="font1">http://innakristiannepalacios.files.wordpress.com</span></a><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through documentation method. The data were taken from the two Ads presented above. The first, step is observing the data source, the second step were attempting to understand the data. Then, the verbal and visual signs data from the advertisement were retrieved. Finally, the data were then analyzed based on the applied theories of (i) verbal and visual sign by Dyer</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(1993), (ii) the meaning and function by Leech (1974), (iii) theory of signs by Chandler (2001) and (iv) theory of colours by Chapman (2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed using qualitative method. It is used in order to explain the data based on the theory of visual and verbal sign proposed by Dyer (1993). Next, the meaning and function was analyzed based on the relevant theories by .Leech (1974), the theory of signs used to elaborate here is the theory proposed by Chandler (2001). Then, the aspects of colors were analyzed based on theories by Chapman (2010).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NIKE advertisement 1</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Informational Function is the function that tends to be the most important one, which conveys the information from the speaker/writer to the listener/reader. Conceptual meaning is also called logical or cognitive meaning. Conceptual Meanings are the essential or the core meaning while other six types are the peripheral. Conceptual meaning helps us distinguish one meaning from the meaning of other sentences. Thus, conceptual meaning is an essential part of language. A language essentially depends on conceptual meaning for communication. The conceptual meaning is the base for all the other types of meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“What’s the Secret of the Speed?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Informational Function is used to convey the information from the speaker/writer to the listener/reader. The conceptual meaning of this sentence is to attract people’s attention to know what kind of product is used to increase speed moreover, in this era, there are so many athletes who are looking for good quality of shoes for running race and comfort to use for daily activities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Affective meaning refers to emotive association or effects of words evoked in the reader, listener. It is what is conveyed about the personal feelings or attitude towards the listener. In affective meaning, language is used to express personal feelings or attitude to the listener or to the subject matter of his</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">discourse. Expressive function can be used to express its originator’s feeling and attitudes, swear words and exclamations are the most obvious instances of this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Ask the Master”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The affective meaning of this sentence is to persuade the readers to ask the company about the product and is intended to introduce the readers about the product. This sentence reflects the affective meaning because it explains the personal feelings of the readers. Expression function is used in this sentence to express its originator’s feeling and attitudes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NIKE advertisement 2</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conceptual meaning is also called logical or cognitive meaning. Conceptual Meanings are the essential or core meaning while other six types are the peripheral. Conceptual meaning helps us distinguish one meaning from the meaning of other sentences. Thus, conceptual meaning is an essential part of language. A language essentially depends on conceptual meaning for communication. The conceptual meaning is the base for all the other types of meaning. Informational Function tends to be the most important one, which conveys the information from speaker/writer to listener/reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Ruffles? No thanks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I break rules. I prefer it modern.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dare to dance by NIKE”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conceptual meanings of these sentences are intended to change the people’s old style into a more modern and more confident with the NIKE shoes. The conceptual meanings of these sentences are also explained by comparing the old style with the modern style. Nowadays, many people prefer and feel confident with a more modern style because, it looks cool and is made of better materials and qualities. It is also designed specifically for Nike shoes to look cooler and comfortable in use by all people in this modern era. Informational function is used in this sentence to convey the information from speaker/writer to listener/reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Allows me to custom design my shoes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">So I can dance with my own style”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Affective meaning refers to emotive association or effects of words evoked by the reader to listener. It is what is conveyed about the personal feelings or attitude towards the listener. In affective meaning, language is used to express personal feelings or attitude to the listener or to the subject matter of his discourse. Expressive function it can be used to express its originator’s feeling and attitudes, swear words and exclamations are the most obvious instances of this. For this function, affective meaning is clearly important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The affective meanings of these sentences are about the creator of the ad was bored with the old style and also like to have his own style that is more modern because, he considers shoes do not have good quality and would like to have or modify the more modern shoes in this era and also want to look more confident with the NIKE shoes. Expressive function is used in this sentence to express its originator’s feeling and attitudes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conceptual meaning is used to give information of the message in order to make the reader catch the message of the advertisement. Informational Function tends to be the most important one, which conveys the information from speaker/writer to listener/reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is the description what the advertisement is all about and people can assume the meaning of these NIKE advertisements. In affective meaning, language in NIKE is used to express personal feelings of the advertisement or attitude to the listener or to the subject matter of his discourse. Expressive function is used here to express its originator’s feeling and attitudes, swear words</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and exclamations are the most obvious instances of this. The viewers can easily</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">understand the function and meaning of the movement, place, physic and etc. Model in NIKE Advertisement is used for delivering the verbal and visual signs to make people interested to the product also there is hidden message behind it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">About NIKE: </span><a href="http://nikeinc.com/pages/about-nike-inc"><span class="font1">http://nikeinc.com/pages/about-nike-inc</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chandler, Daniel. 2013. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics for Beginners</span><span class="font1">. Available at:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&lt;</span><a href="http://users.aber.ac.uk/dgc/Documents/S4B/sem02.html"><span class="font0">http://users.aber.ac.uk/dgc/Documents/S4B/sem02.html</span></a><span class="font0">&gt;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chapman, Cameron. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Color Theory for Designers, Part 1: The Meaning of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Color.</span><span class="font1"> Available in </span><a href="http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/01/28/color-theory-for-designers"><span class="font1">http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/01/28/color-theory-for-designers</span></a><span class="font1"> -part-1-the-meaning-of-color/</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer, Gillian. 1982. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font1">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Evrard, Y Pras, B and Roux. E. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Market, Etudes etrecherches en marketing, 3ème edition</span><span class="font1">. Dunod, Paris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gemitri, Ni Kadek. (2012). Verbal and Visual signs of Food Advertisements in Jakarta Java Kini and The Beat Magazines. Udayana University. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Helme-Guizon, A. 1995.Imageriementaleet communication persuasive: un état de l'art, Actes du 11 èmeCongrès de l'AssociationFrançaise du Marketing.Reims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Goeffrey.1974.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning.</span><span class="font1"> Hannondsworth, Middlesex. England: Pinguin Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McKeown , Ruth. 1998. Le Parfum de Washing Up A Semiotic Analysis of Two Ads for Persil Liquid. aber.ac.uk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaning of colours: </span><a href="http://www.sibagraphics.com/colour.php"><span class="font1">http://www.sibagraphics.com/colour.php</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moriarty, Sandra. 1995. Visual Communication Division of AEJMC. Washington DC. Available at: </span><a href="http://spot.colorado.edu/~moriarts/vissemiotics.html"><span class="font0">http://spot.colorado.edu/~moriarts/vissemiotics.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nabil, Mzoughi. 2011. Tunisia Vol. 2 No. 9. University of Sousse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NikeAds: </span><a href="http://www.behance.net"><span class="font0">www.behance.net</span></a><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font1">and </span><a href="http://innakristiannepalacios.files.wordpress.com"><span class="font1">http://innakristiannepalacios.files.wordpress.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oktayana, I Wayan. 2010. The Analysis of Verbal and Visual Aspect in Watch Advertisements. Udayana University. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Purwanto, Wayan Ari. 2009. The Analysis of Verbal and Visual signs in Advertisement Mike’s Famous in Cycle World Magazine. Udayana University. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Savitri, Yuni. 2007. Analysis of Visual and Verbal signs in Harley-Davidson’s Motorcycles Advertisement in Hot Bike Magazine. Udayana University. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shakuntala, Ida AyuTira. 2011. Visual and Verbal sign of five Australian cartoons on It’s All Happening book. Udayana University. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Webster, Merriam. 2014. Merriam Webster Online Dictionary. Merriam-</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Webster.com</span></p>