---
layout: full_article
title: "SHAPE OF FEMININITY IN THE TEXT OF GEGURITAN (PHILOSOPICAL VERSE) IN BALI: ANALYSIS OF FEMINISM"
author: "Ni Nyoman Karmini, Nyoman Kutha Ratna, I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, I Nyoman Suarka"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-3533 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-3533"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-3533"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SHAPE OF FEMININITY IN THE TEXT OF </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">GEGURITAN</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> (PHILOSOPICAL VERSE) IN BALI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF FEMINISM</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ni Nyoman Karmini<sup>1*</sup>, Nyoman Kutha Ratna<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Weda Kusuma<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Suarka<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduated Study, Udayana University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>2</sup>Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:linguistika_unud@yahoo.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">linguistika_unud@yahoo.com</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The object of this study is Balinese traditional literature which is the form of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan </span><span class="font0">(philosophical verse). The reason why such texts are used as the object of the study is that they contain very complex and interesting narrations about feminism. The objectives of this study are to find out the formal and narrative structure of the texts and to describe the shape of femininity in the texts and its relevance to the lives of Balinese women who are Hindu followers in the society. The objectives are all at once the answers to the problems of the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The theory applied is that of feminism which emphasizes the concept of Radical-Cultural Feminism. This study is a qualitative one of which the data were collected by documentation method, that is, by the techniques of note taking, observation and interview. The data were analyzed using the formal method in accordance with literature studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">There were nine </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> (philosophical verses) which were used as the object of the study. From the formal structural analysis, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pupuh</span><span class="font0"> (strophe) used, its function and literary style could be identified. From the content, religious and amusement functions could be identified. From the narrative structural analysis, it could be identified that the plot was chronological and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sorot balik</span><span class="font0"> (backward directed); the characters and characterization were described to express extraordinary ability, which was based on Hinduism, while the theme was described to express the application of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">panca crada</span><span class="font0"> (the five principles in Hinduism). There were seven findings as far as the analysis of the text is concerned: they are: (1) the educated women could determine their attitudes, make decisions, show prestige and maintain their dignity; (2) the women in the texts had extraordinary power. This means that the women were not weak. Therefore, the stereotype that women were weak was neglected; (3) the educated women who used Hinduism as the reference could become the men’s power; (4) the women who could become the men’s power could be the centre or the subject of the events undergone during their lives; (5) the women’s ability was similar to the men’s and they could show their ability; (6) the shape of femininity in the texts was in accordance with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadhu tatwa</span><span class="font0"> ( a type of philosophy ) and the struggle of Radical Cultural Feminism; (7) it turned out that the theory of feminism could be used for analyzing the traditional literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Key words</span><span class="font0">: shape of femininity, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> (philosophical verse), feminism</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Introduction</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Basically, literary work constitutes one of the human activities which is based on imagination, and is useful to the human life. Literary work </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">presents</span><span class="font0"> the pictures of life and culture in a particular era. The cultural aspects presented in literary work are: religion, language, literature, arts, and the environmental tradition of the literary work created.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The object of this study is the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> (philosophical verse) which were analyzed using the approach of feminism. The reasons on which this study is based are as follows: (1) there are many </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> (philosophical verses) which describe women and their lives. The women are used as the centre and object of narration related to situation, condition and experience. The problems faced by each female character are different, but in the solutions the women’s roles are more dominant; (2) in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> strong and educated women are described to be able to determine attitudes, to make decisions, to do heavy jobs, to be able to maintain their image, to be well tested, to be patient and faithful, which contrasts with the current assumption (stereotype assumption) that women are weak, only busy with household chores, and are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nerimo</span><span class="font0"> (receptive); (3) so far, the contents of many </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> are neglected and are paid less attention to by the public, but the case is that they contain thoughts relevant to the movement of gender equality if observed deeply.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background above, there are four problems in this study; they are: (1) how are the formal and narrative structures of the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study?; (2) what situation and problems are faced by the female characters in the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan </span><span class="font0">used as the object of the study?; (3) what is done to solve the problems faced by the female characters in the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study?; and (4) what is the shape of femininity in the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of study based on the analysis of feminism like and what is its relevance to the lives of Balinese women who are Hindu followers in the society?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the problems above, the specific objectives of this study are : (1) to find out the formal and narrative structures of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study: (2) to find out and present the situation and problems faced by the female characters in the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study; (3) to describe what is done to solve the problems faced by the female characters in the text of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study; (4) to describe the shape of femininity in the texts of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study based on the analysis of feminism and its relevance to the lives of Balinese women who are Hindu followers.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Literature Review, Concepts and Theory</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The works which are concerned with the women in texts which are referred to in this study are written by I Dewa Gede Windhu Sancaya (1966) and Yeni Hayati (2006), and those which are concerned with the women in the real world referred to are written by Ketut Sudhana Astika (2002), Ni Luh Arjani (2002), and Gde Made Swardana (2002).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The concept of the shape of femininity in this study refers to the description of the characters and the personality of the female characters who are able to appreciate their femininity and to carry out their noble responsibilities, and of the grown up women. The concept of Balinese </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> refers to traditional</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Balinese literature, which uses Balinese language and Latin characters as the medium and is in the form of poems as well as narration using </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sekar alit</span><span class="font0">, formed by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pupuh</span><span class="font0"> (strophe) and bound with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">padalingsa</span><span class="font0">. In this study, the concept of text is similar to that of discourse, while the concept of feminism intended in this study refers to the humanity movement which struggles for equality between men and women. Because feminism is not monolithic ideology, this study refers to the concept of Radical-Cultural Feminism commented by Alice Echols and Linda Alcoff.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study is based on the theory of feminism labeled Radical Feminism which states that inequality results from sexism and patriarchal ideology. The women’s fundamental oppression, according to Alison Jaggar and Paula Rothenberg, has something to do with sexism/gender. Criticism has led to the appearance of the thought of feminine essentialism which then results in dissension in Radical Feminism. Such a dissension contributes to the appearance of two ideologies. They are: Radical Libertarian Feminism which suggests androgyny that sexuality is dangerous and that natural reproduction is the main cause of oppression against women. The other one is Radical Cultural Feminism which is commented by Alice Echols and Linda Alcoff. This ideology disagrees with androgyny and therefore, it is replaced by “femininity” (women’s essentials), which considers that sexuality can give great pleasure and that reproduction is the source of the women’s perfect power. Based on the theory of feminism mentioned above, in this study the concept of Radical Feminism Radical is employed as the basic theory. In order to get the description of the shape of femininity in the texts, deconstruction reading whose distinctive feature is neglecting the binary opposition with the concept of difference/differance meaning that difference as well as deferment was applied.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Research Methodology</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This study is a qualitative one. To realize the study, ethic and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">emik</span><span class="font0"> methods were applied. The main data were obtained by documentation method that is, by note taking supported by observation and interview technique. Then, the data were presented using the formal method which is in accordance with literature studies.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Text Determination</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">To find the texts which were used as the object of the study, library research was done at some formal and personal libraries. Based on the catalog available at the library of the Faculty of Letters Udayana Univesity, four texts were found to describe the women’s roles. Such a research was also done at the Bali Cultural Documentation Centre located in Denpasar. From the catalog, 16 texts were dominantly found to describe the women’s roles. Then another research was done at Gedong Kirtya located in Singaraja. Based on the catalog available there, 14 texts were dominantly discovered to describe the women’s roles. A similar research was also carried out at I Wayan Djapa’s personal library, where two texts were dominantly discovered to describe the women’s role. Altogether, there were 36 texts which were dominantly found to describe the women’s roles. However, after they were carefully observed, there were some similar texts kept at the three libraries. Finally, 21 texts were decided to be chosen as the object of the study. They are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">: Geguritan Sawitri, Geguritan Candrawati, Geguritan Cilinaya, Geguritan Diah Arini, Geguritan Luh Lutung, Geguritan Luh Laras, Geguritan Sri Wulan, Geguritan Anggreni, Geguritan Sakuntala, Geguritan Giri Putri, Geguritan Brayut, Geguritan Ni Sumala, Geguritan Ni Sewagati, Geguritan Tunjung Biru, Geguritan Istri Tanjung, Geguritan Ni Nyonya, Geguritan Liku, Geguritan Nilawati, Geguritan Dreman, Geguritan Saci </span><span class="font0">and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Geguritan Damayanti.</span><span class="font0"> Next, the contents of the texts were thoroughly observed. It was found that some texts described love among adolescents, some described animal characters and some others described dissemination of diseases. The last were not used as the object of the study because they were not in accordance with the objectives of the study. Those which were in accordance with the objectives of the study were nine </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> which were directly determined as the object of the study. After they were read and their contents were compared, the texts determined to be researched were: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Geguritan Dreman, Geguritan Diah Sawitri, Geguritan Damayanti, Geguritan Ni Candrawati, Geguritan Brayut, Geguritan Saci, Geguritan Diyah Arini, Geguritan Cilinaya</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Geguritan Dewi Sakuntala.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>The Formal and Narrative Structure of the Texts Determined as the Object of the Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of the formal structure of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan which</span><span class="font0"> were used as the object of the study showed the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pupuh</span><span class="font0"> (strophe) used, its function and its literary style; from the content point of view, those </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> were discovered to function as amusement and to reflect the basic framework of Hinduism and the five basic principles in Hindusim (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Panca crada</span><span class="font0">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of the narrative structure of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">geguritan</span><span class="font0"> used as the object of the study showed that the plot employed can divided into two; they are: chronological and backward directed (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sorot balik</span><span class="font0">). The characters and characterization presented were those who had extraordinary ability in which Hinduism was used as the reference. The theme was found to reflect the application of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">panca crada</span><span class="font0"> (the five basic principles in Hinduism).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>The Women in the Geguritan Used as the Object of the Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the analysis of the texts used as the object of the study, the situation, the problems faced by the women and the solutions to the problems could be identified. The problems faced by the women were different but they were similar in the solutions, that is, they all referred to the five basic principles (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">panca crada</span><span class="font0">) in Hinduism. The shape of femininity in the texts used as the object of the study were still relevant to the lives of Balinese Women nowadays but the form was different due to the difference in situation and era.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Findings</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of the texts used as the object of the study revealed seven findings; they are (1) the educated women could determine their attitude, make decisions, show their prestige and maintain their dignity; (2) the women prescribed in the texts had extraordinary power. This means that the women were not weak. Therefore, the stereotype that women are weak is neglected; (3) the educated women who referred to Hinduism as the reference could become the men’s power; (4) the women as the men’s power could become the centre and subject of the events undergone in their lives; (5) the women’s ability was similar to the men’s and the women could show their ability; (6) the shape of femininity in the texts was in accordance with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wadhu tatwa</span><span class="font0"> as well as the struggle of Radical Cultural Feminism; (7) it turned out that the theory of feminism could be applied in analyzing the traditional literature.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Bleicher, Josef. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutika Kontemporer: Hermeneutika sebagai metode, Filsafat, dan Kritik.</span><span class="font0"> Alih bahasa oleh Ahmad Norma Permata. Yogyakarta: Fajar Pustaka Baru.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Darma Putra, I Nyoman. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wanita Bali Tempo Doeloe: Perspektif Masa Kini</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Yayasan Bali Jani.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kutha Ratna, Nyoman. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode, dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra: dari Strukturalisme hingga Postrukturalisme Perspektif Wacana Naratif.</span><span class="font0"> Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Norris, Christopher. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Membongkar Teori Dekonstruksi Jacques Derrida.</span><span class="font0"> Diterjemahkan dari </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Deconstruction: Teory and Practice</span><span class="font0"> oleh Inyiak Ridwan Muzir. Yogyakarta: Ar-Ruzz.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Palmer, Richard E.. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutika: Teori Baru Mengenai Interpretasi.</span><span class="font0"> Judul Asli: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutics: Interpretation Theory in Schleirmacher, Dilthey, Heidegger, and Gadamer.</span><span class="font0"> Penerjemah Musnur Hery dan Damanhuri Muhammed. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ritzer, George dan Douglas J. Goodman. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Sosiologi Modern.</span><span class="font0"> Edisi Keenam. Terjemahan dari </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Modern Sociological Theory</span><span class="font0"> oleh Alimandan. Jakarta: Prenada Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suryani, Luh Ketut. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perempuan Bali Kini.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: BP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Teeuw, A. 1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Ilmu Sastra.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tong, Rosemarie Putnam. 1998. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Feminist Thought: A More Comprehensive Introduction, Second Edition.</span><span class="font0"> Terjemahan oleh Aquarini Priyatna Prabasmoro. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>