---
layout: full_article
title: "LEXICAL INTERFERENCES IN TRANSLATING DESCRIPTIVE AND NARRATIVE TEXT DONE BY STUDENTS OF SMAN 2 MENGWI"
author: "Fanny Valentine"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LEXICAL INTERFERENCES IN TRANSLATING DESCRIPTIVE AND NARRATIVE TEXT DONE BY STUDENTS OF SMAN 2 MENGWI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FANNY VALENTINE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Terjemahan adalah substitusi kata-kata dari satu bahasa dengan kata-kata dari bahasa lain. Variasi yang ada antara bahasa sumber dan bahasa target membuat proses terjemahan menjadi tantangan tersendiri bagi penerjemah karena setiap bahasa memiliki aturannya sendiri. Begitu pula yang terjadi dalam terjemahan dari bahasa Indonesia ke bahasa inggris, variasi yang ada antara kedua bahasa menyebabkan terjadinya gangguan bahasa. Gangguan dalam terjemahan terjadi karena penerjemah lupa mempertimbangkan konteks dimana sebuah kata atau ekspresi dapat muncul dan memperkirakan arti lain yang mungkin atau lebih alami dipergunakan dalam bahasa target. Tujuan dari studi yang berjudul “Lexical Interferences In Translating Descriptive and Narrative Text Done by Students of Sman 2 Mengwi” ini adalah untuk menganalisis gangguan leksikaldalam terjemahan dan untuk mengetahui faktor-faktor yang menyebabkan terjadinya gangguan leksikal tersebut. Oleh karena itu selain teori tentang gangguan leksikal, teori yang membahas tentang faktor-faktor penyebab terjadinya gangguan leksikal tersebut juga disertakan untuk mencari tahu faktor yang mungkin mempengaruhi terjadinya gangguan leksikal tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: terjemahan, gangguan leksikal, faktor</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">English as one of the languages is mostly learned by people because English is known as the language of the world (Universal language). In learning English, the non-English native will find some difficulties. One of them is the difficulty in translation. Translation becomes a problem for a non-English native because every language has its own rule. The variation between source language and target</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">language makes the process of translating becomes a real challenge. The Indonesian people who get used to their mother tongue will also meet difficulty when doing translation. Most translations are, in some way, influenced by the language of the original text from which they are translated. The amount of interference depends on the proficiency of a translator; therefore, in translation done by students, interference is likely to occur with greater frequency.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on background above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the classifications of lexical interferences that occur in the students’ translation?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the factors that participate in the occurrence of lexical interference in the students’ translation?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are focused on:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the lexical interferences which occur in the translation done by senior high school students and describe the classifications.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the factors which participate in the occurrence of lexical interferences in the students’ translation.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The people who did the translation were senior high school students in English learning stage, which in this scope, have been chosen to be represented by the students of SMA Negeri 2 Mengwi. They were the second and the third grades of senior high school students. The decision for choosing these grades of students was based on the consideration that in this stage of learning, all of the students already got English lesson. The samples were then selected. The samples taken to involve in this study consisted of 2 kinds of texts, descriptive and narrative, which were translated by 7 students of the third grade and 9 students of second grade.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therefore, the total of students were 16 students. The descriptive text was articles entitled ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahaya Merokok</span><span class="font2">’ and ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Coklat</span><span class="font2">’ and the narrative text was folktales entitled ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Timun Mas</span><span class="font2">’ and ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lutung Kasarung</span><span class="font2">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method applied in collecting data in this study was field research. Field research is the collection of raw data in natural setting. Field research involves the collection of new information. This was collected through translating texts that were made out for a purpose. First, the students were given a task to write the translation based on the texts given to them. Then the students wrote the translation of the texts by themselves. The students were also given enough time to write the translation. This time hopefully could give opportunity to the students to choose suitable words and arrange it grammatically. Then the data were collected. The students were allowed to use dictionary but they were prohibited to use online translator such as google translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed by using qualitative method. Qualitative method is method that does not involve measurement and statistics. The qualitative method provides the result of study descriptively by arranging explanation through words and sentences. This study was conducted to find out the factors that participate in the occurrence of interference in the students’ translation and analyze those interferences. Then the data were classified in order to find out the kinds of interferences and the reason why the interferences occur. The theory which was used to find out the factors of interference is based on Weinrich (1968), and the theory which was used to analyze the classification of interference is Thorovsky’s theory (2009).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Lexical Interference in the Translation done by students of SMAN 2 Mengwi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Interferences</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Surface lexical interference (false friend)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Thorovsky, false friend is interference that occurs because a word has similar form in the two languages (source language and target language) but their meaning is not always the same, in other words, a word cannot be translated by sound. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mengandung </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">anti-depresi</span><span class="font2"> translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Contain </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">anti-depression </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Depresi</span><span class="font2"> was translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">depression</span><span class="font2"> by the translator. Because of the sound is quite similar, the translator chose </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">depression</span><span class="font2"> as the translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">depresi</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Depresi </span><span class="font2">in this example is combined with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">anti</span><span class="font2"> and it makes a new meaning. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anti-depresi </span><span class="font2">means a type of medication used to treat depression or prevent it from recurring. In English, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">anti-depresi</span><span class="font2"> had </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">anti-depressant</span><span class="font2"> as its equivalent translation. Therefore, the suggested translation: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Contain anti-depressant.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semantic interference</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Semantic interference occurs because translator relies on one of the first meaning from a dictionary or on their own current knowledge. In this kind of interference, translators use the meaning they know without considering the context of the word. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Raksasa mendengar </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">doa </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mereka…</span><span class="font2">translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A giant heard their </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pray</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">… </span><span class="font2">Translator chose the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pray</span><span class="font2"> as the translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doa</span><span class="font2">. It could be correct if </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doa </span><span class="font2">in the sentence is a verb. In this sentence, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doa</span><span class="font2"> refers to a noun. Therefore, the suggested translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">doa</span><span class="font2"> is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">prayer.</span><span class="font2"> The suggested translation: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The giant heard their prayer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idiomatic interference</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Idiomatic translation is incorrect translation of idioms. Example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Purbararang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tidak mau kehilangan muka</span><span class="font2"> translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Purbararang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">won’t to lost her face</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The translator translated idiom </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tidak mau kehilangan muka</span><span class="font2"> literally into English. This idiom means that Purbararang doesn’t want to be shame or less respected or looks stupid because of something she has done. Therefore, the suggested translation of this idiom is: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Purbararang didn’t want to be ashamed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interference in Collocation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Interference in collocation is interference that occurs because multiword expressions which have single-word equivalent in target language translated literally by the translator. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cokelat mengandung zat </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">yang mampu memperlambat penuaan</span><span class="font2"> translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chocolate contents something </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">which can lating the old</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yang mampu memperlambat penuaan</span><span class="font2"> is translated literally by the translator into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">which can lating the old</span><span class="font2">. This translation is not correct because there is no word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lating</span><span class="font2"> and also the translation sound unnatural in target language because the translator translated it based on the source language arrangement. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Yang mampu memperlambat penuaan</span><span class="font2"> are words that have function to explain </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">zat</span><span class="font2"> or in simple word, those words stand as an adjective. The suggested translation of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yang mampu memperlambat penuaan</span><span class="font2"> is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">anti-aging</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anti aging</span><span class="font2"> means designed to prevent the appearance of getting older. The suggested transation : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chocolate contains anti-aging substance</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural interference</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Cultural interference occurs because the translator is unable to deal with the cultural difference between the source language and the target language culture. Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Timun Mas</span><span class="font2"> translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Golden Cucumber</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Timun Mas</span><span class="font2"> is the name of a character in Indonesian folktale. It means that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Timun Mas</span><span class="font2"> in here is a cultural icon that does not have equivalent in English as target language. The words </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Timun Mas</span><span class="font2"> should not be translated but should be borrowed into English because there is no direct equivalent in the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Factors of Interference</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to Weinrich, there are many factors that contribute to interference. The first is because of the speaker’s bilingualism background. It occurs because the translator is influenced by both of the source and the target language. In the translation, the translators used their mother language and applied it to the translation into target language. Besides, this factor also occurs when the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">translators translate words by its sound, they tend to use the words without considering that the meaning is not always the same and depends on the context of the sentence in source language and the spelling might be different. This factor also makes the translator unable to deal with the cultural difference between the source language and the target language culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second factor is disloyalty to target language. This factor leads to disobedience to target language structure. The translator disobeyed the target language structure. They translated the sentences by following the source language structure or in other words, they did literal translation and it makes the translation sound unnatural and clumsy in target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The third factor is the limited vocabulary of target language mastered by the translator. In order to be able to make a communicative translation, vocabulary takes a big role. The translation done by the translators shows that they have limited vocabulary and they tend to use the first meaning from a dictionary or on their own current knowledge without considering any other possibility.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Semantic interference is the interference which occurs with great frequency and there are only few examples of false friend, idiomatic interference, interference in collocation, and cultural interference. The factors that contribute to interference in the data are the speaker’s bilingualism background, disloyalty to target language, and the limited vocabulary of target language mastered by a learner. The speaker’s bilingualism background causes surface lexical interference and cultural interference. Disloyalty to target language causes literal translation and idiomatic interference. Limited vocabulary of target language mastered by a learner causes semantic interference and interference in collocation. The most interference in the data was caused by limited vocabulary of the target language mastered by the translators.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Echols and Shadily. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An English-Indonesian Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Echols and Shadily. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Indonesian-English Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thorovský, Martin. 2009. Lexical Linguistic Interference in Translations of Science-Fiction Literature from English into Czech. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ostrava Journal of English Philology</span><span class="font2">, vol. 1: 86–98</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Weinrich, Uriel. 1968. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language in Contact.</span><span class="font2"> Mouton: The Hauge-Paris</span></p>