---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Method Of Phrasal Verb In Novel Eat Pray Love By Elizabeth Gilbert"
author: "I Made Krisna Adi Candra"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-23627 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-23627"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-23627"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vol. 23. No. 45</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Method Of Phrasal Verb In Novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> By Elizabeth Gilbert</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>I Made Krisna Adi Candra</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">email: </span><a href="mailto:chandra_wier@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">chandra_wier@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sekolah Tinggi Pariwisata Bali Internasional Jalan Padang Tawang 26B, Canggu, Kuta Utara</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font3">—The aim of this research is to investigate the translation of phrasal verb by applying the translation theory proposed by Newmark. The data were taken from a novel entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3"> and its translation entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Makan Doa Cinta</span><span class="font3"> written by Elizabeth Gilbert.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this research are phrasal verbs in Source Language and its translation in Target Language which is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font3">. The data in this article were collected using documentation method followed by note taking. Then, the data were analyzed descriptively using the exponential mapping adopted from Natural Semantic Metalanguage theory and 64 semantic primes proposed by Wierzbicka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The result shows that the method of translation used by the translator was the communicative translation method with a percentage of 98, 33%, and 1, 66% was left untranslated. This supports that no phrasal verb in Source Language translated into phrasal verb in target language; moreover, the aesthetic and emotional elements of Source Language were omitted. Based on the analysis done by using Natural Semantic Metalanguage theory, out of 60 phrasal verbs in Source Language, 59 were translated into Target Language and one was omitted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">—</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">phrasal verb, method of translation, natural semantic metalanguage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font3">—Tujuan dari riset ini adalah untuk menginvestigasi penerjemahan frasa verba dengan menggunakan teori penerjemahan yang di gagas oleh Newmark. Data diambil dari novel berjudul </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3"> yang ditulis oleh Elizabeth Gilbert dan terjemahan bahasa Indonesianya yang berjudul </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Makan Doa Cinta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data dalam penelitian ini adalah </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">phrasal verb</span><span class="font3"> dalam bahasa sumber dan terjemahannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Pengumpulan data dalam artikel ini menggunakan metode dokumentasi yang disertai dengan teknik catat. Data yang terkumpul lalu dianalisis secara deskriptif dengan menggunakan pemetaan eksponen makna berdasarkan teori Metabahasa Semantik Alamiah serta 64 semantik primitif yang digagas oleh Wierzbicka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa metode yang digunakan oleh penerjemah adalah </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">communicative translation method</span><span class="font3"> dengan persentase sebesar 98,33 %</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font3">sedangkan 1,66 % tidak diterjemahkan. Hal ini menunjukan bahwa tidak ditemukannya frasa verba dalam bahasa sumber yang diterjemahkan dalam bentuk frasa verba pada bahasa target dan dihilangkannya nilai estetika serta emosi dari bahasa sumber. Berdasarkan analisis dengan menggunakan teori Metabahasa Semantik Alamiah pada 60 buah frasa verba yang ditemukan, 59 buah frasa verba dari bahasa sumber diterjemahkan kedalam bahasa target dan satu dihilangkan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font3">—</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">phrasal verb, metode penerjemahan, metabahasa semantik alamiah.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Translation is the combination of skill, art and science. Therefore, those capabilities must be gained in producing a better translation (Nida 1964). Since a translator may use some shifts in translating a text as long as the message of Target Language (TL) is the closest equivalent to source language (SL), it is common that some chances and variations happen in translation. Catford (1980) stated that translation is a</span><span class="font2">n op</span><span class="font3">eration performed on languages: a process of substituting a text in one language for a text. In addition , Newmark (1988) stated that translation is the super ordinate term for converting the meaning of any utterance of any source language to the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Then, based on the Merriam Webster Dictionary (2012), to translate is to change a text from one state or form into another, or to turn a text into one’s own or another language. Moreover, Larson (1984) also stated that translations fall on a continuum from very literal to literal, to modified literal, to near idiomatic, to idiomatic, and moved on to unduly free. It is all done to achieve the goal of a good translator which is to translate idiomatically, by making adjustments in forms. In other words, the translator’s goal should reproduce a text in the target language which delivers the same message as the source language using the natural grammatical and lexical choices of the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Furthermore, in achieving the result needed in translation, Nida in Hatim and Mason (1990) proposed four basic requirements of translation, such as, 1.) Making sense; 2.) Conveying the spirit and manner of the original; 3.) Having a natural and easy form of expression; 4.) Reproducing a similar response. Apart from that, Munday (2001) stated that translation is the process of changing an original written text (the source text or ST) in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">original verbal language ( the source language or SL) into a written text (the target text or TT) in different verbal language (the target language or TL).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In line with this, Labov (1973) states that,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“If linguistics can be said to be any one thing it is the study of categories: that is, the study of how language translates meaning into sound through the categorization of reality into discrete units and sets of units”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It can be concluded that translation is concerned with the transference of meaning from one language to another. In order to do this, the first thing needs to be discovered is the meaning in source language (TL). Then, it is continued by discovering meaning in target language (TL). Finally, it is matched to find the equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Grice (1957), meaning is primarily based on an explication of what he refers to as the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">speaker’s meaning,</span><span class="font3"> i.e., what a speaker means by uttering a sentence or, on a more general level, by carrying out an act with a communication intention. This approach is best treated as encompassing two parts: the theory of the speaker’s meaning or communicative acted on one hand and that of regular meaning, conventional meaning or linguistic meaning on the other hand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, Goddard (2011) stated that meaning is a natural or innate property of human mind activated by experience but not wholly and solely derived from it. Meaning is also the bridge between language and cognition, and between language and culture. Linguistic analysis such as syntax, morphology, semantics, and pragmatics, therefore, makes little sense (Goddard in Heine and Narrog 2010). In this case, semantic analysis was applied to find the meaning, that is, Natural Semantic Analysis (NSM) approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The NSM approach proposed by Anna Wierzbicka (1972) is claimed to be the most well-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">developed, comprehensive and practical approach to cross-linguistic and cross-cultural semantics on the contemporary scene. This theory is believed as one of the world's leading theories of language and meaning. Goddard (1998) also stated that the NSM system is one of the most comprehensive and widely applied approaches to descriptive semantics in modern linguistics. The NSM approach is based on evidence, which is a small core of basic, universal meaning, known as semantic primes expressed by words or other linguistic expressions in all languages. This common core of meaning is used as a tool for linguistic and cultural analysis to explain the meaning of complex and culturespecific words and grammatical constructions (using semantic explications), and to articulate culture-specific values and attitudes (using cultural scripts). The theory also provides a semantic foundation for universal grammar and for linguistic typology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In addition , the NSM starts with the premise that semantic analysis is conducted in natural language, rather than in terms of technical formalisms (abstract features, logical symbols, etc.), because technical formalisms are not clear until and unless they are explained in ordinary language. The second premise is that the full meaning of any semantically complex expression is stated in terms of a reductive paraphrase in ordinary language, i.e. an equivalent expression composed exclusively of simpler meanings than the original. From these premises it can be stated that every language has an irreducible semantic core consisting of a minilexicon of indefinable expressions (semantic primitives) and a minisyntax governing how they can be combined. Such a system of primitive meanings and grammar is termed as ‘natural semantic metalanguage’. The third assumption, supported by the available evidence, is that the NSM of all human languages are essentially isomorphic, i.e. that all languages possess concrete linguistic exponents (words, bound morphemes, or phrases) of the same set of semantic primes, and these exponents share a common set of combinatorial properties (Goddard and Wierzbicka Eds 1994).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Furthermore, it is said that, on the NSM approach, the meaning of a semantically complex expression (be it a word or a grammatical construction) is described by means of an explanatory reductive paraphrase (an ‘explication’) framed entirely within the semantic metalanguage. By relying on a specified, minimal metalanguage, the approach aims to maximize explicitness, clarity, and translatability. The NSM primes are stabilized as a list of irreducible meanings, coded here as English words with specific senses. These primes are hypothesized to be language universals, with most of them having been tested across a wide variety of languages without encountering disconfirmation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is very important to realize that some exponents in the following list have meanings in English that are not shared with other languages, but when used as an exponent in the NSM, we are only concerned with the meanings that are universal. Moreover, there are sixty four sets of universal human concepts proposed by Wierzbicka (2010), </span><span class="font2">they were,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substantives : I, YOU, SOMEONE, PEOPLE/PERSON, SOMETHING/THING, BODY</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Determiners : &nbsp;THIS, THE SAME,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">OTHER/ELSE</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Quantifiers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: ONE, TWO, SOME, ALL,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">MANY/MUCH, LITTLE/FEW</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mental predicates : THINK, KNOW, WANT, FEEL, SEE, HEAR</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. Speech : SAY, WORD, TRUE</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. Actions, events and movement : &nbsp;DO,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">HAPPEN, MOVE, TOUCH</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7. Existence, location, &nbsp;&nbsp;specification &nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">possession: BE (SOMEWHERE),THERE IS, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;HAVE, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(SOMEONE/SOMETHING)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Life and death : LIVE, DIE</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Time : WHEN/TIME, NOW, BEFORE, AFTER, A LONG TIME, A SHORT TIME, FOR SOME TIME, MOMENT</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Space : WHERE/PLACE, HERE, ABOVE.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Evaluators : GOOD, BAD</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptors : BIG, SMALL</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Space : BELOW, FAR, NEAR, SIDE, INSIDE</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Logical&quot; concepts : NOT, MAYBE, CAN, BECAUSE, IF</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intensifier, Augmenter : VERY, MORE</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rational Substantive : KIND OF, PART OF</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Similarity : LIKE/AS/WAY</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is illustrated by the following explication. The Explication shows a semantic description of the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lie </span><span class="font2">(Wierzbicka 1990), which, it is argued to be fully compatible with the prototypically effect described by Coleman and Kay (1981). Notice in particular that the final component of this explication is a reference to a social evaluation. From a syntactic point of view, the explication exemplifies the use of certain complement and argument structures, e.g. the ‘addressee’ argument of SAY, the sentential complements of WANT and KNOW.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lied</span><span class="font3"> to Y =</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X said something to person Y</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X knew it was not true</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">X said it because X wanted Y to think it was true people think it is bad if someone does this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this case, part of sentence which needs to be translated is phrasal verb. It is because two-word verb or phrasal verb has a different meaning from the verb that forms it. Hart (2009) divides phrasal verbs into two. Phrasal verbs are either separable or nonseparable. However, there is no rule that differentiate both separable from nonseparable phrasal verbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Separable phrasal verbs are separated by their objects. When the object is a noun, it is optional whether the object is placed between the verb and the particle or after the particle. Examples: 1.) I </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">took </span><span class="font2">my shoes </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">off</span><span class="font2">; 2.) I </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">took off </span><span class="font2">my shoes. Both sentences are correct. However, when a pronoun is used instead of a noun, the pronoun is placed between the verb and the particle. Examples: 1.) I </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">took </span><span class="font2">them </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">off</span><span class="font2">, 2.) I </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">took off </span><span class="font2">them. On the other hand, nonseparable phrasal verbs cannot be separated from their objects. Example: 1.) He </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ran into </span><span class="font2">a tree, 2.) </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:line-through;">He </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:line-through;">ran </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:line-through;">a tree </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:line-through;">into</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In translating phrasal verbs in this study, some translation methods were used. Newmark (1988) mentions the difference between translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">methods and translation procedures. He states that, while translation methods are related to whole texts, translation procedures are used for sentences and the smaller units of language&quot;. He goes on to refer to the following methods of translation:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Word-for-word translation</span><span class="font3">: in which the SL word order is preserved and the words translated singly by their most common meanings, out of context.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal translation</span><span class="font3">: in which the SL grammatical constructions are converted to their nearest TL equivalents, but the lexical words are again translated singly, out of context.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Faithful translation</span><span class="font3">: it attempts to produce the precise contextual meaning of the original within the constraints of the TL grammatical structures.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semantic translation</span><span class="font3">: which differs from 'faithful translation' only in as far as it must take more account of the aesthetic value of the SL text.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Adaptation</span><span class="font3">: which is the freest form of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">translation, and used mainly for plays (comedies) and poetry; the themes, characters, plots are usually preserved, the SL culture is converted to the TL culture and the text is rewritten.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Free translation</span><span class="font3">: it produces the TL text without the style, form, or content of the original.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idiomatic translation</span><span class="font3">: it reproduces the 'message' of the original but tends to distort nuances of meaning by preferring colloquialisms and idioms where these do not exist in the original.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Communicative translation</span><span class="font3">: it attempts to render the exact contextual meaning of the original in such a way that both content and language &nbsp;are readily &nbsp;acceptable &nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">comprehensible to the readership.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, preliminary research was conducted in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3"> novel which was translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Makan Doa Cinta</span><span class="font3">. It was found that the translation of phrasal verb had less accuracy, lost the sense and words of SL. Based on this, it is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">assumed that in dealing with translation complexities, many problems came up in translation; one of them was the translation of phrasal verb. These are the data of English phrasal verb and its translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1 : “to look up” translated into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mencari”</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrasal verb used in the first data is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to look up</span><span class="font3">, if it is translated literally into TL, the meaning will be </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">melihat keatas. Melihat</span><span class="font3"> means to see something using eyes and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keatas</span><span class="font3"> means to a higher place. If it is used in the sentence, the sentence in TL had to be “saya </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">melihat</span><span class="font3"> kata tersebut </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keatas</span><span class="font3"> dalam kamus”. This makes the sentence not understanble in TL. On the other hands, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to look up </span><span class="font3">is better known as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mencari</span><span class="font3"> in TL. However, the sense of SL is omitted in the process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2 : “to get together” was translated into “bertemu”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, in the second data another phrasal verb is introduced. The phrasal verb used in this is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to get together.</span><span class="font3"> If literal translation method was used to translate this phrasal verb, the translation of TL should be </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">untuk dapat bersama. Dapat</span><span class="font3"> in Indonesia means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">getting</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">obtaining </span><span class="font3">something and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bersama</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">together</span><span class="font3">. In TL sentence, the result of the translation is “Kenapa kita tidak </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dapat bersama</span><span class="font3"> saat makan siang suatu hari nanti?” This sentence is not the wrong form of TL and contains meaning, but the meaning is slightly different from that of SL. However, it is acceptable in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The above pre-research shows a glimpse of data found in the study. Datum 3 was taken from the sentence in page 29 of the novel, “I absolutely needed </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to get</span><span class="font3"> myself </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">back</span><span class="font3"> to Indonesia somehow, on my own dime this time” this is translated into “ Saya sangat perlu untuk </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mendapati</span><span class="font3"> diri saya </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kembali</span><span class="font3"> ke Indonesia, kali ini dengan uang saya sendiri”. It was found that the phrasal verb in that sentence is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to get back.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Furthermore, in the SL sentence “I absolutely needed </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">to get</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> myself </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">back</span><span class="font3"> to Indonesia somehow, on my own dime this time”. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kembali </span><span class="font3">means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to return to a place you have been to.</span><span class="font3"> The</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to get back</span><span class="font3"> ‘kembali’ is shown below;</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At that time, someone (X) needs to get herself (X) back to somewhere :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">someone (X) did something (move)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did this to (X)’s place</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did this with something (plane, ship, etc)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) wanted to do this (return)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">because of this, (X) be somewhere (in previous place)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the above preliminary research, it was found that NSM is needed in translation in order to obtain an appropriate translation of SL to TL since the goal of NSM is to avoid common failures of other methods. NSM sees two major obstacles in meaningful semantic analysis; those are circularity and terminological obscurity (Marusch 2008). NSM tries to avoid circularity using a restricted set of sixty-four semantic primitives in the analysis (Wierzbicka 2010); while terminological obscurity deals with semantic primitives in natural language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3"> was chosen because of it contains a lot of emotion and sense in the SL. It contrasts with the translation using common language with less sense and emotion than the original. However, the translation entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Makan Doa Cinta</span><span class="font3"> is acceptable by target reader. These facts need to be discovered.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The research methods in this study focus on several aspects namely: research approach, method and technique of collecting the data, method and technique of analyzing data. The first aspect is the research approach. It gives the general description on how the data in this research are analyzed and categorized.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moreover, method and technique of collecting data is the next aspect in this research. Basically, this aspect provides information needed on the way of collecting the data, including the steps. Data were collected by observing both novels to find the English phrasal verbs and their translation equivalents. Observation is a procedure of collecting data by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">observing the data; in this case, novels were read focusing on the English phrasal verbs and their translation equivalents in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Then, some steps were applied. First, the phrasal verbs in the source text were identified. Identification provided appropriate data to be analyzed in this study. Next, the English phrasal verbs and their translation equivalents were noted down completed with page number and the sentences in which the phrasal verbs can be found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The last aspect is the method and technique of analyzing the data. This aspect gives the description on how the data were analyzed in this present study. The method applied to analyze the data in this study was the qualitative-descriptive method. The descriptive method is aimed at describing the data systematically and factually, namely, characteristics and correlation that occur among phenomena, while the qualitative method is used to describe the data scientifically (Djajasudarma 1993). The data of phrasal verbs and their translation equivalents were put side by side completed with the sentences. Then, the meaning of each phrasal verb and its translation equivalent were configured in the form of paraphrases. All the meaning of phrasal verbs was mapped by adopting the exponential mapping technique. Finally, the meaning of phrasal verbs and their components were explicated using the NSM approach in which the words were broken down into the combinations of semantic primes.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the aim of the study, this unit shows the translation methods used to figure out all of the data in a systematical way; as a result, a clear picture about the translation methods used for phrasal verbs in this translation of English-Indonesian texts was revealed. The translation methods are divided into two main parts based on Newmark (1988); they are the translation methods which emphasize the SL and the translation method which emphasize the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, the translation methods emphasizing the TL are divided into four. They are adaptation, free translation, idiomatic translation, and communicative translation. Moreover, there are translation methods which emphasize the SL. They are adaptation, free translation, idiomatic translation, and communicative translation. In this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">case, the communicative translation was used to translate the phrasal verbs. It can be seen from the explication of phrasal verbs in SL and their translation equivalents.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Data 3.1.</span></h1>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">I </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">walk up</span><span class="font1"> the stairs to my fourth-floor apartment, all alone. (Gilbert 3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Saya </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">menuju</span><span class="font1"> apartemen saya di lantai empat , sendirian. (Nugroho 3)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The communicative translation method was used. It appears that the translation focuses on the meaning, not on the form, in this case, the form of phrasal verb. Therefore, it is not translated into phrasal verb in Indonesia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Walk up,</span><span class="font3"> if seen from the meaning in the dictionary (OALD), it means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to walk or to go on foot toward somebody or something, especially in a confident way.</span><span class="font3"> The process takes a certain period of time to be somewhere. It involves the action of movement. It can be near or far. However, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">up</span><span class="font3"> in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">walk up </span><span class="font3">indicates that the place is in the higher position than where the phrasal verb is spoken. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Walk</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">heading toward particular direction on foot</span><span class="font3">. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">up</span><span class="font3"> indicates that the destination is located in the higher place than previous one. It might be collectively and individually done. The time taken is not definite. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">walk</span><span class="font3"> shows that the speed of the movement is not more than 20 km/h. Therefore, if the distance is long, time and energy needed would be more than going by transportation media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the other hand, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">menuju</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">heading toward a particular direction (KBBI).</span><span class="font3"> It is not clear whether it is done on foot or by a certain transportation vehicle. It shows that we are losing a piece of information whether the action is done on foot or not. The speed might be more than 20 km/h and the distance is limitless. Time and energy could be saved. However, money might be needed to pay for the transportation service or gas. The destination is not located in the higher position than the previous place. This is assumed to be acceptable to the readership of TL, even though, this cannot</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">represent all parts of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">walk up</span><span class="font3"> in SL. Moreover, it will be clear if it is seen from the following explication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">walk up</span><span class="font3"> ‘menuju’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At that time, (X) did something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, something happened to (X)’s place</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did (move) to somewhere (higher)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did this for sometime</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) wanted this to be happened</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">menuju</span><span class="font3"> ‘walk up’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">At that time, (X) did something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this, something happened to (X)’s place</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did (move) to somewhere</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did this for sometime</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) wanted this to be happened</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3.2.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">SL</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">TL</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">But I share it here because something was about to occur on that bathroom floor that would change forever the progression of my life—almost like one of those crazy astronomical super events when a planet </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">flips over</span><span class="font1"> in outer space for no reason.... (Gilbert 5)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Tetapi saya berbagi disini karena sesuatu baru saja akan terjadi di lantai kamar mandi tersebut yang akan merubah hidup saya selamanya—hampir seperti peristiwa yang luar biasa yang berhubungan dengan astronomi ketika sebuah planet </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">terbalik</span><span class="font1"> di ruang angkasa untuk alasan (Nugroho 5)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Flip over</span><span class="font3"> means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">turning onto the other side or upside down (oxford learner dictionary)</span><span class="font3">. It is a kind of movement. It involves an effort to do this. Sometimes, it is good or bad. Only a short time is needed to do this. The phrasal word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flip over</span><span class="font3"> is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">terbalik</span><span class="font3"> by using the communicative translation method. It can be seen from the attempt made to render the exact contextual meaning of the original in such way that both are acceptable to the reader without transferring the senses and emotion. The translator did not use another phrasal verb as the translation product in TL. Moreover, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flips over </span><span class="font3">is commonly used to modify a flying object like aero plane, kite, etc. It is a kind of action. The action is done by something. That kind of action</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">makes the stand to be in an upside-down position. It can be done once or many times. The time needed is very short. In this sentence, the phrasal verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flips over</span><span class="font3"> is used to modify a planet. Meanwhile, almost the entire planets have a ball shape which is assumed that this action will not take an effect on them. This is not appropriate with the meaning shown by the writer, in which the planet </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flips over </span><span class="font3">and create massive mess on the surface.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Terbalik</span><span class="font3"> in TL means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">turning onto the opposite side or upside down</span><span class="font3">. In some occasions, it is done accidentally (KBBI). Moreover, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">terbalik </span><span class="font3">shows that an action could be done by everyone and everything. Nothing indicates that the action is done as fast as aero plane. Moreover, the doer will keep being in this upside-down position for a certain length of time. This is also done mostly on purpose. The translator used this word to tell the readership that the action would change the life of the doer to be something different the previous life. In conclusion, it is assumed that the translator used </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">terbalik</span><span class="font3"> to represent the phrasal verb </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flips over </span><span class="font3">because </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">terbalik</span><span class="font3"> is the closest equivalent</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Even though, it is meant that some senses must be omitted for the sake of readership of TL. It takes a short time. This is a kind of movement which is very fast.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">flip over</span><span class="font3"> ‘terbalik’ is as follows: At that time, (X) did something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this something happened to (X) (X) did this (move upside down) in a short time. (X) maybe did this (move upside down) because (X) wanted it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did this (move upside down) because something (effort)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The explication of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">terbalik</span><span class="font3"> ‘flip over’ is as follows: At that time, (X) did something</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Because of this something happened to (X) (X) did this (move upside down) in a short time. (X) maybe did this (move upside down) because something (effort)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(X) did not wanted this (move upside down)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Finally, it can be concluded that the English Phrasal verbs appear in the total number 60.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">However, the same phrasal verbs are omitted. It can be seen from table 3.1. below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 3.1.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NO</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TRANSLATION METHOD</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NUMBE R</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PERCENTA GE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Word-for-word translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Literal translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Faithful translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Semantic translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Adaptation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Free translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Idiomatic translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Communicative translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">59</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">98,33 %</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">It was counted that 59 were translated into TL using the communicative translation method and 1 was omitted in the target language. The percentages were that 98,33 % was translated using the communicative translation method and 1,66 % was omitted or erased. This shows that the communicative translation method is the method dominantly used in the translation of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis of the data in this study, it was found that the communicative translation method was the translation method dominantly used in the translation of the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eat Pray Love</span><span class="font3">. The percentage of the use of the communicative translation method is 98,33 %, and only 1,66 % was not using it. This communicative translation method focuses on the readership of TL. Therefore, phrasal verbs in SL were not transferred into phrasal verbs in TL. Moreover, the aesthetic and emotional values of SL were omitted in the process of translation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Catford, J.C. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation</span><span class="font2">. An Essay in Applied Linguistic. United Kingdom, Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Coleman, L, &amp;&nbsp;Kay, P. (1981). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Prototype semantics: The English word “lie”</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language.</span><span class="font3"> URL : </span><a href="https://www.academia.edu/1855217/Prototypes_in_Cognitive_"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">https://www.academia.edu/1855217/Prototy</span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://www.academia.edu/1855217/Prototypes_in_Cognitive_"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pes_in_Cognitive_</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> </span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Djajasudarma, Fatimah.1993. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik Ancangan metode penelitian dan kajian</span><span class="font3">. Bandung, PT Aresco.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goddard, C. 2011, Second Edition : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic Analysis. </span><span class="font2">New York, Oxford University Press Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goddard, C. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theoretical Linguistic Journal : Bad Arguments Against Semantic Primitives. </span><span class="font2">Australia, University of New England.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goddard, C. &amp;&nbsp;Wierzbicka, A. (eds.). 1994. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic and Lexical Universals—Theory and Empirical Findings</span><span class="font3">. Amsterdam, John Benjamins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grice, H.P. 1957. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Philosophical Review</span><span class="font3">. United States of America, Duke University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hart, C.W. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Ultimate Book of Phrasal Verb</span><span class="font3">. United States of America, Barron’s Educational Series, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hatim, Basil. &amp;&nbsp;Mason, Ian. 1990. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse and The Translator</span><span class="font3">. United Kingdom, Pearson Education Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Heine, Bernd and Narrog, Heiko. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Analysis.</span><span class="font3"> New York, Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Marusch, Tina .2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Natural Semantic Formalism? A Discussion of the Naturalness in Wierzbicka’s Approach to &nbsp;Lexical &nbsp;Semantic &nbsp;Analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chemnist, Technische Universitaat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Merriam Webster &nbsp;Dictionary, 2012. &nbsp;&nbsp;America,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Encyclopedia Brittanica Company</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Munday, Jeremy. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Translation Studies : &nbsp;Theories and Applications.</span><span class="font2"> New York,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Labov, W. 1973. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The boundaries of words and their meanings</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Washington, Georgetown</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Larson, Mildred L, 1991. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Translation : Theory and Practice, Tension and Interdependence</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">North America, John Benjamin Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter. 1988, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font2">, United Kingdom, Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nida, EA, 1964. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Towards a Science of Translating</span><span class="font2">. Leiden, E.J.Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Newmark, Peter. 1988, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font2">, United Kingdom, Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wierzbicka, Anna. 1972. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic Primitives. </span><span class="font3">Linguistische Forschungen 22. Athenäum , Frankfurt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wierzbicka, Anna. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The set of universal human &nbsp;concepts</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;University of New</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">England.URL:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.une.edu.au/bcss/linguistics/nsm/semantics-in-brief.php"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.une.edu.au/bcss/linguistics/nsm</span></a><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.une.edu.au/bcss/linguistics/nsm/semantics-in-brief.php"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">/semantics-in-brief.php</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">147</span></p>