---
layout: full_article
title: "MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF SLANG WORDS FOUND IN TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY"
author: "I Made Yogi Dwi Wirahadi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.3 Juni 2016: 37-44</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF SLANG WORDS FOUND IN TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Made Yogi Dwi Wirahadi<sup>1</sup>, I Nyoman Sedeng<sup>2</sup>, Yana Qomariana<sup>3 </sup>email: </span><a href="mailto:yogiwirahadi@gmail.com"><span class="font1">yogiwirahadi@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Studi yang berjudul &quot;Morphological Analysis Of Slang Words Used in Terminator 2:Judgment Day” ini difokuskan kepada analisa morfologi terhadap katakata slang yang ditemukan di dialog film Terminator 2:Judgment Day movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam studi ini berupa naskah film Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa data adalah teori morfologi oleh O'Grady dan Guzman (1993). O'Grady dan Guzman menyatakan bahwa ada dua belas formasi pembentukan kata. Studi ini juga menggunakan teori slang oleh Connie (1996) untuk mengklasifikasi slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Temuan dari studi ini menyatakan bahwa setelah data disortir dan dianalisa, ada 3 temuan. Pertama, ada 2 jenis slang ditemukan dalam film Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Ditemukan kata-kata slang dan juga kalimat slang. Kedua, ada beberapa teori morfologi pembentukan kata dari O'Grady dan Guzman yang mempegaruhi slang tersebut. Teori-teori itu adalah blending slang, clipping slang, compound slang, derivation slang, and borrowing slang. Ketiga, ditemukan bahwa beberapa slang memiliki arti literal dan arti non-literal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Slang, Morfologi, Arti</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Films nowadays has transformed into an entertainment, which is loved by all human age. Children and adults, men and women, simply everyone loves it. This is the reason why, films nowadays also include many languages' phenomenon. There are jargon, code switch, colloquial, dialect and slang. One of them, which are very interesting to study, is slang, especially slang in a movie. Moviemakers insert these terms because they wanted to make their movies more attractive, and make them closer to the audiences, which come from many circles. They wanted their film to be closer and much familiar to the audience's social life. This utterance is simply daily spoken language, which is done by the native speaker's user.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Most of languages in the world have their own slang. According to Connie (1996:11), slang words were conducted from a community that had a set of colloquial words and phrases that usually defines a trend, or social identity within a group. Slang itself consists of lexicons of non-standard words and phrases in a given language. Use of these words and phrases is typically associated with the subversion of a standard variety (such as Standard English) and is likely in order to be interpreted by listeners as implying particular attitudes on part of the speakers. In some contexts a speaker's selection of slang words or phrases may convey prestige, indicating group membership or distinguishing group members from those who are not a part of the group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">While, morphology (in this study word formation processes) are the linguistic processes of creating new word or terms. The processes might be from the old words to the new uses without change the meaning or it may create completely new words. Based on Yule (2006: 52-59), there are some ways of creating new words, there are Coinage, Compounding, Clipping, Blending, Borrowing, Back formation, Acronyms, Multiple processes, Affixes (Prefix, Infix, Suffix).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I choose the title &quot;Morphological Analysis of Slang Words in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day Movie&quot; because </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terminator 2: Judgment Day</span><span class="font1"> as it contains many slang words in its characters' dialogue that is very interesting to analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background of the study, the problems can be formulated, including: a.) What slang words are found in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terminator 2: Judgment Day</span><span class="font1"> movie?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">b.) How is word formation in slang words found in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terminator 2: Judgment Day</span><span class="font1"> movie?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the slang words which are found in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terminator 2: Judgment Day.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze word formation in slang words founded in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terminator 2: Judgment Day</span><span class="font1"> movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method used in this study is qualitative method since it involves detail description of specific situation using research tools like interviews, surveys, and observations. However, in this study the writer did not use interviews or surveys. The writer observed data, which come from dialogues in a movie. There are three aspects of the research method. They are data source, data collection and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into three parts; classification of slang, word formation analysis of slangs the meaning of slang words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compounding</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to O’Grady and Guzman (1996:143), one type of morphological process in language is termed compounding. It is defined as combination of some lexical categories such as adjectives, nouns, verbs, or prepositions in purpose of constructing a larger unit of word. Here is one of the compounding words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dickwad</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there are two appearances of &quot;dickwad&quot; words in the phrase &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah, or &quot;later, dickwad.&quot; Or if someone gets upset you say &quot;chill out.&quot; Like that. Or you can do combinations.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">&quot;, </span><span class="font1">&quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Chill out, dickwad.</span><span class="font1">&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on Oxford Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.oxforddictionaries.com"><span class="font1">www.oxforddictionaries.com</span></a><span class="font1">), the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dickwad</span><span class="font1"> is a process of compounding from two words; Dick + Wad which forms into a single word. Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dickwad</span><span class="font1"> is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">compound</span><span class="font1">. Based on Urban Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.urbandictionary"><span class="font1">www.urbandictionary</span></a><span class="font1">. com), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dickwad</span><span class="font1"> means a stupid person. It also means a complete ass.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is all language-borrowed word from other language (Hatch and Brown, 1995:170). The forms of borrowed words are usually adapted to the phonology of the borrowing language. It is easy to see this in the mutation of English words borrowed by other languages. Here is one of the borrowing words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bastard</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there is one appearance of &quot;bastard&quot; in the phrase &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">All you know how to create is death... you fucking bastards</span><span class="font1">.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the Oxford Dictionary (2010:108), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bastard</span><span class="font1"> is originally an Old French word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bastard</span><span class="font1">. Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, bastard is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">borrowing</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bastard</span><span class="font1"> has literal and figurative Meaning. Based on Oxford dictionary (2010:108), the literal meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bastard</span><span class="font1"> is a person whose parents were not married to each other when he or she was born.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">While, the figurative meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bastard</span><span class="font1"> Based on Urban Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com"><span class="font1">www.urbandictionary.com</span></a><span class="font1">) (</span><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com"><span class="font1">www.urbandictionary.com</span></a><span class="font1">) is an unpleasant or despicable person. It is a person of a specified kind: e.g: you lucky bastard! On the other hand, bastard is a difficult or awkward situation or device.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Blending</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Blends are two words in which their non-morphemic components are mixed into one (O’Grady and Guzman, 1996:158). It is taking only the beginning of one word and joining it to the end of the other word (Hatch and Brown, 1995:211). Here is one of the blending words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coulda</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there is one appearance of word &quot;Coulda&quot; in the phrase &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Here. I wish I coulda met my real dad</span><span class="font1">&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on Fun Easy English (</span><a href="http://www.funeasyenglish.com"><span class="font1">www.funeasyenglish.com</span></a><span class="font1">), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Coulda </span><span class="font1">is a blending process from the word could + have which formed into a new word. Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">coulda</span><span class="font1"> is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">blending </span><span class="font1">because it is formed from two words and creates a new utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on Urban Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.urbandictionary"><span class="font1">www.urbandictionary</span></a><span class="font1">. com), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Coulda </span><span class="font1">means that it is of no use to dwell on what should have (shoulda), could have (coulda) or would have (woulda) happened/been done. Said as an attempt to shorten a discussion that focuses on the past, thus providing no solution to an actual problem.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clipping</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Clipping is a process where a polysyllabic word is eliminated its one or more syllable so that it becomes shorter (O’Grady and Guzman, 1996: 157). Allan in his book ‘Linguistics Meaning: Volume 1’ (1986:239) divides three categories of clipping, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Foreclipping, are those with the first part of the original word cut off.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Backclipping, where the tail –end of the original has been shorn off.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fore-back clipping, where the first part and the tail –end of the original has been cut off. This kind of clipping is rarest happened.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Here is one of the clipping words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1. 'em</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there is one appearance of &quot;'em&quot; word in the phrase &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Baby, this thing is going to blow 'em all away. It's a neural-net process --</span><span class="font1">&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on Oxford Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.oxforddictionaries.com"><span class="font1">www.oxforddictionaries.com</span></a><span class="font1">), the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">'em</span><span class="font1"> is the reduction of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">them</span><span class="font1"> into a shorter form. Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">'em</span><span class="font1"> is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">clipping</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on Oxford Dictionary (</span><a href="http://www.oxforddictionaries.com"><span class="font1">www.oxforddictionaries.com</span></a><span class="font1">), the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">'em</span><span class="font1"> means an informal word for them and usually used in particular condition of conversation (usually non-formal).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Derivation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">O’Grady and Guzman (1996:144) state that a process when a word is created where it's meaning and/or its category is different from its base by adding an affix is called derivation. Whereas, Hatch and Brown (1995:268) say that derivation morpheme makes explicit the word class assignment of the word to make it into an adjective, an adverb, or another part of speech. Here is one of the derivation words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Loser</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there is one appearance of &quot;loser&quot; word in the phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Yeah, she's a total loser.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Loser</span><span class="font1"> is an original word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lose</span><span class="font1"> and then added </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">-r</span><span class="font1"> suffix and the base word which is verb (lose) change class into noun (loser). Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">loser</span><span class="font1"> is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">derivation</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Loser</span><span class="font1"> has literal and figurative meaning. The literal meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">loser</span><span class="font1"> based on Oxford Dictionary (2010:882) is a person or thing that loses or has lost.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">loser b</span><span class="font1">ased on Oxford Dictionary (2010:882) is a person who is regularly unsuccessful, especially when you have a low opinion of them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inflection</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is a word formation by adding affixes so that it creates a new form without changing the word class or meaning, there are some kinds of inflection:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plural suffixes /-s/ which are added to noun</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plural suffixes /-en/ which are added to noun</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Past tense morpheme /-ed/ which are addedd to verbs</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Comparative morpheme /-er/ which are added to adjective</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Comparative morpheme /-est/ which are added to adjective</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Present Progressive morpheme /-ing/ which are added to verbs</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Present tense morpheme /-es/-es/ which are added to verbs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Hatch and Brown, 1995:285)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Here is one of the inflection words that were found in the Terminator 2: Judgment Day dialogue script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1. Dicks</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, there are two appearances of &quot;dicks&quot; words in the phrase &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Your foster parents are kinda dicks, right?</span><span class="font1">&quot;, &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Look, Todd and Janelle are dicks but I gotta warn them. Shit! You got a quarter?&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dicks</span><span class="font1"> is a process from an original word Dick and then added -s suffix but it doesn't change the word class. Therefore, based on morphology theory purposed by O'Grady and Guzman, word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dicks</span><span class="font1"> is an </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Inflection</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dicks</span><span class="font1"> has literal and figurative Meaning. The literal meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dicks</span><span class="font1"> Based on Oxford Dictionary (2010:403) is a man's penis (plural).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">While, the figurative meaning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dicks</span><span class="font1"> Based on Oxford Dictionary (2010:403) is a stupid or contemptible person.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After reviewing and explaining some slang relating to the kinds or forms, word formation and the meaning, here comes into last chapter. In this chapter, the conclusions about the study are presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data already analyzed in the previous chapter of this study therefore; there are some conclusions based on the findings and the discussions. Based on the analysis about slang on the “Terminator 2 Judgment Day” movie, there are founds two kinds of slang, they are </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">slang word </span><span class="font1">(howdy, jetline, fuck, fucking, motherfucker, etc.) and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">slang phrase </span><span class="font1">(get your ass, easy money, holy shit, etc.). There are some of O'Grady and Guzman word formations influenced in the study. They are blending slang (ain't, coulda, gimme, etc.), clipping slang ('em, howdy,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">whatcha, whatya, etc.), compound slang (jetline, sunblock, dickwad, dipshit, etc.), derivation slang (fucking, loser, etc.), inflection slang (dicks) and borrowing slang (problemo, fuck, ditch, etc.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are also found that the slang utterances on the movie have a literal and figurative meaning. The data are analyzed using Oxford dictionary and Online Slang Dictionary to find the meaning of the slang utterances.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Eble, Connie C. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Slang &amp;&nbsp;Sociability: In-group Languages among College Students.</span><span class="font1"> Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hatch, Evelyn Marcussen; Brown, Cheryl. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Vocabulary Semantic and Language Education.</span><span class="font1"> UK: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A. S. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary 8<sup>th</sup> Edition.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.oxforddictionaries.com"><span class="font1">http://www.oxforddictionaries.com</span></a><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Online Oxford Dictionary.</span><span class="font1"> Access date: 16 September 2014.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">O’Grady, O. W. and V. P. de Guzman. 1996. Morphology: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Word Structure</span><span class="font1"> in O’Grady, O. W., M. Dobrovolsky and F. Katamba (eds) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Contemporary Linguistics: An Introduction.</span><span class="font1"> UK: Addison Longman Limited.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.funeasyenglish.com"><span class="font1">www.funeasyenglish.com</span></a><span class="font1">. Access date: 10 June 2015.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com"><span class="font1">www.urbandictionary.com</span></a><span class="font1">. Access date: 31 Septermber 2014.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language.</span><span class="font1"> UK: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">44</span></p>