---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS IN LARKIN’S TIES OF LOVE AND HATE"
author: "Ni Made Dwi Enggawati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS IN LARKIN’S </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TIES OF LOVE AND HATE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Made Dwi Enggawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini yang berjudul “Analisis Pada Konflik Di Novel Karya Larkin yang berjudul Ties of Love and Hate bermaksud menganalisis konflik pada tokoh utama dan kedua. Analisis pada permasalahan mencakup konflik dari dalam dan dari luar. Sumber data penelitian in diambil dari novel Ties of Love and Hate (2011). Teori literature yang digunakan untuk menganalisis karakter dan karakterisasi dikemukakan oleh Wellek and Waren dalam buku Sukada (1986) dan Kenney (1966) sedangkan teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisis konflik pada tokoh dikemukan oleh Deetz and Stevenson (1986). Akhir dari penelitian ini menunjukan bahwa Maggie Pierce adalah pemeran utama pada novel. Dia mengalami dua jenis konflik yaitu konflik dari luar dan dalam. Konflik yang dialami Maggie dari luar termasuk konflik yang bersumber dari dirinya sendiri. Konflik dari dalam bersumber dari perbedaan pendapat dan tujuan hidup antara Maggie dengan orang tuanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: konflik, internal, eksternal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature is expression of human being which consists of feeling, ideas, thought, spirit and experience using language as the media. There are two elements in literary works, such as intrinsic and extrinsic elements. The intrinsic element consists of: character, theme, plot, setting and point of view, style, language and unity while the extrinsic element is the background of the work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A conflict is the most important element in the story, it happens because of the differences. According to Kenney (1966:19) conflict may take place within a single man, a conflict between man and nature and also conflict between man and society. This study focuses on conflicts faced by the main and secondary characters. Conflict analysis is chosen because conflict can influence the story very much and it creates high tension in the story and makes the readers more interested in reading the novel. Conflict in literary works is considered very important because it there is no conflict in literary work, it will not be interesting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The story about Maggie Pierce has left her comfortable home and married with her Catholic sweetheart, Paul Mason. Together they set up home in the Falls Road, but Maggie finds it difficult to settle until she finds an ally in the form of Paul’s landlady, Mollie Grahame. The birth of baby Sarah cements the young couple’s happiness, but a second pregnancy brings a double tragedy and soon Maggie finds herself penniless and alone, struggling to survive in a harsh and uncaring world.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Two problems of the present study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of conflicts can be identified in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ties of Love and Hate</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How do the characters manage the conflicts to find the solution?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Related to the problems stated above, this study has two aims of study, those are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the kinds of conflicts in the novel</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ties of Love and Hate.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the way characters manage the conflicts to find the solution.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research method in writing in this paper consists of data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this study were taken from the novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ties of Love and Hate</span><span class="font1">by Larkin (2011). The data related to the object of the study was chosenbecause it can provide much information related to the conflicts on main and secondary characters which are very interesting to be analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In writing this study, the documentation method was used to collect the data. Three techniques in collecting the data are: the first step was the data were collected by reading the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ties of Love and Hate</span><span class="font1">(2011) intensively, repeatedly to get the information, the second step was identifying and selecting the information and the last step was note taking and classifying the conflicts that were found in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data from the novel were collected then analyzed using the qualitative method. The technique of analyzing data can be formulated as follows: the first by identifying and collecting the conflicts that were found in the novel, and then classifying them in accordance with types of conflicts, the last step was analyzing the data based on the theories of conflicts by Deezt and Stevenson in his book</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managing International Communication</span><span class="font1">(1986)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of The Main Character and Her Conflicts</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Main and Secondary Characters in the Novel</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Maggie is considered the main character because she dominantly plays an important role that determines the plot of the story. Ruth Pierce is the secondary character in the novel, because she gives many influences to the main character, Maggie. The second character, while not central, has an important role in influencing the life of the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Maggie and her parents lived in a prosperous family and peacefully. However, the conflict suddenly happened when Maggie suddenly wanted to get married with her boyfriend Paul Mason though Maggie was still twenty one years old.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The internal conflict is also considered part of psychological conflicts. Based on the opinion presented by Kenney (1966:5), internal conflict is a struggle that takes in the character’s mind.Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">She had neglected to tell Paul how much her father disliked Roman Catholics. He would have done all in his power to stop the wedding and he was so strong, so domineering, she was not sure that she would have been able to stand up to him. Now the damage was done and she was Paul’s wife. Surely they would accept him, now that he was her husband?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Larkin, 2011:13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seen from data 2, Maggie had to tell Paul Mason how her father did not like him so much because Paul Mason was a Roman Catholic. Maggie also told Paul Mason that she would not ever be strong to stand up in front of her father because her father did not like the Roman Catholic at all. Maggie was really aware that she had been Paul Mason’s wife then everything was had happened and she had been Paul Mason’s wife and nobody could disturb her marriage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types and Resolution of Internal Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The internal conflicts faced by Maggie included personal conflicts. She was the one who created the internal conflict because she had a very hard choice with her own mind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When Maggie had gone away from her parents’ house, she was aware that she would never get any heritage from her parent’s money even a penny because she had decided to leave her parents’ house and chose her husband Paul Mason. She thought that event though she had been sent away she would be happy with her husband. However, she was wrong and even her life was getting worst when her husband, Paul Mason was dead.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Kenney (1966:5), there are two types of conflict. Those are external and internal conflict. External conflict is a form of fight, argument, or simple opposition in which two sides are present. Conflict is stated this way: man vs. nature, beautiful vs. ugly, good vs. bad. The source of the conflict between Maggie and her parents started when Maggie decided to get married with her boyfriend, Paul Mason, without asking for permission from her parents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘Is anything wrong, Margaret?’ Ruth Pierce asked, worried eyes anxiously scanning her daughter’s strained face. ‘I have something to tell you, Mother.’ To her dismay, her voice came out in a squeak, causing her mother to draw back and blink in surprise. In haste Maggie blurted out. ‘I got married this morning. (Larkin,2011: 12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seen from the data above, it shows that the external conflicts faced by Maggie firstly began when Maggie wanted to tell he mother that she had got married with her husband, Paul Mason.At first Maggie felt doubtful because she was not brave enough to tell her mother what she had done that day,thatshe had married with Paul Mason. However, she finally told her mother what she had done that day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types and Resolution of External Conflicts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict faced by Maggie and her parents here is also called the interpersonal conflicts because the conflicts were caused by different opinions that occurred between Maggie and her parents which involved Maggie as the main character and her father and mother as the second characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data 26</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘If ... you leave this house ... today, Margaret ... don’t ever come back. Do you hear me? Don’t ... ever ... come ... back. And tell that ... that Paul fellow ... he’ll never touch a penny of my money. Do you hear me? Not a penny.’ His wife interrupted him. ‘Clive, please save your strength. You need to rest.’ With a weak gesture of his hand,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">he silenced her and continued, ‘He’ll not want you without money, Margaret. Mark my words, he’ll not want you for long ... and then what will become of you? ’His eyes held hers. ‘If you go, Margaret, I never want to see you again. Never!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Larkin, 2011:19)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seen from data 26 above, it shows that her conflicts were also getting worst because Maggie wanted to leave her parents’ house and stayed with her husband, Paul Mason. When Maggie wanted to go away, her father said to her that once she had gone away from her parents’ house she would not be allowed to come back again to her house. Her father also said that she would never be given any money even though she was in a big problem because Maggie decided to choose her husband,Paul Mason. Then she had to follow her parents’ advice by leaving Paul Mason.The conflict management strategy that was Maggie used in this conflict is avoidance strategy. Conflict avoidance can take place by avoiding the context in which conflict might raise, by giving in to the other in a conflict situation or by agreeing to put off the conflict to another time and place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maggie here chose to leave her parent’s house and stay with her husband, Paul Mason to avoid another conflict raise, because at that time her father was very angry with her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conflicts that happened in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ties of Love and Hate</span><span class="font1">werebased on the role of the main character. Here it could be concluded that Maggie Pierce is the main character in the story. She faces two types of conflicts, the external and the internal conflicts. She is the most important figure in the center of the story because she dominated the whole progress of the story from the beginning to the end.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The source of Maggie’s internal conflicts werethe incompatible roles assumed by her. The internal conflicts of Maggie were included in personal conflicts. Whereas, the sources of external conflict of Maggie and her parents were resulted from their having different opinions and different goals in marrying Paul Mason because he was a Roman Catholic, while Maggie’s parents were Protestant. This conflict could be</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">categorized as the interpersonal conflict.The result of the conflicts on the characters ended with sad ending because the conflicts could not be solved well by both the main and secondary characters.The conflict management strategy that Maggie used in this conflict was avoidance strategy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Standford, Judith. 2006. Responding to Literature: Stories, Poems, PlaysansEssasys. Fifth Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Angandari, P.A. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Conflicts In Grogan’s Marley And Me,</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Diyanni, Robert. 2001. Literature Reading, Fiction, Poetry, and Drama. McGRAW-Hill International Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. How to Analyze Fiction. New York: Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Marks, A and DeChurch A. 2001.Maximizing The Benefits Of Task Conflict: The Role Of Conflict Management. Florida: International University, available on </span><a href="http://www.researchgate.net//"><span class="font1">http://www.researchgate.net//</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Megawati, Novi Lidya. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Conflicts Of The Main Character In Character In Relation To The Development Of Intrinsic Elements In Irene Brand’s Summer’s Promise</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nurgiyanto, Burhan. 2009 dan 2012.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori PengkajianSastra.</span><span class="font1">GadjaMada University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Robbins, Stephen.P.2005.Orgaziontional Behaviour, Eleventh Edition, [Electronic Edition</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Soares, Antonio Constantino. 2013. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis Of Conflict On The Main And Secondary Characters In The Novel The House On Hope Street By Danielle Steel</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek and Waren.1962.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> Great Britain: Penguins Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Widiasih, Ni Wayan Sari. 2013. The Main Characters’ Conflict In Charlotte Bronte”s Jane Eyre, Denpasar: Warmadewa University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Windari, Ni KadekAyu. 2009. Conflict Analysis Of The Main Character In Bronte’s Wuthering Heights, Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>