---
layout: full_article
title: "COMPARISON OF SEXIST LANGUAGE USED IN  THE TWILIGHT SAGA ECLIPSE MOVIE"
author: "Ni Wayan Ayu Santi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">COMPARISON OF SEXIST LANGUAGE USED IN</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TWILIGHT SAGA ECLIPSE MOVIE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Ayu Santi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Non-regular Program English Department Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Comparison of Sexist Language Used in the Twilight Saga Eclipse Movie. Penelitian ini mengacu pada penemuan penggunaan bahasa sexist yang digunakan oleh karakter perempuan and karakter laki-laki baik itu karakter utama maupun karakter pendukung dalam dialog film tersebut. Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode kualitatif. Metode ini merupakan salah satu metode yang mengacu pada pemahaman dan penjelasan fenomena social, berarti data dapat diambil melalui wawancara, percakapan, rekaman, catatan dan lain-lain. Data yang diteliti dimulai dari episode pertama sampai akhir, dimana terdiri dari 18 episode.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ada tiga teori utama yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini, teori pertama ditulis oleh Lakoff (1973), menganalisis karakteristik bahasa perempuan seperti lexical hedges, tag question, precise color terms, empty adjective, intensifier, swear word, super-polite form, rising intonation, hypercorrect grammar dan emphatic stress. Teori kedua ditulis oleh Holmes (1992). Teori ini membahas tentang karakteristik bahasa laki-laki seperti ungrammatical form, multiple negations, pronounced –in form, delete –ed at the end of form in pronunciation, dan impolite forms. Dan teori yang terakhir membahas tentang perbedaan bahasa perempuan dan bahasa laki-laki secara linguistic menggunakan teori yang ditulis oleh Coates (1986). Coates menyebutkan beberapa perbedaan tersebut seperti verbosity, tag question, questions, command and directives dan swearing and taboo language. Di dalam penelitian ini ditemukan karakter perempuan tidak hanya menggunakan karakteristik bahasa mereka namun menggunakan karakteristik bahasa laki-laki, dan sebaliknya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: Sexist Language, Film, Dialog</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sexist language is a language concerned with women and men language. Sex in sexist word refers to sexual distinction. Holmes said the sexist language is a language that expresses both negative and positive stereotypes of women and men. The negative stereotype of women is animal imagery but less than men. The positive stereotype of men is sexual prowess. And food imagery is one of positive stereotypes of women (Holmes, 1992: 336). But Wijayanto said sexist language is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a language that refers to gender and used in linguistic level, for example word, morpheme, phrase or sentence (Jurnal Penelitian Humaniora, 2006:134).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the explanation above, women and men language have characteristic or features to keep their conversation. In fact, conversation has the form of dialogue on theater or film. Film as representative language is used in this study. It is the American romantic fantasy film based on Stephenie Meyer’s 2007 novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2">. The film is distributed by Summit Entertainment in August 2009.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">And the last, this study is concerned with the comparison of women and men language used by women and men characters both main characters and supporting characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie. This analysis is very interesting because it discusses the data clearly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the introduction above, the problems in this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What language features are used by women and men characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the comparison of women and men’s language features in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie like?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is focused on the differences between men and women’s language in dialogue by analyzing words used by female characters and male characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie. Therefore, the aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the features of language used by female and male characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To compare the women and men’s linguistic features as represented in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Twilight Saga Eclipse</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used to analyze the data is as qualitative method. The term qualitative research is a general definition that includes many different methods used in understanding and explaining social phenomena. According to Denzin and Lincoln (1994), qualitative research is a field of inquiry in its own right. It crosscuts disciplines, fields, and subject matters. Some steps in analyzing data presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">First, the data were taken from film which consisted of 18 episodes. In each episode, analysis started on female and male characters. The analysis was based on women and men’s features proposed by Lakoff (1973) and Holmes (1992). Second, analyzed the differences between women and men’s language were analyzed based on theory proposed by Coates (1986). And the last, female and male language features based on the data were compared.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis on Women and Men’s Language Features</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1<sup>st</sup> Episode: Fire or Ice</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This episode talked about the main characters, Edward and Bella. Bella Swan is the girl coming from Phoenix, Arizona and living in Forks with her father, Charlie Swan. She is 18 years old. And she has a boy friend called Edward Cullen. He is the vampire, and 17 years old. This episode tells about Bella’s feeling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dialogue 1:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The dialogue occurred between Bella Swan and Edward Cullen as main characters in early evening after they came back to school at grass land. Edward wanted to ask Bella to get married with him but Bella was unsure.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: “You know, I’ve got an English final. I gotta focus.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">2. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Marry me.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">3. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: “No.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">4. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Marry me.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">5. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Change me.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">6. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Okay I will if you marry me. It's called a compromise.”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">7. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: “It's just called coercion. Marriage is just... It’s a piece of paper.”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">[she goes into his arms and kisses him]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">8. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Where I'm from it's the way one says I love you.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">9. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Well, where I come from, at my age, it’s the way one says, I just got knocked up.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">10. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: “So you're worried about what people will think.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">11. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “You know two out of three marriages end in divorce.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">12. Edward</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “Well, I think you’ll find the vampire / human divorce rate is a little lower. So, marry me.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">13. Bella</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: “I can't. I have to be back at four.”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In sentences (1), (9) and (11), Bella uses lexical hedges </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you know</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well.</span><span class="font2"> She uses them to start the conversation, show her unconfidence for Edward’s proposal and her situation to accept it. Second, Bella uses ungrammatical form in sentence (1), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gotta</span><span class="font2"> means have got to or have got a (Hornby, 2005: 672). She shows her language style in the conversation. And the last, she also uses intensifiers such as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">just</span><span class="font2"> in sentences (7) and (9). They are used to strengthen her feeling, her mind to the addressee (Edward) and don’t want to get situation like her parents; divorced.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile, in sentence (12), the male character; Edward uses women’s language features such as lexical hedges. He uses </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">well</span><span class="font2"> to give other situations around them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis on the Differences between Men and Women’s Language Features</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbosity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There is an age-old belief that women talk too much. The cultural myth of women’s verbosity is nicely caught in this fifteenth-century. Women are described as not liberal in language but ever in secure. Jespersen in Coates (1922: 252) said that rapidity was no proof of intellectual power, and some of the slowest readers were highly distinguished men. In this case, women do not only talk too</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">much but also men in some conversation such as husband-wife conversations, friend’s conversation, and staff meeting and anymore are shown below:</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Dialogue 2:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The dialogue occurred at Rosalie’s room in the evening between Rosalie as the supporting character and Bella as the main character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jasper : “No sign of the intruder. But Victoria continues to make appearances.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rosalie : “Go blather to some one else about the joys of becoming a newborn.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella : “Okay… Rosalie, I don’t understand what I did to make you hate me so much.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rosalie : “Hate… I don’t hate you… I don’t particularly like you, but… Bella, I envy you.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella : “What? That’s ridiculous.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rosalie : “No, it’s not. You have a choice. I didn’t. None of us did. But you do, and you’re choosing wrong. I don’t care how miserable your human life is.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">7.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella : “My life is not miserable. I mean, it’s not perfect. Nobody’s life is perfect.”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rosalie : “Mine was. Absolutely perfect. There were things I still wanted, to be married, with a nice house and a husband to kiss me when he came home, a family of my own. Royce King was the most eligible bachelor in town. I barely knew him. But I was young. I was in love with idea of love. On the last night of my life, I left a friend’s house late. I wasn’t far from home.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rosalie tells her past to Bella and her feeling. She never gets human experiences such as having a daughter and a husband that really love her. It shows that women talk much than men as English proverb, Coates (1986) said many women, many words; many geese, many turds. It occurred if women shared her feeling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In area of women’s language features based on theory proposed by Lakoff (1973) was found women used all their feature except precise color terms that used by women in their conversation. On the other hand, men’s language features proposed by Holmes’s theory (1992) was found men used ungrammatical form or vernacular language and swearing or taboo language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile, on the analysis of differences between women and men linguistic style based on theory proposed by Coates (1986) was found women and men used verbosity, the use of tag questions, questions, command and directive and also used swearing word or taboo language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Finally, the analysis in was found women more polite than men. As far as analyzed, women used men’s language features such as ungrammatical form. Also men used women’s language features such as lexical hedges, intensifier, super polite form and hypercorrect grammar.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Coates, Jennifer. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men, and Language</span><span class="font2">, New York: Longman Group UK Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denzin, N. K. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Discipline and Practise of Qualitative Research</span><span class="font2">. Available from: http: //web.media.mit.edu/2kbreman/mas790/01/Denzin,the disciplineandpracticeofqualitaiveresearch.pdf. Accessed: May 23, 2013. 19.02</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Longman Group UK Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A S. 2010. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary. Seventh Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Page: 1470.New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, Robin. 1973. “Language and Women’s Place”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language in Society</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 2.No. 1. Page: 45-80. Available from:</span><a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/4166707/"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.jstor.org/stable/4166707/</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2"> Accessed: April 15, 2009. 20:06.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wijayanto, Agus and Endang Fauziati. 2006. ”Jurnal Penelitian Humaniora”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sexist Language in LKS Bahasa Inggris for Junior High-School Student in Surakarta</span><span class="font2">. Vol. 7.No. 2. Page: 133-151.</span></p>