---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF COSMETIC PRODUCT ADVERTISEMENTS  IN ENGLISH PRINTED MAGAZINES"
author: "Ni Nyoman Ayu Suryari Karang"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.1 April 2016: 72-79</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF COSMETIC PRODUCT ADVERTISEMENTS IN ENGLISH PRINTED MAGAZINES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Nyoman Ayu Suryari Karang email: </span><a href="mailto:suryarikarang12@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">suryarikarang12@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> English Department Non-Regular Program Faculty Of Letters And Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul “Analisis Iklan Produk Kosmetik dalam Majalah Bahasa Inggris”. Karya sastra ini di analisis berdasarkan tipe makna dan fungsi dalam aspek verbal, serta jenis-jenis majas yang digunakan dalam iklan produk kosmetik. Data dalam penelitian ini di ambil dari lima jenis iklan produk kosmetik yang berbeda dalam majalah Marie Claire dan majalah Glamour. Teori yang di gunakan dalam menganalisa iklan tersebut berdasarkan teori struktur iklan yang di usulkan oleh Leech (1966), teori makna dan fungsi di dalam iklan produk kosmetik yang di usulkan oleh Leech (1974), serta teori jenis-jenis majas di tulis oleh Perrine (2005). Hasil dari analisa menunjukkan bahwa makna konseptual lebih banyak ditemukan dalam iklan produk kosmetik. Jenis makna konseptual mempunyai makna logis dan dapat juga disebut dengan makna denotatif atau kognitif. Jenis-jenis makna yang ditemukan dalam iklan produk kosmetik selain makna konseptual adalah makna konotatif dan makna afektif. Dalam jenis-jenis fungsi, fungsi informasional lebih banyak ditemukan dalam iklan produk kosmetik, karena fungsi tersebut dapat memberikan informasi yang lebih jelas mengenai suatu produk. Jenis-jenis fungsi yang dapat ditemukan di iklan produk kosmetik selain fungsi informasional adalah fungsi direktif dan fungsi ekspresif. Salah satu jenis majas yang banyak ditemukan dalam iklan produk kosmetik adalah hiperbola, sementara itu beberapa jenis majas yang berbeda dapat ditemukan dalam iklan produk kosmetik yaitu personifikasi, simbol dan metonimi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Iklan, Makna dan Fungsi dalam Aspek Verbal, Jenis-jenis Majas</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is a means of communication used by everyone. It consists of both written and spoken forms. Communication is a process in forming, delivering, receiving, and processing messages in one or between two persons or more. In spoken language, communication is found in the form of conversations, dialogues, etc. Meanwhile, in written language, communication is found in brochures, magazines, newspapers, letters, banners, flyers, etc. In communication, language can be used as a media for giving information and promotion, such as in an advertising promotion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Advertisement is a public notice offering or asking for goods, services, etc (Hornby, 1995:18). According to Dyer (1993:2), advertising is an activity of drawing attention to something or informing somebody of something. The aim of the advertisement is to attract the readers' attention to feels about the benefits of the products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Magazine is a type of large thin book with a paper cover, containing stories, essays, pictures, etc and issued usually every week or every month (Hornby. 1995:705). Every person likes buying magazine because there are many advertisements in it, therefore, it attracts people to buy it. In addition, the advertiser should pay more attention to the slogans and the headlines which make people easier to understand and remember the name of the product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study was focused on the meanings and functions of the verbal aspects and also the figures of speech that are mostly used in the five advertisements. Verbal aspects of the advertisement are in the forms of a word, a phrase or a sentence. Moreover, the figures of speech in the advertisement would make the advertisement more attractive and it will influence the readers to buy the products.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two problems formulated in this study based on the background:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings and functions of the verbal aspects in the cosmetic product advertisements?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of the figures of speech are used in the cosmetic product advertisements?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After formulating the problems of the study above, the aims of the research are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the meanings and functions of the verbal aspects in the cosmetic product advertisements.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of the figures of speech used in the cosmetic product advertisements.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data to be analyzed in this study was presented in the form of five printed cosmetics product advertisements for women. The advertisements were taken from the English printed magazines namely Marie Claire magazine and Glamour magazine. The method used in this research was documentation because the data was taken from English printed magazine. The collected data in this research was analyzed by using qualitative method. The structures of text in the advertisements was analyzed based on the concept of advertising proposed by Leech (1966), they were also analyzed based on the meanings and functions of the verbal aspects proposed by Leech (1974). Next, the data were analyzed based on the types of the figures of speech proposed by Perrine (2005)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Cosmetic Product Advertisements in English Printed Magazines 5.1 Advertisement 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This advertisement was taken from Marie Claire magazine. It was published in December 2014. It tells about the teeth whitening product that would make the teeth look white and clean</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbal Aspects</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The advertisement has verbal aspects to introduce a product and be able to attract the readers' attention. It consists of headline, sub headline, body copy, signature line and standing detail.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">WHITENS AS WELL AS PROFESSIONAL TREATMENT FOR A SMILE THAT SHINES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the headline is affective because it reflects the personal feeling of the advertiser to keep the white teeth and cleanliness. Having amazing smile can make someone more confident when communicating with other people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The function of language in the headline is informational because the advertiser wants to introduce the product with attractive words and give more information. This part is located in the bottom of the picture in the advertisement. The advertiser uses uppercase font size to attract the readers' attention.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sub headline</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Crest 3D Whitestrips with Flexfit Technology</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the sub headline is conceptual because the advertiser mentions the name of this product to make the readers remember about the name of the product. This part is printed in normal font size.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The function of language in the sub headline is informational because the advertiser wants to deliver the information about how to obtain white teeth from this product. This product is very important to giving a brighter smile and removing the stains on the teeth because it used high technology such as FlexFit Technology design to help the consumer whiten the teeth and also the form of the product is sheet strips which come off easily and clean.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">They stretch and mold to your teeth and custom fit your smile for professional level results</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the body copy is affective because it reflects the personal feeling of the advertiser. This is one of the best products to help the teeth look good than before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The function of language in the body copy is expressive because the advertiser wants to expresses his/her feeling about the benefits of the product which</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">help to stretch and custom fit to a beautiful smile, molding the teeth with a strong grip and clean removal to make the teeth whiter. These whitening strips are designed to the shape of the teeth and it contains whitening gel to remove the stains. The whitening strips consist of the high qualified materials, and also the product is very comfortable and safe for someone who has a problem with the teeth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signature line</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">life opens up with a white smile</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the slogan of this advertisement is conceptual because the advertiser directly informs the readers to use this adorable product. This part is printed in lowercase font size.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The function of language in the slogan is directive because the advertiser wants to share and influence the readers, that smile is very important thing in life, because it could attract the attention of the other person. When your mouth and teeth keep clean, this situation would make you feel more confident.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">e) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standing details</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">www.3DWhite. com</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the first sentence of standing details is conceptual because the advertiser shows the official website address of the product in the advertisement. Meanwhile, the function of language in this part is informational because the advertiser wants to convey the whole information of the product through the official website address to the readers. This part is located in the bottom of the advertisement, and designed with lowercase font size.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">©Proctor&amp;Gamble, Inc.2014 ORAL-16006</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of meaning in the second sentence of standing details is conceptual because the advertiser mentions the copyright of the manufacture. Meanwhile, the function of language in this part is informational because that indicates the product was produced in 2014 by Proctor&amp;Gamble incorporation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Figures of Speech Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some figures of speech that are used in this advertisement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Here are the explanations of them.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Sentences</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Components</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Figures of Speech</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“They stretch and mold to your teeth and custom fit your smile for professional level results”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Body copy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Personification</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“life opens up with a white smile”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Standing detail</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hyperbole</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Discussion</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“They stretch and mold to your teeth and custom fit your smile for professional level results”</span><span class="font1"> in the body copy is personification, because this style giving the attribute of human beings to animal, an object or a concept. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“they”</span><span class="font1"> refers to the name of the product </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Crest 3D Whitestrips”</span><span class="font1"> which means that the product or object has a major influence and service like human beings to help every customers to get a maximal result on their teeth.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A figure of speech in the sentence of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“life opens up with a white smile”</span><span class="font1"> in the standing detail is hyperbole, because it is an overstatement to exaggerate things. This slogan means that someone who has white and clean teeth without stains will be more confident when they communicating with other people. Meanwhile, a person who does not use this product would not obtain perfect teeth and not get the benefits of the product.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is a means communication used by everyone. It consists of both written and spoken forms. Communication is a process in forming, delivering, receiving, and processing messages in one or between two persons or more. In communication, language can be used as a media for giving information and promotion, such as in an advertising promotion in the magazines. Advertiser uses language quite distinctively to deliver messages of the advertisement and influence the readers to buy the products. It can be seen in the cosmetic product advertisements of which receivers are dominated by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">women who are addicted to the cosmetic products. Here are some points that can be presented as the conclusion of this paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The verbal aspects are presented by a word, a phrase and a sentence. Conceptual meanings are generally found in the cosmetic product advertisements. This is due to the fact that the verbs with the conceptual meanings are logical and sometimes it is called denotative or cognitive. These conceptual meanings can be found in the standing details of the advertisements in which they deliver the information about the name of the products and the official website address. Besides conceptual meanings, there are also other types of meanings found, namely connotative meanings and affective meanings. In terms of the types of function, the informational functions are generally found in the cosmetic product advertisements because they can give more information about the products. In addition to informational functions, there are other types of functions that were found in the cosmetic product advertisements namely directive functions and expressive functions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There were five cosmetic product advertisements which were taken from two magazines namely Marie Claire magazine and Glamour magazine. Every advertisement has different types of the figures of speech to make the readers more interested in the product. The type of the figure of speech mostly found in the cosmetic product advertisements is hyperbole because it is a figure of speech in which statements are exaggerated or extravagant. The advertisers use this type because they want to influence the readers to buy the products through attractive words. Besides, some other types of the figures of speech that were found in the cosmetic product advertisements are personification, symbol, and metonymy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Arp, Thomas R and Johnson, Greg. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perrine's Sound and Sense an Introduction to Poetry.</span><span class="font1"> United States of America: Thomson Wards worth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer, Gillian. 1993. Advertising as Communication. New Fetter Lane, London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leive, Cynthia. 2014. Glamour Magazine: You Can Never Have Two Many Accessories! So Many Bags and Shoes to Obsess Over. New York City: Conde Nast Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 1995. Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1966. English in Advertising a Linguistic Study of Advertising. Great Britain, London: Longman Group Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_________.1974. Semantics. Auckland: Penquin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frans, Jackie. 2014. Marie Claire Magazine: Celebrating Style and Substance. Eveleigh, New South Wales: Pacific Magazines.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">79</span></p>