---
layout: full_article
title: "A CAUSAL CONJUNCTION IN TWAIN’S THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER"
author: "Putu Indri Lestari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.3 Juni 2016: 191-196</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A CAUSAL CONJUNCTION IN TWAIN’S </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Putu Indri Lestari email: </span><a href="mailto:indrylesss@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">indrylesss@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “A Causal Conjunction in Twain’s The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” dilakukan berdasarkan tujuan menemukan dan menganalisis jenis dan fungsi dari karya Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Penelitian ini dilakukan berdasarkan latar belakang bahwa konjungsi merupakan bagian integral dari bahasa Inggris dan digunakan dalam komposisi tulisan untuk menjaga tulisan tetap dalam koherensi, sehingga akan mudah untuk dipahami. Metode penelitian kualitatif digunakan untuk mengkaji Novel Twain Twain The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi sebagai metode pengumpulan,-semua pengumpulan data kemudian dibaca dan ditandai; akhirnya data diidentifikasi, diklasifikasikan, dan dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif. Analisis ini difokuskan pada jenis dan fungsi dari konjungsi kausal dalam karya Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Penemuan menunjukkan bahwa jenis konjungsi kausal paling dominan yang digunakan dalam novel terkait The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1988) adalah sebagai berikut: (1) hubungan kausal, (2) hubungan kausal terbalik, dan (3) hubungan kondisional. Temuan berikutnya adalah fungsi hubungannya kausal yang ditemukan dalam diskusi. Berikut ini adalah fungsi dari hubungannya kausal dalam novel ini: untuk menyatakan hubungan sebab, untuk menyatakan hubungan dari tujuan, dan untuk menyatakan hubungan dari kondisi, masing-masing konjungsi kausal diwakili oleh item penghubung yang paling dominan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci:</span><span class="font1"> Konjungsi, konjungsi kausal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conjunctions are an integral part of the English language. If used properly, the conjunctions can improve almost any type of writing. From poetry to prose, conjunctions help create better sentences. The proper use of conjunctions allows for more natural flow and rhythm in writing composition. From poetry to prose, conjunctions help create better sentences. As a type of prose, novel might also use conjunctions in its content, for instance, the famous novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sawyer</span><span class="font1"> by Mark Twain. Each event in his writing has formed such a unity in coherence that result in a story that is easy to understand. Regarding to the use of conjunction in a writing composition, this study is conducted to reveal the types and functions of conjunctions used in a novel. For the purpose of academic use, a set of principles of cohesion—where conjunctions is as part of the principles—proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976) is used as the base of this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study is conducted on the basis of the following problem formulation:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of causal conjunctions used in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of causal conjunction in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems, there are two goals that are mainly focused as this study is conducted is to investigate the types and function of causal conjunction Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A method is an important aspect in research and scientific writing. It is the way or process of how a researcher approaches the problems to find the answer through the findings, collection, and analyzing of the data. In this study, the research method involves three points of discussion. They are data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study was taken from one source, which is “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">” written by Twain (1988). This novel taken in this study is to be the primary data. The primary data is written data taken from the novel entitled “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Adventure of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">. The selection data of the novel is related to the scope discussion. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">novel is chosen because it consists of many causal conjunctions which obtained in the sentences of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method of collecting data used in this study was documentation. Method of documentation is a particular form of procedure in preserving all the data form observation that was reconstructed from the novel. The techniques used to collect the data were elaborated into three steps: Reading, highlighting, and note taking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the data was analyzed based on Halliday and Hasan’s theory of conjunction in their book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1">. The method that was used in analyzing data was qualitative method. Qualitative refers to the method in which the data was analyzed without any manipulation. The was conducted through the three steps; to classify, choose, and analyze the data based on their types and functions of causal conjunction that were used in the novel</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of Causal Conjunction In Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Adventures Of Tom Sawyer</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter focuses on the discussion about the of conjunction as a part of cohesive relation study. The is based on the concept of conjunction as a part of the theory of cohesion proposed by Halliday and Hasan in cohesion in English (1976). This discussion is conducted to investigate the types and functions of causal conjunction that are used in the novel entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1"> written by Mark Twain.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The types of causal conjunction in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Adventure of Tom Sawyer</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The following discussion mainly states the types of causal conjunction that are represented by its conjunctive items of the causal conjunction found in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Causal Relation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Generally, the causal relation points out the relation between sentences that express what follows. This is the result or consequence of previous relation. The following discussion includes expressions, such as: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thus,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reversed Causal Relation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Reversed Causal Relation consists of two conjunctive items, they are: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">For and because.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conditional Relation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two conditional relations that are found in the novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">If then</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">under the circumstances</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The function of causal conjunction in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Adventure of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To state the relationship of cause</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Causal conjunction is used to state the relationship of cause between clauses. The following are the conjunctive items in the causal conjunction that are used to state the relationship of cause: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Because</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To state the relationship of purpose</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Causal conjunction is used to state the relationship of purpose or the reason for which something is done or created or for which exists. The following are the conjunctive items in the causal conjunction that are used to state the relationship of purpose: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">So that</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">that</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To state the relationship of condition</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In stating relationship of condition, the dependent clause provides the conditions under which the information in the independent clause should be considered.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following are the conjunctive items of causal conjunction used to state the relationship of condition: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">If, then</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">under the circumstance.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The paper entitled “A Causal Conjunction in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”</span><span class="font1"> was conducted based on the goal of finding and analyzing the types and functions of Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">. The study was carried out based on the background that conjunction is an integral part of English language and it is used in a writing composition to keep the writing in coherence, so it would be easy to be understood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Qualitative research method was used to study Twain’s novel Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1">. By employing documentation method as the method of collecting, all data-collection then were read and highlighted; finally the data were identified, classified, and analyzed using the qualitative method. The was focused on the types and function of A causal conjunction in Twain’s </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawye</span><span class="font1">r.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The findings showed that most dominant types of causal conjunction used in the related novel of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</span><span class="font1"> (1988) are as follows: (1) causal relation (general), (2) reversed causal relations (general), and (3) conditional relation. The next finding is the function of causal conjunction found in the discussion. The following are the functions of causal conjunction in this novel: to state the relationship of cause, to state the relationship of purpose, and to state the relationship of condition each of causal conjunction is represented by the most dominant conjunctive items.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Bloor, M. and Bloor, T. 2004; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Functional of English</span><span class="font1">. 2<sup>nd</sup>ed London: Arnold Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DamaArimbawa, Putu. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The of Conjunctions in the Short Story “Connor + Jenny”(undergraduate thesis).</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Letter, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dian Marliana, A.A. IstriAgung. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The of Conjunctions in the Adopted Short Story “Two Gentlemen of Verora”by William Shakespeare (undergraduate thesis)</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;English Department, Faculty of Letter, Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K and Hassan. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1">. New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, Albert Sidney, 2010, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font1">, Oxford University Press, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rosen, Leonard. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Everyday English Handbook</span><span class="font1">. New York: Dell Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sahebkheir, F. and Aidinlou, N.A. 2014. “The Role of Explicit Instruction on Using Conjunctions in Iranian EFL learner’s Written Performance.” </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Languange and Lingsuistic</span><span class="font1">, Vol 2, No 2, 2014, pp. 121-126 Retrieved June 12<sup>th</sup>, 2015. </span><a href="http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/j/ijll"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/j/ijll</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">SolinaYuda, Mahayu. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Function of Conjunction in Children Short Story “The Snow White Pigeon”</span><span class="font1"> (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letter, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stern, George. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Outline of English Grammar with Exercise and Answer Key</span><span class="font1">. Singapore. Learners Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Twain, Mark.1988.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Adventure of Tom Sawyer.</span><span class="font1">Washington: by the Materials Development and Review Branch English Language Programs Division United States Information Agency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">196</span></p>