---
layout: full_article
title: "WORDSWORTH’S TREATMENT OF NATURE IN HIS POEM  “THREE YEARS SHE GREW IN SUN AND SHOWER”"
author: "I Gede Hari Sanjaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.1 April 2016: 17-24</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">WORDSWORTH’S TREATMENT OF NATURE IN HIS POEM “THREE YEARS SHE GREW IN SUN AND SHOWER”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I Gede Hari Sanjaya email: </span><a href="mailto:arickrocknroll@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">arickrocknroll@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Program Studi Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font0">&quot; adalah sebuah puisi yang ditulis pada tahun 1798 oleh penyair Inggris William Wordsworth. Sebagai salah satu dari lima puisi dari serial “Lucy&quot;, yang menceritakan dan menggambarkan hubungan antara Lucy dan alam menggunakan kata-kata kompleks yang berlawanan dan sentimen. Wordsworth menggunakan antitesis dari kata-kata -'sun dan shower ', ' law dan impuls ', 'earth dan langit ', ' kindle atau restrain'- sebagai perangkat untuk membangkitkan kekuatan yang berlawanan yang berada di alam. Ada konflik lebih lanjut dan pertentangan antara alam dan manusia, di mana mereka berupaya untuk memiliki Lucy. Pernikahan dijelaskan antara Lucy dan alam, sementara kekasih manusianya tertinggal untuk berkabung dalam pengetahuan bahwa kematian telah memisahkan diri dari umat manusia, dan dia selamanya sekarang akan bersama dengan alam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Dalam studi ini, karya penyair Inggris William Wordsworth yang berjudul </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font0"> dipilih untuk dianalisis dan penulisan studi ini menggunakan sumber data primer dari syair tersebut di atas dan menggunakan teori sastra yang ditulis oleh Knickerbocker,, K.L. 1963. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature,</span><span class="font0"> dan buku </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font0"> yang ditulis oleh Rene Welek and Austin Waren (1962).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hasil dari penulisan ini menyatakan bahwa adanya hubungan dalam antara puisi William Wordsworth </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font0"> dengan kehidupannya dan ini memiliki elemen-elemen dasar yang berhubungan erat dengan pengalaman hidupnya dan cintanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kata kunci: matahari, alam, kematian,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature refers to something creative, imaginative, and expressive of which the material is language. It is created based on human consciousness and imagination which is translated by the artist into a concrete form. One of the important aspects of literature is its relationship with human life because it expresses and shares human life as well as human experiences</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Poets work with words, while artists work with a variety of media including paint, ink, paper, canvas, clay, and metal. But both poets and artists offer pictures that reflect their responses to images, experiences, people, places, emotions observed, remembered, or imagined (Stamford, 2006 : 1235)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker and Reninger (1955: 309) state that as the first step in understanding a poem, it is very helpful to make a paraphrase of its plain sense. The meaning of each part of the poem helps determine the meaning of the whole poem, and in turn the whole poem helps determine the meaning of each part. According to Wellek and Warren in their book, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1"> (1955: 309), the meaning of poem is seldom stated directly, but is carried or revealed by the element and structure of the work that usually in the form of figurative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, a poem entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font1"> by a popular English poet William Wordsworth is analysed. The poem is one of the best known Lucy poems written by William Wordsworth. The poet in this poem illustrates his belief that Nature is a great teacher. He believes that one can learn one can learn a great lesson if one approaches nature with a pure and humble heart. A deeper understanding about </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font1"> is analysed by studying Wordsworth’s autobiography.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The problems to be discussed are formulated as follows,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What message does Wordsworth want to convey in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the poet’s autobiography help understand the poem?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study has three aims; they are the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The general aim of this writing is to apply theories related to Wordsworth’s poem </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font1"> and the specific aim is to find out what message the poet wants to deliver to the readers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The last is an academic aim that is to apply the theory of literature learned in the English Department and write a scientific article to contribute to this department. Besides, this writing can be used a reference for the student who likes to write about literature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three points in this section: data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analysing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study were taken from Tomas Hardy’s poem entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">After a Journey</span><span class="font1">. The primary data analysed in this writing were taken from William Wordsworth’s entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower</span><span class="font1"> cited in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><a href="http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174828"><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174828</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">)</span><span class="font1"> and the his short biography was taken from </span><a href="http://www.adnax.com/biogs/ww.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.adnax.com/biogs/ww.htm</span></a><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data are the object of the study. The method applied in this study is library research because this method is reliable and relevant to the process of collecting the data. The important one is to get some books in the library and some articles on internet as data sources and references in order to find out more data related to the topic of study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analysing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analysed in accordance with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1"> by Knickerbocker, K.L. 1963 and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1"> by Warren and Wellek. And one more theory to support this study is the Smith’s theory in his book of theory </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry</span><span class="font1">. 1985.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Three years she grew in sun and shower</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Three years she grew in sun and shower,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Then Nature said, &quot;A lovelier flower</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">On earth was never sown;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This Child I to myself will take;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">She shall be mine, and I will make</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A Lady of my own.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;Myself will to my darling be</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Both law and impulse: and with me</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Girl, in rock and plain</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Shall feel an overseeing power</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To kindle or restrain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;She shall be sportive as the fawn</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">That wild with glee across the lawn</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Or up the mountain springs;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And her's shall be the breathing balm,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And her's the silence and the calm</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Of mute insensate things.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;The floating clouds their state shall lend</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To her; for her the willow bend; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;20</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nor shall she fail to see</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Even in the motions of the Storm</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Grace that shall mold the Maiden's form</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">By silent sympathy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;The stars of midnight shall be dear</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To her; and she shall lean her ear</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In many a secret place</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Where rivulets dance their wayward round,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">And beauty born of murmuring sound</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Shall pass into her face. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;30</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">&quot;And vital feelings of delight</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Shall rear her form to stately height,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Her virgin bosom swell;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Such thoughts to Lucy I will give</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">While she and I together live</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Here in this happy dell.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Thus Nature spake---The work was done---</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">How soon my Lucy's race was run!</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">She died, and left to me</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This heath, this calm, and quiet scene; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;40</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The memory of what has been, And never more will be.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">&quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three years she grew in sun and shower&quot;</span><span class="font1"> is a poem composed in 1798 by the English poet William Wordsworth. As one of the five poems that make up the &quot;Lucy series&quot;, the work describes the relationship between Lucy and nature using a complex opposition of words and sentiments. Wordsworth uses antithetical couplings of words —'sun and shower', 'law and impulse' 'earth and heaven', 'kindle or restrain'— as a device to evoke the opposing forces at work in nature. There is further conflict and opposition between nature and mankind, as both attempt to possess Lucy. The marriage described is between Lucy and nature, while her human lover is left to mourn in the knowledge that death has separated her from mankind, and she will forever now be with nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The beginning gives some foreshadowing that Nature also sees the beauty of this child and wants to raise her as its own. But the Mother Nature goes on to describe how the daughter will be led by both impulse and law and that she will experience many different things. Even in places as different as “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rock and plain</span><span class="font1">” or “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">earth and heaven</span><span class="font1">” or “glade and bower” (Line 9-10) she “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">shall feel an overseeing power, to kindle or restrain.</span><span class="font1">” (Line 11-12). It seems that he is encouraging the child to be wild and calm and live life to the fullest, see different things and experience all that she can. He goes on to say that she will be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sportive as the fawn</span><span class="font1">” (Line 13) running around the grass playing and climbing mountains. On the other side of things that “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">she shall be the breathing balm, and hers the silence and the calm, of mute insensate things</span><span class="font1">” (Line 16-18) which means that will have a balance of wild and fun and also being quiet and calm and peaceful. She will be everything and anything that she wants to be and all of the properties and beauty of nature will be hers. She will be free to explore and live and be whatever and whoever she wants to be. The Mother Nature says how the daughter, Lucy, will see grace in everything, she will float through her life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">changing things as she goes. Things will bend to her because of her beauty and how charming and wonderful she is. He talks of how she will know all that there is to know and how there are so many things he wants to teach her and tell her of life. She is so happy about her little girl and living their happy life together. At the end of the poem, however, we find out that the “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">race is run</span><span class="font1">” (Line 38) and that death has taken Lucy. She lives now in Nature and can stay with the Mother Nature in different aspects of the world around her and the memories of the daughter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wordsworth testified his true attitude of Nature. According to him, Nature is a heavenly spirit who has the combined qualities of a mother and a teacher. He observed and drew the picture of how Mother Nature raised Lucy up; moulded and shaped her life till she becomes a fine young beautiful lady. Right from the time she was three years old, Mother Nature proposed to begin Lucy’ s education in her own natural wisdom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the day she was born till the day she was three years old, Lucy grew under the light and the heat of the sun and the showers of the soft summer rain. Then Mother Nature said to her that there was no flower lovelier than Lucy that has ever been sown on earth, here Lucy is compared to a flower because of her beauty and the natural way in which she was bred in. Mother Nature decided to take full charge of Lucy’s life and would educate her according to nature’s own ideal. Nature would be to Lucy a source of inspiration for both law; rules of nature; and impulse; inspiring emotions, and with her Lucy would learn about the secrets of the mountains and plains, the wisdom of heaven and earth, in glade; a clear open space and bower; shady place under trees. She would learn to feel an overseeing power to rouse and control.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lucy would be playful and merry like a young deer with that wild and tameless joy. Lucy would possess that gentle breeze that would act as a soothing and healing balm for her wounds. She would also learn to be silent and calm with the silent inanimate objects of nature. The silent floating clouds that pass by would lend their dignity and grandeur to her. For her the willow trees would bend; refers to the fact that Lucy would learn modesty from the bending branches of the </span><span class="font0">22</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">willow. Even in the strong movement of the storm; which symbolizes power and gracefulness; Lucy would learn to be powerful and graceful like the storm at the same time. Yet in silence, without Lucy being conscious of it, she would ultimately be moulded into a fine young lady.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the process, Lucy would someday display all her true beauty like the stars in the sky on a cloudless midnight. She would be loved and close to them and would listen carefully in many secret places of nature. The secret places where the rivulets dance their wayward round with their streams of clear rushing waters. Their beauty was born with a soft murmuring sound that would beautify her and make her face beautiful. As long as Lucy dwells with Mother Nature in this joyful valley, she would shape Lucy’s thoughts to the height of maturity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">At last Mother Nature spoke and said that the work of educating Lucy was finally done. Lucy’s duration of life was compared to a race which has a beginning and an end. When she died all that she left to the narrator was the heath; barren land, the calm and quiet scene. The memory of what would always be perhaps suggestive to the fact that this work of nature would never be repeated in future.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This poem can be described as a Romantic nature poem because of the close connection was Nature. A key Romantic idea is the way in which nature is something that we can learn from and become united with if we are aware enough of our intimate connection with it. As a child, Lucy, the girl who dies in this poem, has a natural advantage, as Wordsworth believed that children were much more able to respond to the beauty and wisdom of nature and that this became harder as you grew older. Consider the following stanza as an example of the intimate link between Lucy and Nature:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She shall be sportive as the fawn (Line 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">That wild with glee across the lawn</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Or up the mountain springs;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And hers shall be the breathing balm,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And hers the silence and the calm</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Of mute insensate things. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Line 18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What is interesting about this poem is that, although Lucy dies, to Nature, this death is actually cast in a very positive light, as Lucy will gain a closeness with nature and become a part of it in such a strong way that it is almost a positive rather than a negative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nature takes on an interesting role in this poem. She is a beautiful and yet dictates the circumstances of Lucy's death. The poem is a beautiful elegy written to a woman who has died, and whom Wordsworth admired not only for her beauty, but also for her connection to nature, which Wordsworth felt was the highest possible achievement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker,, K.L. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">. USA: Holt, Rinehart, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner, Kathleen. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font1">. Chicago: NTC Publishing Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Smith, Sybille. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry.</span><span class="font1"> Pitman Publishing Ltd : London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith. A. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature; Stories, Poems, Plays, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Essays. Fourth Edition.</span><span class="font1"> New York: The McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Waluyo, Herman J. 2003. Presiasi Puisi. Jakarta : PT. Gramedia Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wordsworth, William. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower </span><span class="font1">(cited in </span><a href="http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174828"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174828</span></a><span class="font1">) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">William Wordsworth’s Short Biography</span><span class="font1"> (taken from </span><a href="http://www.adnax.com/biogs/ww.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.adnax.com/biogs/ww.htm</span></a><span class="font1">.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">24</span></p>