---
layout: full_article
title: "The Used of Online Learning Method in Acquiring Children's English Vocabulary at English Buzz Bali"
author: "Ni Putu Manik Masuci"
categories: pustaka
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-74587 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/id-74587"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-74587"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>PUSTAKA</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark3"></a>JURNAL ILMU-ILMU BUDAYA</span></h2>
<h3><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>VOL. XXI NO. 2 • AGUSTUS 2021</span></h3>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Ludruk Jember: Ruang Kebudayaan Masyarakat Jember dalam Mengekspresikan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kembali Kultur Kemaduraan di Wilayah Perantauan”</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark6"><span class="font2">Mohammad Rizaldy Ramadhan, Egy Fernando, Muhammad Sulton Ridho, Vivia Suaidin &nbsp;97</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Silakramaning “Aguron-Guron”</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Dalam Teks Cerita Bhagawan Dhomya-Adiparwa</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark7"><span class="font2">Drs. I Nyoman Duana Sutika, M.Si 103</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dinamika Pemajemukan Dengan Morfem Unik Dalam Bahasa Bali</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark8"><span class="font2">Ni Made Sri Ramayanti &nbsp;110</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Penggunaan Bahasa Inggris dalam Percakapan Bahasa Indonesia Generasi Muda</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark9"><span class="font2">Anak Agung Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi &nbsp;116</span></a></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark10"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kehidupan Sosial Migran Madura di Desa Kintamani Tahun 1982-2018 </span><span class="font2">Risa Yuliandri &nbsp;122</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Upacara Ngerebong di Pura Agung Petilan Desa Adat Kesiman</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark11"><span class="font2">Ni Made Odi Tresna Oktavianti &nbsp;128</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Pengelolaan Yayasan Albanna sebagai Lembaga Pendidikan Islam</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">di Denpasar Selatan 2007-2019</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark12"><span class="font2">Deanita Salsabila 142</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Psychological Analysis of Emily Grierson in Short Story A Rose for Emily</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">by William Faulkner</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark13"><span class="font2">Gaby Kumala Dewi Santoso, Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih ....149</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Code switching Used by Naila on Her YouTube Channel: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Naila Farhana</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark14"><span class="font2">Kadek Yuda Wardana, Luh Putu Laksminy, Made Detriasmita Saientisna &nbsp;154</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Used of Online Learning Method in Acquiring Children's English Vocabulary</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">at English Buzz Bali</span></p>
<p><a href="#bookmark15"><span class="font2">Ni Putu Manik Masuci &nbsp;162</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pedoman Penulisan Naskah dalam Jurnal Pustaka</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark17"></a>PUSTAKA</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark19"></a>JURNAL ILMU-ILMU BUDAYA</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">P-ISSN: 2528-7508 E-ISSN: 2528-7516</span></p>
<h3><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>VOL. XXI NO. 2 • AGUSTUS 2021</span></h3>
<h4><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Susunan Redaktur PUSTAKA :</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Penanggung Jawab </span><span class="font2">Dr. Made Sri Satyawati, S.S., M.Hum.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Pemimpin Redaksi</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">Ngurah Indra Pradhana, S.S., M.Hum.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Wakil Ketua</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">I Gusti Ngurah Parthama, S.S., M.Hum.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Sekretaris</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">Dr. Bambang Dharwiyanto Putro, S.S., M.Hum.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Staf Redaksi</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">I Nyoman Aryawibawa, S.S., M.A., Ph.D.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dr. Dra. Ni Made Suryati, M.Hum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dr. Dra. Ni Ketut Ratna Erawati, M.Hum. Zuraidah, S.S., M.Si.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Drs. I Wayan Teguh, M.Hum Fransiska Dewi Setiowati Sunarya, S.S., M.Hum</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Mitra Bestari</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">Prof. Dr. I Wayan Ardika, M.A (Unud)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prof Dr. I Nyoman Darma Putra, M.Litt (Unud) Prof. Dr. Made Budiarsa, M.A (Unud)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prof. Thomas Reuter (Melbourne University) Prof. Dr. Nengah Bawa Atmadja, M.A. (Undiksha) Prof. Dr. Susantu Zuhdi (UI)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prof. Dr. Irwan Abdulah (UGM)</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Pelaksana Tata Usaha :</span></h4>
<p><span class="font2">I Gede Nyoman Konsumajaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Naskah dikirim ke alamat : </span><a href="mailto:jurnalpustaka@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">jurnalpustaka@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Foto sampul oleh I Gede Gita Purnama &amp;&nbsp;I Putu Widhi Kurniawan</span></p>
<p><span class="font8" style="font-weight:bold;">The Used of Online Learning Method in Acquiring Children's English Vocabulary at English Buzz Bali</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Ni Putu Manik Masuci</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:manik.masuci@gmail.com"><span class="font7">manik.masuci@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Abstract</span></h4>
<p><span class="font6">This study entitled “The Used of Online Learning Method in Acquiring Children's English Vocabulary at English Buzz Bali”. It focuses on finding out the effectiveness of Online Learning Method in acquiring English vocabulary. This study was test how effective is the use of online learning method to teach children’s English Vocabulary at English Buzz Bali and to know the student perception about their new learning method of study. The research of this study applied field work research that used theories by Revan Revan (1991 in M. Pedlar edition (2011) about theory of action learning and Terry Anderson (2008) about online learning method. This research used teaching and observation technique involving students in the third grade of elementary school. The data in this study were the collected from the result of Pre-test and Post-test of the students of English Buzz Bali using online platform; ZOOM for their teaching and learning process. There were ten children (M= 9) participating in this study and official permission from the school has been obtained to conduct the study. The result of this study shows that, the use of online learning method is quite effective to acquiring English vocabulary for the children during the pandemic Covid-19. It can be seen from the high percentage score (80,85%) of correct answer from the Post-test of the students who been taught through online platform. It can be concluded that online learning method is the suggested ways to acquiring children’s English vocabulary during the pandemic Covid-19.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Introduction</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">Language is used to communicate between two or more people to deliver a message. Language also becomes the primary needs of human meanings through language humans have the ability to interact with one another. There are so many languages in the society. One of them is English. It is a universal language and considered to be a second language or foreign language in multilingual country such as Indonesia. The way of acquiring English for the learners could be from parent, sociallife, or environment. Language Acquisition is a process where someone acquires a language</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">in an unconscious situation. Krasben (2009: 10) stated acquisition is a sub-conscious process where the learners acquire language which understandable and meaningful to them. The importance of English language has become a concern in Indonesia. English has been taught as early as it can, to boost proficiency in speaking and understanding English. One of the important components in teaching English is vocabulary, because without vocabulary students can not able to understand others or express their own</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">ideas. By mastering vocabulary, students can communicate and tell their idea effectively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">This study was inspired by the world condition nowadays because of the pandemic Covid-19. People were supposed to stay to reduce the virus became wider and it was also impacted all the students all over the world. They are supposed to study at home because the schools were closed. During the pandemic of covid-19, the education system of the world has affected extremely. Online learning method has become a popular learning system for education especially in pandemic because of its multi-functionality characteristic and effectiveness. Online learning method reflects remote teaching tactics for teachers as well as one of the learning strategies for students because it helps to learn anytime from anywhere. It also helps the students to reduce the study gap that could play an alternative learning methodology during pandemic covid-19.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">This current study is interesting to be observed because the method that used in this study has not been observed yet by the other undergraduate students specifically at the English Department of Udayana University. This chance is</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">a good opportunity to explore deeper to this current method of learning to know the effectiveness of this method. On the other hand, some references related to the topic of the study reviewed in order to deepen the knowledge in teaching strategies for the children. The studies such as from Widyastuti (2007) discusses the effectiveness of the combination of songs and illustrations in the vocabulary acquisition on children of SD No. I Sesetan. Then, Triningsih (2013) discusses the development of children at TK Negeri Negara in acquiring vocabulary of English through the English children music and video. Also, Wiana (2013) discusses about the use of action learning method to improved student’s English vocabularies at 10 grades of IPB 1 Class in SMAN 1 Sawan. Besides, from AH Fansury R Januarty (2017) discussed about the comparison between two different learning methods to improving vocabulary abilities of class VII students of SMPN 35 Makassar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Regarding to the background of the study above, the problems of study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How effective is the use of Online Learning Method for teaching children's English vocabulary in English Buzz Bali?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font7">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the common problems faced by the children to learn English vocabulary using Online Learning Method in English Buzz Bali?</span></p></li></ul>
<h4><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Method</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">This study applied field work research to observe the data source. The data source of this study was taken from English course named English Buzz Bali, which is located in Denpasar, Bali. English Buzz Bali is a formal language course that implements an international-based English curriculum integrated with Indonesian curriculum guidelines. English Buzz Bali open the online class to support the learning process during the pandemic Covid-19, to avoid the spread of the virus and to help the students to learn English from home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">The data sources in this study collected from the children's responses based on the results of pre- and post- tests and the answer from the students about common problems that they are faced during the teaching and learning process related to the problems of questions. The main reasons the nine years old students were chosen in</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">this study because according to Journal of Research in Science Teaching about Cognitive Development in Children by Jean Piaget (1896– 1980) in around this age, students become les egocentric, more rational, can organize and classifies the class or words and able to understanding the conversation. This is become the main reason nine years old chosen to be the object of this research. The main objectives of this present study are to know the student’s perception and how effective is the use of online learning method as the alternative learning medias for students in English Buzz Bali during covid-19.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">The method that was used in collecting the data was field research method. On the other hand, the technique that was used in collecting the data is note-taking technique. There were several procedures in collecting the data consist of planning, action and observation. In planning step, all of the student’s activities and the materials of the study that needed in the learning process must be prepared such as checking the attendance list of the students, prepare all of the pre-test, post-test and questions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Through all of the observation that has been conducted for one period of the research, it was proved the effectiveness of this method through the valid data and the data is definitely compelling to see how the tests scored as followingBesides, after the end of the class, asking the students after the lesson is held to collect the information from the students about problem or struggles that they might face during the online class happened. Last, observation step conducted during the teaching and learning process to find out the progress of each students using the online learning method as their learning media The data of this study also collected by screenshot and video recording technique.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">In this study, the descriptive qualitative method was applied to analyze the data which means describing the result of pre and post-test score and transcribing the explanations of the students related to the problems of questions. The data from the pre-tests and post-tests were compared, described, and quantitatively analyzed by grouping the results of the tests. The data were analyzed by using theory of Revan (1991 in M. Pedlar edition (2011)) and Terry Anderson (2008) and counted using technique proposed by Darmadi Hamid (2011) with his book entitled “Metode Penelitian Pendidikan”.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Findings And Discussion</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">This part focusses on the analysis of verb (action verb), adjective (describing a person) vocabulary and common problems faced by the students of English Buzz Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Table 1: Data obtained from the Pre-Test of Verb</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="7" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Vocabulary</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered correctly</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered incorrectly</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Adelio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">35%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">65%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Bagas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Devina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Eveline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ibas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Joia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Nirbana</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">80%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ode</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Revata</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Praja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">50%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">50%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font7">According to the calculation of the Pretest of Verb Vocabulary, only 1 student (Eveline) from 10 ten students can answer correctly up to 50% of Pre-test. It was indicated that the students need to explore and acquire the vocabulary of verb. To know the percentage of the improvement of the second pre-test, it was calculated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">P = 1 X 100 = 10 %</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Based on the result above, the percentage of the students who passed the tests were very low, the result is just only 10% of students are able in acquiring vocabulary in the pre-test of the verb vocabulary. So, it was shown that vocabulary acquisition of the students for verb vocabulary were very poor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Table 2: Data obtained from the Post-Test of Verb Vocabulary</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered correctly</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered incorrectly</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Adelio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">65%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">35%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Bagas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">50%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">50%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Devina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Eveline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">85%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ibas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Joia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Nirbana</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ode</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Revata</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">75%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">35%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Praja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">80%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font7">According to the calculation of the Posttest of Verb Vocabulary, there are 7 students from 10 ten students answer correctly up to 50% of Post-test. The highest percentage was collected by Eveline with 85% of correct answers. In order to know the percentage of the improvement of the post-test, it was calculated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">P = 7 X 100 = 70 %</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">10</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">In contrast with the pre-test result, the percentage of the students who passed the test were quite high in the post-test. The result shown that 70% of the students are passed the test and able in acquiring verb vocabulary. It was shown that there are significant progresses of the vocabulary acquisition from the students using online learning method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">The second analysis of this research were containing the result of pre and post-test of adjective vocabulary from students at English Buzz Bali as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Table 3: Data obtained from the Pre-Test of Adjective Vocabulary</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered correctly</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered incorrectly</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Adelio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Bagas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Devina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">35%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">65%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Eveline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ibas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Joia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Nirbana</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">25%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">75%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ode</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">80%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Revata</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">25%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">75%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">10.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Praja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">35%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">65%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font7">According to the calculation of the Pretest of Adjective Vocabulary, none of the student can answer correctly up to 50% of pre-test. Mostly, students only can answer 6-8 questions that were given. So, it was indicated that the students are not able mastering the adjective vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Table 4: Data obtained from the Post-Test of Adjective Vocabulary</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Students</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered correctly</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Number of words answered incorrectly</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Adelio</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">60%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">40%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Bagas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Devina</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Eveline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">80%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ibas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Joia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">75%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">25%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Nirbana</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">30%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">70%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Ode</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">55%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">45%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">9.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">Revata</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">85%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">15%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">10.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">Praja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">85%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7">15%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font7">Based on calculation of the Post-test above, there are 8 students from 10 ten students answer correctly up to 50% of Post-test. The highest score of percentage was collected by Revata and Praja with 85% of correct answers. In order to know the percentage of the improvement of the post-test, it was calculated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">P = 8 X 100 = 80 %</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">As seen above, the percentage of the students who passed the test were really high if compared with the previous one. The result shown that 80% of the students are passed the test and able to acquiring adjective vocabulary. It was shown the increasement progress of the students in acquiring vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">On the other hand, there are 5 common problems faced by students during the process of teaching and learning using online learning method. These problems are collected by asking the students at the end of class such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptability Struggle</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font7">Switching from traditional classroom and face to face learning method to computer-based training in a virtual classroom makes the learning experience entirely different for students. Students who have been always studying in the traditional classroom mindset are not able to focus on online learning platforms. It is important for them to accept the new learning environment with an open mind.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Home Distraction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font7">Learning through online, the students must manage everything in one room with parents around them. As an online student, the classroom is often in home, and these distractions may seem nearly impossible to avoid. The students can be easily distracted by small things at their surroundings especially with family and possibly younger siblings around by talking to them, innocently asking questions or even playing phone while the teaching and learning process happened. It is important to establish boundaries and make sure everyone understands which disruptions are acceptable and which should wait until the study time is complete.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lack of Social Interaction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font7">During the online class, it was hard to keep students engaged without a teacher’s physical presence and face-to-face contact because teacher cannot control the students directly. Many students find that learning was not just an intellectual activity, but a social one – and that explains why a number of student’s report missing in-person interaction with their teachers. The students also miss face-to-face interactions with fellow students. For some students, this lack</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">of social interaction and the accompanying need to be self-motivated to get their work done and it can lead to feelings of isolation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Self-Motivation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font7">Self-motivation is an online learning essential requirement; however, many online learners lack on it. After enrolling in distance learning courses, many learners feel fall behind even they want to give up. Mostly, the students do not know how to explain about it but one thing for sure, they missed having to get up and walk into the classroom. They feel unmotivated and lack of concentration because they just spent their time straight to the monitor and cannot feel the ambience of the study as before as pandemic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font7">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Technical Issues</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font7">Technical issues are bound to happen in an online-only environment. This technical issue could distract the online learning process and interrupt online learning sessions. Sometimes the computer could be shut down or there are moments when the Wi-Fi is spotty, and slow computer can make it difficult to keep up with the virtual class. Some students are not provided with strong internet connections and this situation make them failed to catch up with the materials given in online class. The students should inform what happening to them if this kind of situation happened to them. Besides, teacher also have to understand and be flexible perhaps even recording the class session for backup data.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Conclusion</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">Based on the research and the analysis, it can be concluded that indeed the use of online learning method during the pandemic is quite an effective way in the process of acquiring children’s English vocabulary, it can be seen from the high percentage of correct answer of the posttests from the students who had been taught with online learning method. This study not only to find out the effectiveness of online learning method, it also to find out common problems that faced by the children in the learning process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">There are five common problems that faced by the children during the learning process of online learning method. Adaptability struggle was</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">become the first problems for them because at the beginning students find the difficulties to adapt to an online learning environment. Then, the technical issues are also bound to happen in an online learning environment because not all the students well equipped with a high internet connection that is required for online learning. Next, home distraction. The students are easily distracted by small things at their surroundings and hard to get their focus back and this condition may lead to student’s self-motivation to learn. The students feel unmotivated because they just spent their time straight to the monitor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Based on student's problem, there is an alternative media to decrease the rise of problems in learning English by showing interactive pictures and videos through online learning method. Through this method, students can interpret their imaginations because they not only knowing the object but also have their own description about the characteristic for each object that they see. Besides, the presence of this pandemic will indirectly change education in the future, seeing that the students must be able to adapt to studying online for any kind of reasons and situations.</span></p>
<h4><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>REFERENCES</span></h4>
<p><span class="font7">A.S. Hornby.1995</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">. Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary of Current English, Fifth Edition.</span><span class="font7"> New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">AH Fansury, R Januarty. 2017. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Picture and Picture Learning Model with Android Games Media to Improving Vocabulary Abilities of Class VII Students of SMPN 35 Makassar</span><span class="font7">. Makassar: Alauddin State Islamic University of Makassar</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Anas Sudjono. 2006. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Statistik Pendidikan</span><span class="font7">. Jakarta: PT.Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Darmadi,Hamid. 2011.</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Pendidi kan</span><span class="font7">Bandung: Alfabeta</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Kemmis, S., &amp;&nbsp;McTaggart, R. (1992) </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">The Action Research Planner</span><span class="font7">. Geelong: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Mike Pedler.1992. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Action Learning in Practice</span><span class="font7">. United Kingdom: Henley Business School.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Ni Putu Widyastuti.2007. The Effectiveness of the Combination of Songs and Illustrations in the Vocabulary Acquisition on Children of SD No. I Sesetan. Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Revan Reginald.1991. Action Learning: Research and Practice. United Kingdom: University of Cambridge</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Stephen D Krashen.1982. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Principle and Practice in Second Language Acquisition.</span><span class="font7"> United State of America: University of Southern California.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Triningsih.2013. Language Development by the Children at TK Negeri Negara in Acquiring English Vocabulary through English Children Music and Video. Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Vieda Pra Ramadhani. 2015.The Use of Picture as Stimuli in Children’s English Vocabulary Acquisition. Denpasar: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">University</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">WHO.2019.</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Novel Corona Virus Disease.2019</span><span class="font7">.Av ailable at:</span><a href="https://www.who.int/emergencie"><span class="font7">https://www.who.int/emergencie</span></a><span class="font7"> s/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019)</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Terry Anderson.2008</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">. The Theory and Practice of Online Learning.</span><span class="font7"> Canada: Athabasca University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">167</span></p>