---
layout: full_article
title: "ADDRESS TERMS USED BY THE CHARACTERS IN MOVIE THE IRON LADY"
author: "Ni Putu Risa Pratiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ADDRESS TERMS USED BY THE CHARACTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN MOVIE THE IRON LADY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NI PUTU RISA PRATIWI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Setiap bahasa di dunia mempunyai istilah-istilah tutur sapa yang sangat penting digunakan dalam berkomunikasi.istilah-istilah tutur sapa adalah kata atau frase yang digunakan untuk menyapa seseorang. Tepat atau tidak tepatnya penggunaan istilah tutur sapa akan mempengaruhi situasi berkomunikasi dalam kehidupan sosial. Jika seseorang menggunakan istilah tutur sapa secara tidak tepat maka orang tersebut tidak dapat melanjutkan komunikasi dengan baik dan sopan. Sebaliknya, jika seseorang mampu memilih istilah tutur sapa dengan tepat, maka terciptalah situasi percakapan yang nyaman. Pemilihan tipe istilah tutur sapa yang tepat akan sangat dipengaruhi oleh beberapa faktor dalam kehidupan sosial. Dalam penelitian ini, penggunaan istilah tutur sapa dalam film “The Iron Lady” dianalisis bersama dengan faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaannya ketika mereka berkomunikasi satu sama lain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : istilah tutur sapa, kehidupan sosial, faktor</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of address terms can be found in every culture in the world because it is a universal phenomenon. In this situation, the appropriate way of speaking to the people in different positions depends on the speaker’s position in the context. If the people’s position is in common ground, the speaker may call directly by name to the people. And if the speaker as a child, he or she cannot use first name, sister, or brother to call his or her mother, because it does not show the appropriate term in social life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The address terms can also be found in novel, movie script, drama, talk show, and etc. This study used movie script in movie “The Iron Lady”. The conversation or dialogue between characters created on the script is made as in real life because it contains many conversations between someone and his or her society. Movie also shows the culture and social status of people in certain conditions during the play. Therefore, the dialogue on the movie script is interesting as an object to be analyzed because it contains address terms in which</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">it is related to marked setting, proffesion title,higher rank, etc that may influence people to choose the appropriate address terms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, the problem of this study is What factors influence the use of address term in the movie entitled “The Iron Lady”?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Related to this study, the aim of study is to analyze the factors which influence the use of address terms in the movie entitled “The Iron Lady”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study were taken from the movie script entitled “The Iron Lady”. The movie script contains utterances used as the data. The reason for selecting the movie “The Iron Lady” to be analyzed is because it provides many conversations occurring among the characters including the use of appropriate address term which influenced by several factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This method explains the process of data collected for the study. The data were collected from the movie entitled “The Iron Lady” by using the documentation method and the technique of note taking. The process of collecting data was divided into several stages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Firstly, the conversation of the characters in the movie were watched and listened. Secondly, the movie script were downloaded from internet. Then, the last stage was the data were identificated and analyzed based on the problem related to the theory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed using qualitative method. In analyzing the data, all of the collected data were descriptively analyzed based on the theory of sociolinguistics typically about the factors that influence the use of address terms proposed by Holmes. There are some steps that were followed in analyzing the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Firstly, it was started from classifying and categorizing the data in this case the address term that applied by the character. Secondly, the data were analyzed to know the factors may occurred in the movie that affect the characters to choose the address terms based on the theory of sociolinguistics typically the factors influencing the use of address terms in British English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analysis of factors influence the use of address terms in movie “The Iron Lady”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some factors that affect the use of address terms to address someone in this movie. They are marked setting, higher rank, kin, and profession title. Here will be explained the examples that indicating to the factors which affect the use of adress terms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marked Setting</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Example &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Prime Minister</span><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>(Scene &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Int. Downing Street. 1982. Night.)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">TV Footage</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Close now - we see a man on fire, burning. Voices mixing in and out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TV Journalist V.O. </span><span class="font1">: “... HMS Sheffield, a Type 42 destroyer, was attacked and hit late this afternoon by an Argentine missile...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">TV Journalist V.O. (Cont'd) </span><span class="font1">: “...it is seen as a retaliation for the sinking of the General Belgrano, in which over 300 Argentinian Sailors died...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Margaret's eyes shining, as if with tears. A soft knocking at the door. She dabs them away quickly.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>John Nott &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">: “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Prime Minister</span><span class="font1">”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">John Nott enters</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">John Nott (Cont'd) </span><span class="font1">: Latest casualty figures from the Sheffield.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He hands her a piece of paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">: “I must write to them.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">John Nott &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">: “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Prime Minister?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">: “The families. I must write to them...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The setting of the dialogue above was in the downing street and show formal situation. This dialogue tells that Margaret as the Prime Minister of United Kingdom has a higher status than John Nott. The social status of Margaret as the Prime Minister is determined by marked setting. Marked setting refers to a person who works in Parliament or Law Court. John Nott shows his respect and addressee Margaret using her position as the Prime Minister of United Kingdom</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font1">Prime Minister is the most appropriate address term for addressing Margaret as the Prime Minister. It is used based on the degree of formality in addressing someone to the person who has higher rank and works in law parliament in British.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Higher Rank</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Example &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Lady </span><span class="font1">Thatcher</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(Scene : Drawing room. Chester square. London. Present. Day.) (</span><span class="font1">Suddenly looming over her and grinning down as if at the top of a tunnel Susie, Margaret's personal secretary carrying a cardboard box.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Susie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">Good morning </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Lady </span><span class="font1">Thatcher. Are you alright?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(concerned)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">How are you feeling?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">I'm fine, thank you </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Susie</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Susie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">I've just been reading about the bombings.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">Yes. Frightful.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The title “Lady” is one of the titles found in the movie. Lady is a word used to mean ‘woman’ that some people, especially older people, consider more polite. The title “Lady” is used by Susie as the personal secretary of Margaret because she wants to show her respect to Margaret. Although Margaret is not a Prime Minister anymore, Susie always respects and takes care of Margaret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3 Kin</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Example</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Mummy</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(Scene</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Bedroom. House. Chester Square. London. Present.Dusk.)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">(She watches, irritated, as Carol reaches to move a pile of Denis' clothes.)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1">“No! Don't move those. I haven't finished sorting them.”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(</span><span class="font1">Carol settles beside her on a chair.)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Carol</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: “</span><span class="font1">I hear you went out today...You mustn't go out on your own </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mummy</span><span class="font1">. We've talked about that.”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Her daughter, Carol Thatcher sometimes also addressed Margaret by “Mummy”. “Mummy” is one of the examples of kinship terms used in this movie. The use of term of address especially kinship term is influenced by kin factor in which kin is factor which shows an intimate relationship between speaker and hearer and blood relationship, for instance, in this case is between daughter and her mother.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Profession title</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Exa mple 1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Education Secretary.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(Scene &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Cabinet Room. Downing Street. 1974. Night.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(There is cabinet meeting. Edward Heath as the Prime Minister at that year is in mid-speech. Margaret bleans forward for a better view, trying to catch his eye. She wants to add something. All turn to look at Margaret who sits unwavering. Heath resumes.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Heath &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">- the fact of the matter is, it's absolutely crucial that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">we are seen by the public to be acting a conciliators and not aggressors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Finally acknowledging Margaret)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yes, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Education Secretary</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret : “</span><span class="font1">Yes...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(All eyes turn on her again, hearing the reservation in her voice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The setting of this conversation is in cabinet room in which there are all of cabinet members discuss about the problem in Britain. In this situation, Margaret Thatcher is addressed “Education Secretary” by Edward Heath, although Heath is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prime Minister at that time, he also respects Margaret by using the occupational term. Because the reason is the setting is appropriate to use this term. Therefore, proffesion title influences the use of address terms depending on when the talk takes place and what is talked about.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Exa mple 2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Foreign Secretary</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>(Scene : Downing Street. Study. 1982. Night.)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Margaret at her desk, looks up at Pym.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Margaret &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “Foreign Secretary</span><span class="font1">...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Pym &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font1">I've just been briefed by Admiral Fieldhouse.”</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>(MORE)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Pym (Cont'd) : “</span><span class="font1">He told me bluntly that if the Argentinians are prepared and willing to risk their aircraft, they have enough missiles to cripple most of our fleet.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(A beat.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the conversation above, we can see that Pym is addressed Foreign Secretary by Margaret. The term Foreign Secretary is one of the types of address terms especially occupational terms. This term is influenced by one factor, in this case, proffesion title. Foreign Secretary is the least intimate form of address in which it designates the occupation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are four factors that influence the use of address terms in this movie. They are marked setting, Kin, higher rank and Profession title. The first factor is marked setting, for instance Prime Minister. The use of term Prime Minister is determined by the marked setting. Higher rank is the next factor that influence the use of address term used. Margaret is also addressed with “Lady Thatcher” by Susie. Then, other factors are kin and profession title. The example of the use of address terms which influence by factor kin is “Mummy” as the term that show close relationship between Carol and her mother (Margaret). The last is the use occupational terms “Education secretary” and “Foreign Secretary” that are influenced by profession title.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Braun, Friederike. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address: Problems of Patterns and Usage in Various Languages and Cultures.</span><span class="font1"> Contributions to the Sociology of Language, 50. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet.1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">, London: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2005. (7th edition). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary. </span><span class="font1">London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jones, Damian (Producer). 2011. The Iron Lady. UK Film Council. London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wardhaugh, Ronald, 1988. (3rd edition). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. </span><span class="font1">Oxford: Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yang, Xiaomei. 2010. Address Forms of English:Rules and Variations. Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, China</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.imdb.com"><span class="font1">www.imdb.com</span></a></p>