---
layout: full_article
title: "Complaint Speech Act Of Hotel And Restaurant Guests"
author: "I Nengah Suryawan, Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, Ida Ayu Made Puspani"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-22662 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-22662"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-22662"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2016</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 0854-9613</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol. 23. No. 44</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Complaint Speech Act Of Hotel And Restaurant Guests</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Nengah Suryawan </span><span class="font2">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:soeryaonengh@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">soeryaonengh@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dinas Kebudayaan dan Pariwisata Kabupaten Tabanan Banjar Koripan Kelod No.18, Kecamatan Kediri, Kabupaten Tabanan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Bagus Putra Yandya </span><span class="font2">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:putrayadnya@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">putrayadnya@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2"> Program Magister Linguistik, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ida Ayu Made Puspani</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:madepuspani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">madepuspani@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Program Magister Linguistik, Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font2">—Tulisan ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis bagaimana tindak tutur keluhan tamu hotel dan restoran dilakukan dan direspon berdasarkan kategori tindak tutur dan bagaimana tindak tutur keluhan dilakukan berdasarkan aspek tindakan locutionary, illocutionary, dan perlocutionary. Metode dan teknik pengumpulan data menggunakan metode dokumentasi yang mana data dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan teknik pencatatan untuk kemudian dianalisis secara kualitatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa keluhan yang dilakukan oleh tamu hotel dan restoran ditujukan untuk mendapatkan respon yang baik dari pelayan terhadap keluhan yang disampaikan. Berdasarkan kategori tindak tutur, tamu menggunakan tindak tutur ekpresif dan deklaratif untuk mengekpresikan keluhan dan pelayan menggunakan tindak tutur ekspresif dan komisif untuk menanggapi keluhan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keluhan yang disampaikan oleh tamu hotel dan restoran melibatkan tiga jenis tindakan: locutionary, illocutionary, dan perlocutionary. Locutionary merupakan ujaran yang disampaikan oleh tamu untuk menunjukan kekecewaan. Tindakan illocutionary merupakan hal yang diinginkan oleh tamu untuk dilakukan oleh pelayan dalam merespon keluhan yang disampaikan melalui tutur. Tindakan perlocutionary merupakan jenis tindakan yang akan dilakukan oleh pelayan untuk menanggapi tindak tutur keluhan yang disampaikan oleh tamu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font2">—tindak tutur keluhan, tamu hotel dan restoran, kategori tindak tutur, keluhan, aspek tindakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract—</span><span class="font2">This paper is aimed at analyzing how complaint speech act of hotel and restaurant guests are performed and responded based on categories of speech acts and how they are performed considering the aspects of acts: locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary. The method and technique of collecting data in this study is documentation method in which the data were collected using the technique of note taking and were qualitatively analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The findings show that complaint of hotel and restaurant services stated by the guest was intended to have a good response of the server about the complaint conveyed. Based on the categories of speech, the guests used expressive and declarative speech acts to express complaints and the server used expressive and commissive speech acts to respond complaints.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Complaints of hotel and restaurant guests involved three kinds of acts: locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary. Locutionary act is the utterance conveyed by the guest to show sense that he or she was not happy with something. Illocutionary act shows that what the guest wanted the server to do concerning his complaints through speech. Perlocutionary act is a kind of action taken by the server to respond the complaint speech act stated by guests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font2">—complaint speech act, hotel and restaurant guests, categories of speech acts, complaint, aspects of acts.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Speech act theory is primarily concerned with pragmatic issue of languages. i.e. people’s use of language rather than its form. Pragmatic is about the issues of language use (Pedersen, 2002:5). Sadock (2006:53) claimed that the theory of speech acts, however, is especially concerned with those acts that are not completely covered under one or more of the major divisions of grammar-phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantic-or under some general theory of actions. According to Schiffrin (1994:57), speech act theory analyses the way meanings and acts are linguistically communicated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle (1977:18) stated that speech acts or acts performed in the utterance of a sentence are in general a function of meaning of the sentence. The meaning of a sentence does not in all cases uniquely determine what speech acts is performed in a given utterance of that sentence, for a speaker may mean more than what he actually says, but it is always in principle possible for him to say exactly what he means. Bonvillain (2003:92) mentioned that the term speech act refers to the fact that through speaking, a person accomplishes goals. Speakers choose ways of expressing themselves based on their intention, on what they want hearers to believe, accept, or do. Schmidt and Richards (1980:129) proposed that speech act theory has to do with the function and uses of language, so in the broadest sense we might say that speech acts are all acts we perform through speaking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Speech is the power or action of speaking. Speech can also be defined as a manner or way of speaking (Hornby, 1995:1142). Richards, et.al (1985:265) stated that speech act is an utterance as a functional unit in communication. There are many different kinds of speech acts; they are request, orders, commands, complaints, and promise. Searle (1977:16) mentioned that the reason for concentrating on the study of speech acts is simply this: all linguistic communication involves linguistic acts. The unit of linguistic communication is not, as has generally been supposed, the symbol, word or sentence, or even the token of the symbol, word or sentence, but rather the production or issuance of the symbol or word or sentence in the performance of the speech act.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Complaint speech acts are performed through utterances to deliver information or meaning of the complaint. According to Thomas (1995:2), the utterances in terms of meaning can be divided into three, they are, the first, abstract meaning, i.e. conceptual meaning, the second, utterance meaning i.e. intended meaning. In other words, it is neither the conceptual meaning nor the utterance meaning such as, rather it is specific meaning used in its particular context of situation of speech event. When we want to fully understand the meaning behind utterances based on condition when the speech is performed, we need to recognize the semantic aspect of the conversation or speech itself. Lyons (1978:1) proposed that semantic is generally defined as the study of meaning. Certain of meanings (or sense)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">can be distinguished by the technique of substituting other words in the same content and enquiring whether the resulting sentences are equivalent. However, in this paper, we are not going to discuss further about semantic but we will discuss more about speech act in term of pragmatic aspect. Lycan (1995:58) stated that pragmatics studies the use of language in context, and the context-dependence of various aspects of linguistic interpretation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Complaint speech act becomes the focus of this study. Moon (2010:1) stated that complaint speech act is very situation- dependent in that speakers should know how to perform the speech act considering such aspects as the hearer, the relationship with the hearer, the topic, the purpose of the speech, and the appropriate linguistic forms for the speech act. Thus, the speaker is required to have socio-cultural competence of language use in a language as well as linguistic competence to perform the speech act appropriately. In addition, the speech act of complaining is a face-threatening act when the speaker violates the socio-cultural rule of speaking. This can lead to a breakdown in communication and in the relationship with the other participants. In fact, it is frequently observed that non-native speakers fail in communication in a target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The problems of the study are formulated as follows: what types of speech acts are applied by guest to convey complaints?; what type of speech acts are used by server to handle the complaints of the guests?, and what kind of acts are performed by guests in delivering complaints? The aims of the study are to find out the types of speech acts applied by guest to convey complaints, to discover the type of speech acts used by the server in handling guests’ complaints and to identify what kind of acts applied by guests to convey complaints. The scopes of the discussion are identifying the complaint of hotel and restaurant guests in terms of speech act and act types applied. This study is expected to have both</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">theoretical and practical significances to learn the way to perform the complaint speech act, the speech used by those involved in the complaint as well as the type of speech acts and acts applied in complaint speech act.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The method and technique of collecting data in this study is in the documentation method in which the data were collected through the technique of note taking. In order to find complaint speech act of hotel and restaurant services, the data were collected with reference to the data source, and were carefully read dialogue by dialogue. The data were qualitatively analyzed. The data of the complaint speech act of hotel and restaurant guests were taken from books entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English for Professional Waiter</span><span class="font2"> written by Leo (2008) and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English for Room Division</span><span class="font2"> by Widhiastuti and Oosterloo (2001).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The complaint speech acts of hotel and restaurant guests in the dialogues were carefully analyzed to describe how the complaint speech act was performed based on the categories of speech acts and the analysis of how the complaint speech acts were performed based on the aspects of locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary acts. The data were presented in two parts. The first part presents the full dialogue about complaints. The second part presents the analysis of each dialogue by describing the complaint speech act in terms of how complaint speech acts were performed based on the categories of speech acts and how complaint speech acts were performed based on the aspects of locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary acts. By presenting the data in such a way, it is hoped that how complaint speech acts were performed with their analysis can be easily understood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DISCUSSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Before talking about complaint, in delivering complaint to someone, we need to do effective communication in order the complaint could be easily understood. Halliday and Hasan (1985:9) mentioned that one important aspect of communication in the speech events is the genre besides other aspects such as the form and content of the message, the setting, the participants, the intent and effect of communication, the key, the medium, and the norm of interaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle (1977:10-13) identified five classifications of speech acts based on functions assigned to them. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Representatives: Commit the speaker (in varying degrees) to something’s being the case, to the truth of the expressed preposition; for example, state, conclude, represent, deduce.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directives: Attempts (of varying degrees) by the speaker to get the hearer to do something; for example, command, offer, invite, ask, order, request, beg, permit, dare, challenge.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Commissives: Commit the speaker (again in varying degrees) to some future course of action; for example, promise, pledge, threaten.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressives: Express the psychological state of the speaker toward a particular state of affairs; for example, thank, congratulate, apologize, condole, deplore, welcome.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Declarations: Bring about the correspondence between the prepositional content and reality, for example, appoint, nominate, sentence, pronounce, fire, resign.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Austin (1962:94-101) mentioned three kinds of acts that are simultaneously performed in terms of their purpose and effect when language is put to use:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Locutionary act is an act of “saying something”. It contains the speaker’s verbalized message.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Illocutionary act indicates the speaker’s purpose in saying something, specifying in what way she or he is using the locution. Some illocutionary acts are asking or answering</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">questions; giving information, assurance, or warnings; making identification; announcing an intention; making criticism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Perlocutionary act produces sequential effects on the feelings, thoughts, or actions of hearers.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conversations about complaints are analyzed in this paper to find out the types of speech acts applied by guests in conveying complaints, to discover the types of speech acts used by the server to respond the guests’ complaints, and to identify what kinds of acts applied by the guests in delivering complaints. The conversations occurred between a guest and servers (waiter, waitress, headwaiter, and head repair). The conversations tell about some complaints made by the guest to the servers. The complaints are concerned with the restaurant services and hotel room services.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are five dialogues analyzed from two aspects. The first is the analysis of the dialogue in regard to how complaint speech acts are performed and responded based on the categories of speech acts. The second analysis is about how complaint speech acts are performed based on the aspects of locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary acts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : Waiter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waiter &nbsp;: Yes, Sir. How can I help you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : The fish smells very bad. How could you serve us such a bad fish?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waiter : I am extremely sorry about that, Sir. I’ll have it replaced.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It’s okay, hurry up then.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waiter &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes, right away, Sir. (Leo, 2008:147)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 1, we can see that the conversation occurs between a guest and a waiter where the guest expresses his complaint to the waiter. In the dialogue, the waiter should listen carefully to the guest’s complaint so he is able to give appropriate response to it. The customer uses expressive speech act that sound a bit hard to show his disappointment. He also uses directive speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act in the form of question to express his complaint. In responding to the customer’s complaint, the expressive and commissive expression of the server is much softer while offering assistance and promising to do something (replacing the fish) soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expressive speech act of the guest is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The fish smells very bad</span><span class="font2">, and his directive speech act is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How could you serve us such a bad fish?</span><span class="font2">. The directive speech act in the form of question is not a real question; it is the way of expressing complaint to the server. The expressive speech act of the waiter is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am extremely sorry about that, Sir</span><span class="font2"> followed by the comissive speech act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll have it replaced</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By examining carefully the first dialogue, three aspects of acts can be described as follows: Locutionary act : The fish smells very bad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">How could you serve us such a bad fish?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;- The customer (guest) wants</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the waiter to know that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">served fish is a bad smell fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) wants the waiter to understand that he does not want to eat the bad smell fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) needs the waiter to replace the bad smell fish with the good fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlocutionary : The waiter will replace the act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bad smell fish with the new</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and good fish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The locutionary act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The fish smells very bad. How could you serve us such a bad fish?</span><span class="font2"> is an utterance produced by the guest to show a sense that he is not happy with the fish. The reference of his disappointment is the fish which smells bad and is considered being in poor condition to be served. The illocutionary act in dialogue 1 is indirect refusal for the fish served. It is also</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">indirect refusal to eat the fish which is considered smelling badly. The perlocutionary act in dialogue 1 is that the waiter will check the fish before serving it to the customer, and immediately replace the fish with the fresh one.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Data 2</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Waitress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waitress : &nbsp;Yes, Madam. Is there anything</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">wrong?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Certainly there is. This cup is very</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">dirty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waitress : I am sorry, Madam. I’ll get you another one. (Leo, 2008:148)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 2, it is recognized that the conversation occurs between a guest and a waiter where the guest expresses his complaint to the waiter. The topic of the dialogue is a complaint which is intended to get good response from the waitress to the customer complaints. Here, the guest complaints using the expressive speech act telling about the dirty cup by informing the server about it through an utterance. The waitress replies the information given with expressive and commissive expressions by saying sorry and promising to get another new and clean cup.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expressive speech act of the guest is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This cup is very dirty</span><span class="font2">. The expressive speech act of the waitress is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am sorry, Madam</span><span class="font2"> followed by the comissive speech act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll get you another one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By examining carefully the second dialogue, three aspects of acts of complaint can be illustrated as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Locutionary act : This cup is very dirty. Illocutionary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;- The customer (guest) wants</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the waitress to know that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the cup given is not in clean condition; it is dirty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) wants the waitress to understand that he wants to have a clean cup.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">requires the waitress to do something to make the dirty cup becomes clean.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlocutionary : The waitress does something act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to make the dirty cup</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">becomes clean by replacing the dirty cup with the clean one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The locutionary act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This cup is very dirty</span><span class="font2"> is an utterance produced by the guest to show a sense that he is not happy with the cup. The reference of his disappointment is that the cup is very dirty. The illocutionary act in dialogue 2 is an indirect refusal for using the cup. The perlocutionary act in dialogue 2 shows that the waiter will check the cup before using and replacing the cup with the clean one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Waiter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waitress : Yes, Madam. What can I do for you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I ordered my lunch 20 minutes ago,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">but it has not appeared yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waitress : I am sorry about that, Madam. I’ll speak to the headwaiter immediately. (Leo, 2008:148)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 3, it is understood that the dialogue occurs between a guest and a waitress. Here, the guest expresses his complaint using an expressive speech act telling about the late coming of his order by informing the server about it through an utterance. The waiter replies the information given with expressive and commissive expressions by saying sorry and promising to inform the headwaiter about the guest’s complaint.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expressive speech act expressed by the guest is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I ordered my lunch 20 minutes ago, but it has not appeared yet</span><span class="font2">. The expressive speech act expressed by the waitress is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am sorry about that, Madam</span><span class="font2"> followed by the comissive speech act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll speak to the headwaiter immediately</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By examining carefully the third dialogue, three aspects of acts of complaint can be described as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Locutionary act : I ordered my lunch 20 minutes ago, but it has not appeared yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;- The &nbsp;&nbsp;customer (guest)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;wants the waitress to know</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">that his lunch order has not appeared although he had ordered it 20 minutes ago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer &nbsp;&nbsp;(guest)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">wants the waitress to understand that &nbsp;he has</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">been waiting for a long time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) requires the waitress to do something to make the ordered food coming soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlocutionary : The waitress does something act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to make the ordered food</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">immediately appeared by speaking to the head waiter about the late lunch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The locutionary act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I ordered my lunch 20 minutes ago, but it has not appeared yet</span><span class="font2"> is a speech produced by the guest to show a sense that he is not happy with the late lunch. The reference of his disappointment is that he ordered her lunch twenty minutes before, but it had not appeared yet; the guest has been waiting too long for her lunch. The illocutionary act in dialogue 3 is an indirect request to the waitress to check his ordered lunch. It is also an indirect request to the waitress to serve her lunch as soon as possible. The perlocutionary act in dialogue 3 is that the waiter will check the ordered lunch whether it is already prepared or not as well as to make sure that the guest’s lunch will be coming soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Guest</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Guest</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head Waiter</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">Good evening, can I help you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yes, I ordered dinner from Room Service. That was about forty-five minutes ago. Yes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I have telephoned Room Service twice, but my dinner still has not come yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I see.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I have an appointment at eight o’clock and now it seems that I have to go without having dinner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I am sorry about this, Sir. You ordered dinner 45 minutes ago, and you have phoned twice since then. That’s right.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I really must apologize. You should have received it not later than 15 minutes after you ordered it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">That is what I thought.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I try to sort it out and will make sure that the dinner is sent to you immediately. (Leo, 2008:150)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">Iin dialogue 4, it is understood that the dialogue occurs between a head waiter and a guest. The topic of the dialogue is a complaint which is intended to get a good response from the head waiter after the guest expresses his complaints.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The guest complaints using an expressive speech act telling about the late dinner which is ordered through Room Service. The expressive speech act is used to tell the head waiter that he has been waiting for forty-five minutes for the dinner. The expressive speech act is also intended to make the head waiter understand that he has telephoned the room service twice, but the dinner has not been served.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The head waiter replies the information given with an expressive speech act which is intended to apologize for the inconvenience to the customer. The commissive speech act is also applied by the head waiter by promising to the guest that the dinner will be sent immediately.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expressive speech acts used by the guest are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I ordered dinner from Room Service. That was about forty-five minutes ago</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have telephoned Room Service twice, but my dinner still has not come yet,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have an appointment at eight o’clock and now it seems that I have to go without having dinner</span><span class="font2">. The expressive speech acts expressed by the head waiter are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am sorry about this, Sir, You ordered dinner 45 minutes ago, and you have phoned twice since then, I really must apologize, You should have received it not later than 15 minutes after you ordered it</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I try to sort it out</span><span class="font2">. The commissive speech act expressed by the head waiter is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(I) will make sure that the dinner is sent to you immediately</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Three aspects of acts of complaining in the fourth dialogue can be describes as follows: Locutionary act : &nbsp;- I ordered dinner from</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Room Service. That was about forty-five minutes ago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- I have telephoned Room</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Service twice, but my dinner still has not come yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- I have an appointment at eight o’clock and now it seems that I have to go without having dinner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;- The customer (guest) wants</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the head waiter to know</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">that his dinner order has not appeared although he had ordered it 45 minutes ago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) wants the head waiter to understand that he has been waiting for a long time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer wants the head waiter to understand that he is very disappointed since he had telephoned room service twice but there was no satisfying result.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer wants the head waiter to realize that he has to go out for important appointment and he is afraid of attending the appointment &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;without</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">having dinner in advance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlocutionary : The waitress does something act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to make the ordered dinner</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">appeared soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 4, there are utterances in terms of locutionary act. The first utterances </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I ordered dinner from Room Service. That was about forty-five minutes ago</span><span class="font2"> are the utterances produced by the guest to show a sense that he ordered dinner through the Room Service in quite a long time. The second utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have telephoned Room Service twice, but my dinner still has not come yet </span><span class="font2">has a sense that the guest has telephoned the Room</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Service as an effort to make his dinner come soon to his room. The third utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I have an appointment at eight o’clock and now it seems that I have to go without having dinner</span><span class="font2"> has a sense that the guest really needs the dinner since he has an appointment after having dinner; and he doesn’t want to attend the appointment without having dinner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary act in dialogue 4 is indirect request of the guest to the head waiter to check his ordered dinner. It is also an indirect request to the head waiter to serve his dinner as soon as possible since he has an appointment. The perlocutionary act in dialogue 4 shows that the head waiter will check the ordered dinner lunch whether it is already prepared or not as well as to make sure that the guest’s dinner will be coming soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head : Good evening, this is the Repair and Repair Maintenance Office. May I help you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : Yes, I want to report something to you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head : What is it, Sir?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Repair</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : I want to take a bath and I have already turned on the hot and cold water taps, but after a few minutes, no hot water came out. What’s wrong? I’m in a hurry because I have to attend a Dinner Party in The American Embassy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head : I’m very sorry, Sir. There has been Repair something wrong in one of the broilers. What’s your room number, Sir?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;733.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head : Oh, we are now still contacting all Repair the guests staying in room 701 to 704 and 801 to 840. We are about to contact you, Sir. We are trying to fix it, and we do hope to finish it by 7 p.m. We are sorry for that</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">inconvenience, Sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : Are you sure, you can finish it within half an hour?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head : We are doing our best, Sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Repair</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guest : Well, I hope so. (Widhiastuty and Oosterloo, 2001:170)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 5, it is understood that the dialogue occurs between a guest and a head repair. The topic of the dialogue is a complaint which is intended to get a good response from the head repair after the guest complaints.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The guest complaints using an expressive speech act telling that the hot water tap is out of function. An expressive speech act is used to tell the head repair that he wanted to take bath using hot and cold water taps. However, the water from hot water tap is not coming out. The eExpressive speech act is intended to make the head repair understand that he wants to take a bath with warm water and he was in hurry since he has to attend a Dinner Party in The American Embassy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The head repair replies the information given with an expressive speech act by explaining the effort already made to handle the complaint and apologizing for the inconvenience. An commissive speech act is also applied by the head waiter by promising the guest that the he will check the tap so the guest can take a bath soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The expressive speech acts of the guest are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I want to take a bath and I have already turned on the hot and cold water taps, but after a few minutes, no hot water came out. What’s wrong? I’m in a hurry because I have to attend a Dinner Party in The American Embassy.</span><span class="font2"> The expressive speech acts used by the head repair are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oh, we are now still contacting all the guests staying in room 701 to 704 and 801 to 840. We are about to contact you, Sir. We are trying to fix it, and we do hope to finish it by 7 p.m. We are sorry for that inconvenience, Sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The three aspects of acts of complaining in the fifth dialogue can be described as follows: Locutionary act : &nbsp;- I want to take a bath and I</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">have already turned on the hot and cold water taps, but after a few minutes, no hot water came out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- What’s wrong?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- I’m in a hurry because I have to attend a Dinner Party in The American Embassy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;- The customer (guest) wants</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the head repair to know</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">that he wants to take a bath.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) wants the head repair to understand that he had turned on the hot and cold taps.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer wants the head repair to understand that although he had turned on the taps but the hot water did not coming out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer wants the head waiter to realize that he has to go out to attend a dinner party located in American Embassy in hurry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">- The customer (guest) requires the head repair to do something to make the hot water coming out from the tap.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perlocutionary : The head repair does act &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;something to make the hot</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">water coming out from the tap so the guest can take a bath soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In dialogue 5, there are utterances expressing the locutionary act. The first utterances </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I want to take a bath and I have already turned on the hot and cold water taps, but after a few minutes, no hot water came out</span><span class="font2"> are the utterances produced by the guest to show a sense that he wants to take a bath using warm water, but he is surprised to see that the hot water is not coming out. The second utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">What’s wrong?</span><span class="font2"> has a sense that the guest wants to know why hot water does not come out from the tap. The third utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’m in a hurry because I have to attend a Dinner Party in The American Embassy</span><span class="font2"> has a sense that the guest does not want to attend the Dinner Party without taking a bath.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary act in dialogue 5 is indirect request expressed to the head repair to check the hot tap in the bathroom. It is also an indirect request to the head waiter to repair the hot tap as soon as possible since he has to attend the Dinner Party in The American Embassy. The perlocutionary act in dialogue 5 expressed that the head repair will check the tap so the guest can take a bath soon.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Complaint speech acts of hotel and restaurant guests are intended to have good responses of the server (waiter, waitress, head waiter, and head repair) about the services or facilities given to the guests.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The guests of hotel and restaurant use expressive and directive speech acts to express their complaints or disappointments. For example, the expressive speech act of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The fish smells very bad</span><span class="font2"> is used by the guest to show that he/she is not happy with the fish served. The directive speech act of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How could you serve us such a bad fish</span><span class="font2"> is the example of directive speech act produced by the guest to describe his/her disappointment about the fish served.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In responding to guests’ complaint, servers use expressive and commissive speech acts; expressive speech acts are applied to ask for apologies to the guest about the disappointing services and commissive speech acts are expressed by promising the customer that something will be conducted as a response to the complaint. Inn responding to the guest’s complaints, the expressive speech act followed by the commissive speech act is used. For example, the expressive speech act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I am extremely sorry about that, Sir</span><span class="font2"> is followed by the commissive speech act </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll have it replace</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Complaints of hotel and restaurant services involve three kinds of acts: &nbsp;&nbsp;locutionary,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">illocutionary, and perlocutionary. Locutionary act is an utterance used by the guest to show sense that he is not happy with the services presented. Illocutionary act shows what the guest wants the server to do in regard to his complaints through speech. Perlocutionary act is a kind of action taken by the server as a response to the complaint speech act.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>REFERENCE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Austin, J. L. 1962. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">How to Do Things with Words</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font2">Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bonvillain, Nancy. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Culture, and Communication. The Meaning of Messages.</span><span class="font2"> New Jersey: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K and Hasan Ruqaiya. 1985.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context and Text: Aspect of Language in Socio-Semiotic Perspective. </span><span class="font2">Victoria: Deaki University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leo, Sutanto. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English for Professional Writer</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lycan, William. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Philosophy of Language</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lyons, John. 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font2">. London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moon, Kyunghye. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Act Study: Differences between Native and NonNative Speaker Complaint Strategies</span><span class="font2">. The American &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University.</span><a href="http://www.cas.american.edu/cas/tesol/pdf/.../WP-2002-Moon-Speech-Act.pdf"><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.cas.american.edu/cas/tesol/pdf/.../WP-2002-Moon-Speech-Act.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">.cas.american.edu/cas/tesol/pdf/.../WP-</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.cas.american.edu/cas/tesol/pdf/.../WP-2002-Moon-Speech-Act.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">2002-Moon-Speech-Act.pdf</span><span class="font2">.</span></a><span class="font2">(cited on 8 May 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pedersen, H.M. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts and Agents-A Semantic Analysis:</span><span class="font2"> IMM.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Richards, Jack et.al. 1985. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Longman Dictionary of Applied Linguistics</span><span class="font2">. London: The Chaucer Press Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sadock, Jerrold. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In L. R. Horn, &amp;&nbsp;G.Ward (Eds.), Handbook of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. USA, UK, Australia: Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Discourse.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schmidt, R.W. and Richards, J.C. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts and Second Language Learning. Applied Linguistcs.</span><span class="font2"> Hongkong: University of Hawaii and Chinese University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle, J.R. 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts. An Essay in The Philosophy of Language.</span><span class="font2"> London: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thomas, Jenny. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning in Interaction: An Introduction to Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">: New York. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Widhiastuti, S.L.P and Oosterloo, Christine. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English for Room Division</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Mapindo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pusat Bahasa Departemen Pendidikan Nasional.2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta : Balai Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta : Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sutopo, H.B. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodelogi Penelitian Kualitatif, Dasar Teori dan Terapannya Dalam Penelitian</span><span class="font2">. Surakarta: Universitas Sebelas Maret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Venuti, Lawrence. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font2">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Widiastuti, Ni Made Ayu. 2011. Terjemahan Istilah-Istilah Arsitektur Tradisional Bali kedalam Bahasa Inggris. The Translation of Balinese Traditional Architectural Terms into English. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Naskah Lengkap Seminar Nasional Bahasa Ibu Dalam Rangka Memperingati Hari Bahasa Ibu Internasional.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar, 21 Februari 2011.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">54</span></p>