---
layout: full_article
title: "ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN LITTLE MISS SUNSHINE MOVIE SCREENPLAY"
author: "I Komang Adi Tusanjaya"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">LITTLE MISS SUNSHINE</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE SCREENPLAY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I KOMANG ADI TUSANJAYA ENGLISH DEPARTMENT, FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul jurnal ini adalah “Tindak Tutur Ilokusi di Skenario Film Little Miss Sunshine”. Dalam tindak tutur ,dalam kasus sederhana makna sebuah kalimat berarti persis dan benar-benar seperti apa yang pembicara katakan . Namun, dalam beberapa kasus ketika pembicara mengucapkan kalimat , tidak hanya berarti sebagai apa yang dia katakan , tetapi juga berarti sesuatu yang lain . Oleh karena itu , tindak ilokusi dipilih sebagai topik dalam penelitian ini karena kompleksitas makna ucapan oleh pembicara yang menarik untuk dibahas terutama dalam skenario yang pada dasarnya difungsikan sebagai narasi deskriptif untuk sebuah film. Penelitian ini diambil dari scenario film Little Miss Sunshine . Data dikumpulkan dengan melakukan studi pustaka. Metode kualitatif digunakan dalam menganalisis data. Ada dua teori yang diterapkan dalam penelitian ini yaitu Taksonomi Tindak ilokusi oleh Searle ( 1979 ) dan Teori Etnografi Komunikasi oleh Hymes (dalam Schiffrin , 1994 ) . Taksonomi Tindak ilokusi digunakan dalam menganalisis jenis tindakan ilokusi yang ditemukan di skenario Little Miss Sunshine, sedangkan Teori Etnografi Komunikasi digunakan untuk menganalisis fungsi masing-masing tindakan ilokusi yang ditemukan di naskah berdasarkan teori konteks situasi .Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa di antara lima fungsi tindak tutur seperti yang diusulkan oleh Searle , ada empat fungsi tindakan ilokusi yang ditemukan di Little Miss Sunshine skenario . Beberapa fungsi dari setiap jenis tindakan ilokusi ditemukan sebagai dampak dari konteks situasi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : tindak tutur , ilokusi dan skenario .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In human life, language is needed to help them in communicating with each other. Language is performing function as intended by the user of language when it is used for communication. It is impossible for human to live without communicating with others and language is the main means of communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle (1969) states that speaking a language is performing speech acts, such as making statement, giving command, asking questions, asking promises and the like. In speech acts, the simple cases of meaning are those in which the speaker utters a sentence and means exactly and literally as what he says. However, in some cases when the speaker utters a sentence, it is not only means as what he says, he also means something else. And the listener should know and able to interpret the utterances of the speaker because not all speech acts utterances contain verb act.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In Levinson (1987: 236), Austin (1969) states three basic types of speech acts: those are Locutionary Act, Illocutionary Act, and Perlocutionary Act. Illocutionary Act is the making of a statement, offer, promise, etc. in uttering a sentence, by virtue of the conventional force associated with it (or with it explicit performative paraphrase).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Locutionary acts are the acts of saying something, provides the hearer with the core information from which to infer the speaker’s illocutionary (communicative) intent or recognizing that the speaker has uttered an identified sentence from language with an identified prosody, in other words, the constituents and constituent structure of sentence (Allan, 1986).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Perlocutionary acts are carried out by a speaker in making an utterance. It is the act of causing a certain effect on the hearer and others (Hurford and Heasley, 1983).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle (1979) describes five parts of illocutionary acts; those are assertive, directive, commissive, expressive, and declarative. This study only discusses about the types of illocutionary acts that occur in the screenplay and its functions and also the explication of the function of those illocutionary acts. The simplest cases of meaning are those in which the speaker utters a sentence and means exactly and literally as what he/she says. On the other hand, not all cases of meaning are as simple as that. In such cases, however, the speaker can say something and mean it, but additionally mean something else. This complexity of the act performing illocutionary acts makes the hearer unable to understand the meaning of the utterance well. Therefore, illocutionary act is chosen as the topic in this study because the complexity of the meaning of utterance uttered by the speaker is interesting to be discussed especially in a screenplay that basically functionalized as a descriptive narration for a film. This factor also makes illocutionary acts that occur in a screenplay interesting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background stated above, the problem of the study was “What kinds of illocutionary acts are found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Little Miss Sunshine</span><span class="font1"> movie screenplay by Michael Arndt ?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background and problems stated above, the aim of the study was “To find out what kinds of illocutionary acts are found in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Little Miss Sunshine</span><span class="font1"> movie screenplay”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method is a method used in a process of how people approach the problems and seek the answers through finding, collecting and analyzing the data. In this writing, there are three steps formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Data source is the source from which the data to be analyzed is obtained in order to support the validity of the study. The data were taken from the dialogue of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Little Miss Sunshine</span><span class="font1"> movie screenplay by Michael Arndt. This study focuses on speech acts related to utterances of the speaker that usually occur in spoken language, which in this screenplay, the utterances were written down.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through library research. There were no respondents involved as data in information for this study. There are four steps that were done in collecting the data. First, the screenplay downloaded from internet, for the comprehensive data, was read. Second, the data which belongs to utterances that emerged as object of this study, utterances of illocutionary acts were noted down to abridge which one from the data would be analyzed and picked as main data. Third, the illocutionary acts which were found in accordance with their types were classified. The last, the data were classified again based on declarative utterance, interrogative utterance, and imperative utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analyzed descriptively. Analyzing means examining the data in order to understand them better or discover more about it and descriptively means the data were described as clearly as possible. The method used is qualitative research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of illocutionary acts in little miss sunshine movie screenplay</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis is presented by firstly showing the data in the form of piece of conversation in the movie. The utterances which are later analyzed are in bold type.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Assertive</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Olive : So that’s when?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frank : Well, no. Actually all that was okay. What happened was two days ago the McArthur Foundation decided to award a “genius” grant to Larry Sugarman. (deep breath) and that’s when..</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandpa : You tried to check out early</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richard : Olive, what’s important to understand is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">that uncle Frank gave up on himself. </span><span class="font1">He made a series of foolish choices, and then he gave up on himself, which is something that winners never do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance that is uttered by Richard is an assertive illocutionary acts similar to the previous data. But in this data, the utterance uttered by Richard tends to regard as an insulting. As proposed by Searle (1979), the point or purpose of the members of the assertive class is to commit the speaker (in varying degrees) to something’s being the case, to the truth of the expressed preposition. Insulting belongs to assertive class by the reason that the expressed proposition commits the speaker to the truth of her proposition, i.e. the speaker, Richard, in insulting Frank, committed by preparatory fact as to able to perform the act of insulting, that Frank’s suicide attempt is a foolish choice in the speaker’s perspective.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directives</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Richard </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: Olive, you want to talk to him?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Then olive walks over and sits next to Dwayne)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle (1979: 13) in his taxonomy characterized directive acts whose illocutionary point is to get the hearer to do something. In this utterance, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Olive, you wat to talk to him?”,</span><span class="font1"> the speaker performs the act of asking grammatically, but in the context it is an act of requesting. Act of requesting belongs to Directive act. It is classified because it fulfills some conditions underlying Directive act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Commissives</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Sheryl : sixty one miles. What time is it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Frank : Five o two</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Richard : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">We’ll make it. Don’t worry!</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance above can be regarded as commissive type of the illocutionary acts, which is act of promising. The point of this class is committing the speaker (in varying degrees) to some future course of action (Searle, 1979). There are certain conditions that are fulfilled by this utterance so that it is counted as a member of this class.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Propositional condition: S predicates a future act A of S</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(The speaker, Richard, predicates that he promises to get to the pageant place right on time by uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“We’ll make it. Don’t worry!.”</span><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preparatory condition: H wants S to perform A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Sheryl wants Richard to promise to get the place on time.)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sincerity condition: S expresses intention to do A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(This utterance expresses the speaker’s intention to get the place on time.)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Essential condition: it is counted as an undertaking by S of an obligation to do A.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(The utterance uttered by the speaker is counted as a promise of Richard to get the place on time.)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressive</span></h1>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Miss Florida</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Olive</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(very polite)</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Hi, what’s your name?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Olive.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Miss Florida</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">: What’s your talent?</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Olive</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">: Dancing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Hi, what’s your name?”</span><span class="font1"> is clearly a greeting by the speaker to the hearer by the lexical items. As stated by Searle (1979), the act of greeting is considered the expressive illocutionary acts since it is performed as the expression of psychological state of the speaker towards the hearer. The speaker feels he has to say something to someone as the social obligation when speaker meets hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data analysis that is previously presented, there are two points that can be concluded related to the problems formulated in the first chapter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Among five functions of speech acts as proposed by Searle, there are four functions of illocutionary acts that are found in Little Miss Sunshine screenplay. They are Assertives, Directives, Commisives, and Expressives. Declarations are not found because the story and the setting of the movie did not include the environment in which Declarations can exist.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Allan, Keith. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Meaning</span><span class="font1">. London: Routledge &amp;&nbsp;Kegan Paul.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Austin, J.L. 1970. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How To Do Things With Words</span><span class="font1">. New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Horecky, Jan. 2007. “The Content and Form of Illocutionary Acts”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">SKASE Journal of Theoretical Linguistics.</span><span class="font1"> Vol 4. No 1.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.skase.sk/Volumes/JTL08/pdfdoc/11.pdf"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.skase.sk/Volumes/JTL08/pdfdoc/11.pdf</span></a><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, D. 1972. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Toward Ethnography of Communication: The Analysis of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Communication Events</span><span class="font1">. In Giglioli 1972: 22-24. New York : Holt, Rinehart and Winston</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Levinson, C. Stephen. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Cambrige: Cambrige University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Marcu, Daniel. 1999. “Perlocutions: The Achilles’ Heel of Speech Act Theory”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal Of Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. California: University of Southern California</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mattews, P.H. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology</span><span class="font1">. Cambrige: Cambrige University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. Approach to Discourse. Cambrige : Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle, J.R. 1969. Speech Act : An Essay in the Philosophy of Language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cambrige: Cambrige University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 2000. Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University of Press</span></p>