---
layout: full_article
title: "THE USE OF PIDGINIZED ENGLISH BY VENDORS IN SEMINYAK BEACH KUTA BALI"
author: "Ida Ayu Chandra Purnama Sari M"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE USE OF PIDGINIZED ENGLISH BY VENDORS IN SEMINYAK BEACH</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">KUTA BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IDA AYU CHANDRA PURNAMA SARI MANUABA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2013</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Adapun judul dari penelitian ini adalah </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Pidginized English by Vendors in Seminyak Beach Kuta Bali.</span><span class="font1"> Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan penyederhanaan bahasa Inggris yang terjadi di pantai Seminyak Kuta Bali. Disamping itu, penelitian ini juga bertujuan untuk menganalisa faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi terjadinya bahasa pijin yang digunakan oleh pedagang acung di pantai Seminyak. Penelitian ini didasari atas teori sosiolinguistik, dan topic yang didiskusikan berdasarkan teori dari Wardhaugh (1986), Hudson (1980), Holmes (1992), Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) dan Todd (1984). Penelitian ini menggunakan metode observasi dan menggunakan kuisioner, perekaman data dan membuat catatan kecil sebagai cara untuk pengambilan data di pantai Seminyak. Data yang telah ada kemudian dianalisa dengan menggunakan teori yang ada. Berdasarkan hasil analisa, telah ditemukan bahwa ada beberapa penyederhanaan dari segi grammar dan leksikal. Penelitian ini juga menemukan bahwa faktor ekonomi, pendidikan dan sosial berpengaruh pada penggunaan bahasa pijin di pantai Seminyak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Bahasa Pijin, Pedagang acung, Seminyak</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This paper is talking about the variety of English language, which is related to the language which has no native speakers, it is no one’s first language, but it is a contact language (Wardhaugh, 1985:57). The variety of language is called pidginized language, which means that its speaker who wish to be able to communicate with other try to find or improvise a simple code to enable them to do so. This topic is interesting to choose and analyze because we all know that English has a great influence in the world. It is so important to know how pidgin exist in this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">globalization era. It is also interesting to know how the vendors express the sentence structure in their job. Pidgin that is spoken by vendors in Seminyak beach Kuta Bali was chosen in this paper to be the objects of observation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background mentioned above, the problems discussed in this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of language simplification that occur in the pidginized English used by vendors at Seminyak beach Kuta Bali compared to Standard English?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors lead the use of Pidgin English at Seminyak beach Kuta Bali?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to the problems of the study, the aims of this study are to analyze the kind of language simplification that occur in the pidginized English used by vendors at Seminyak beach Kuta Bali compared to Standard English, and to find out the factors which influence the use of Pidginized English by vendors at Seminyak beach Kuta Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method explains about the way used by the researcher in doing the research. The methodology that was used in writing this paper consist of three steps, they are data source, data collection, and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken by doing observation. They are written and spoken data of the vendors in Seminyak beach Kuta Bali. The written data were gained by giving questionnaires distributed to the vendors. The spoken data were in the form of the conversations of the vendors with foreigners in their daily activities as a vendor in Seminyak beach Kuta Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method and technique used in collecting the data are as follows: Doing observation by watching and listening how vendors used their English in communicating with foreigners, giving 25 vendors questionnaires in order to record their identities and knowing the factors that lead to the use of Pidgin English by them, choosing 15 vendors as sample, recording and note taking the conversation between the vendors and their foreign buyers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were qualitatively analyzed based on the related theories. Every sentence in the conversations was identified and then analyzed according to the theories on Sociolinguistics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Simplified of Language Spoken by Vendors and The Factors that Influence Simplified the Pidginized English at Seminyak Beach</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simplification Language</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This very cheap</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This paintings nice, Sir</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Special price morning</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This serious price</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Can bargain this one, Sir</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This good than other shops</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tomorrow-tomorrow, see you again</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Examples (1) and (2) are having the same case, which both have the absence</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">of ‘to be’. In examples (1 &amp;&nbsp;2), the vendor seemed to simplify the sentence. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">sentence (example 1) were lacks of to be </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“is”</span><span class="font1"> after the subject </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“this”</span><span class="font1"> which refers to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“the painting”</span><span class="font1"> that also omitted by the vendor. The complete sentence should be consisting of at least S+V/to be. Example (1) should be “this </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">is</span><span class="font1"> very cheap”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The same form S + V/to be also must be applied to example (2). Yet, to be “is” in sentence (1) must be replaced with “are” as the second example which refers to plural noun. Thus, the subject “this paintings” must become “these paintings”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the data, the declarative sentences that are used by the vendors undergo the simplification in the form of the absence of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“to be”.</span><span class="font1"> In Bahasa Indonesia, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“to be” </span><span class="font1">has the equal function with the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“adalah”</span><span class="font1"> which is used when giving the information about something. Moreover, the existence of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“adalah”</span><span class="font1"> in the sentence does not bring much effect for the meaning of the sentence are does not change the meaning of the sentence. However, the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“be”</span><span class="font1"> in English language must absolutely occur because the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“be”</span><span class="font1"> brings the agreement with the subject, especially to show whether it is singular or plural.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (3), the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“price morning”</span><span class="font1"> it translated into Bahasa Indonesia means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“harga pagi”</span><span class="font1"> which is considered a special price given to the customers when the vendors just arrive in the beach and begin to sell their goods in the morning. This expression appears as the translation of the Bahasa Indonesia term “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">penglaris”,</span><span class="font1"> which refers to the first transaction that happens to the vendors in the morning. In Indonesia, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“penglaris”</span><span class="font1"> is believed to make good transactions along the day for the vendors. And this example should be formed in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Present Continuous Tense,</span><span class="font1"> in which verb is using the present participle verb –ing (S + V-ing). It is because the vendor is talking about what is happening at the moment of speaking. Therefore, the standard English will be </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I am giving you the special morning price.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (4) and (6), again the absence of “to be” has occurred. Both examples must use “is” as to be after “this” as the determiners, which refers to singular noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (4), the speakers use special terms, they create new expression in order to ease their interaction with their customers. But, of course, those terms are still understandable. These special terms or new expressions are created by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mixing the local expressions</span><span class="font1"> which have been translated into English. For instance, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“serious price”</span><span class="font1"> means the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“real price.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore, the standard English for example (4) is “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">This is the real price</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meanwhile in example (6), there is also an error in using degrees of comparison of adjective “good”. In order to compare two or more objects, degrees of comparison needs to be applied to the sentence. In example (6), two objects are being compared, the one belongs to the vendor, and another belongs to the other shop. The comparative degree for “good” is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">better</span><span class="font1">. The formula for comparative degree sentence is S + to be + comparative degree adjective. Thus, the standard English for example (6) must be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">This is better than the other shops’</span><span class="font1">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example (5) performs errors such as absence of subject, as well as absence of preposition. The problems occur as the result of the intention to simplify the word order and the speakers do not tend to embed them. The sentence in English should be formed by Subject + Verb/to be. In this case, the sentence does not have subject. The subject needed for example (5) that is “You” which refers to the person whom the vendor was talking to. The preposition “for” in order to be followed by noun “this one” is also needed in example (5). The standard English for this sentence must be </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“You can bargain for this one, Sir”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (7), the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“tomorrow-tomorrow”</span><span class="font1"> appears from local vocabulary, Bahasa Indonesia, which means </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“besok-besok”.</span><span class="font1"> In Bahasa Indonesia, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“besok-besok”</span><span class="font1"> means next time. The vendors simplify the sentence and translate </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“besok-besok”</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“tomorrow-tomorrow”,</span><span class="font1"> the sentence should be </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“See you next time”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the data collected in Seminyak Beach, there are some examples of negative instruction:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not bargain too low, Sir.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No money, no bargain.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data, the speakers do not seem to be aware of being mistaken in arranging the sentences. They just simplify the use of the word “NOT” and “NO” in certain or any places. The data show the avoidance of auxiliary verb “do” in negative clause, as one of the criteria of pidgin. “No” is used as a negator in the responses. Those data can be compared to Standard English in the sense of its grammatical aspect:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don’t bargain too low, Sir.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don’t bargain anything if you don’t have any money.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interrogative Forms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;First time in Bali?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You wanna surfing today?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One water?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the examples above, there are no subject pronoun, auxiliary, modal or verb before the subject in the interrogative forms. The vendors used the simple expression in offering something or communicating to the tourist, supported by gesture, and by raising their intonation. Besides, some elements of the sentence were also omitted. Those sentences showed the vendors tended to use the simple expression in most</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">responses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (1), there was the absence of subject pronoun, the sentence has no subject pronoun in the beginning of the sentence. Therefore, the rule of word order should be: V/to be + S + P + O. The form was simplified by the vendors in the conversation. Those sentences showed the simple expression used by the vendor in most responses by omitting the subject of the sentence. However, the tourist still understood what the vendors mean. The sentence should be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Is it your first time in Bali?”.</span><span class="font1"> As in example (2), the vendors also simplified auxiliary “do” as the operator in the beginning of the interrogative sentence. The sentence should be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Do you want to have surfing today?”.</span><span class="font1"> Moreover, in example (3) there was also the simplification of auxiliary “do” in the interrogative form. And the sentence should be “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Do you like a bottle of water.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors that Influence the Pidginized English at Seminyak Beach</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Economy Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Generally, economic factor is responsible for the existence of pidginized English. In this case, the economic factor is related to tourism sector. In Bali, the understanding of foreign languages, especially English, has been an important part of the development of tourism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Educational Condition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The result of investigation shows that the people who run the business become vendors are those who did not continue their education after junior high school. They only get their knowledge of English in their school, a few of them are learning English by taking course, and some of them learn English themselves by listening to other people talking English. However, based on the observation, they are not good at in English. In communicating with foreigners, they express their idea just by translating Indonesian or Balinese language into English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Social Factor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The usage of Balinese language and Bahasa Indonesia in their daily life as the mother language makes the vendors simplify English with those pronunciations and dialect of that language. The vendors also translated some expressions into their mother language that they should have translated into Standard English, but these simplified of English done by the vendors can be understood by the foreigners.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Based on the data, there were found some simplifications, such as grammatical, lexical, modal, auxiliary and subject pronoun.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Some factors that influenced the pidginized English in Seminyak beach Kuta Bali, were: the economic background of the vendors, the educational condition of the vendors, and the last one was the social factor.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet.1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font1"> USA : Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hudson, RA.1980. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Randolph Quirk &amp;&nbsp;Sidney Greenbaum.1973. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">English Grammar.</span><span class="font1"> USA : Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Todd, Lotero.1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Modern English: Pidgin and Creoles</span><span class="font1">. England : Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wardhaugh, Ronald.1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. Great Britain: Page</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bros.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Winford, Donald.2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Pidgin and Creole Language.</span><span class="font1"> Colombus: The Ohio State University.</span></p>