---
layout: full_article
title: "MERCANTILSM OF KNOWLEDGE IN EDUCATION: A CASE STUDY AT MELATI SUKMA ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DENPASAR"
author: "I Ketut Suda, I Nengah Bawa Atmaja, I Wayan Ardika, I Gde Parimartha"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3596 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3596"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3596"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MERCANTILSM OF KNOWLEDGE IN EDUCATION: A CASE STUDY AT MELATI SUKMA ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DENPASAR</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">I Ketut Suda<sup>1</sup>, I Nengah Bawa Atmaja<sup>2</sup>, I Wayan Ardika<sup>2</sup>, I Gde Parimartha<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>Postgraduate Program, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University Email: </span><a href="mailto:sudaketut@yahoo.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">sudaketut@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This study discusses”Mercantilism of Knowledge in Education: a Case Study at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar”. The matter observed is a shift of educational paradigm, from enlightenment paradigm into instrumental paradigm. When the system of market economy influenced the Indonesian economic system in 1960s or in the beginning of 1970s, which is now getting more materialistic-capitalistic, social organizations such as educational organizations (read: schools) have found it difficult to avoid it. This study aims at exploring why the management of Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar has implemented “mercantilism of knowledge” in education, and why the consumers have accepted it. This study also aims at identifying the mechanism of how “mercantilism of knowledge” has occurred at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar, and its implications on the pupils, the school, the learning-teaching process, and on the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Qualitative method was employed for conducting the research. In this context, various types of information related to why the school management has implemented the mercantilism of knowledge, the mechanism of how it has occurred, and its implications on the pupils, the school, the process of learning and teaching process in the classrooms, and the community were obtained. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Firstly</span><span class="font0">, problems were identified, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">then</span><span class="font0"> theories for examining the data were selected, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">later</span><span class="font0"> the primary and secondary data were collected, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">next</span><span class="font0"> the selected data were analyzed and interpreted. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Finally</span><span class="font0">, the report writing and the results of the research were constructed. The theories employed are Comodification theory, Hegemony theory, and Deconstruction theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results are as follows: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">firstly</span><span class="font0">, those which have been responsible for the mercantilism of knowledge are the fact that the teachers have been getting marginalized from the process of national development, the system of market economy and the consumptive attitude of the community including the teachers have been getting stronger. The parents’ motivation to send their children to that school has also been in included in the first result. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Secondly</span><span class="font0">, the mercantilism of knowledge at Melati Sukma Elementary School has also been implemented through the domination, hegemony, and power of the school management over the pupils’ parents in the forms of sales of various industrial products, provision for additional lessons, and other types of payments. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Thirdly</span><span class="font0">, the mercantilism of knowledge has also resulted from the attempts made by the school</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">management to make the school look more glorious. The learning process has not been oriented towards the attempts made to increase the pupils’ intelligence but towards the economic advantages. Where the parents will send their children does not depend on the quality of education but on the prestige instead.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Key words</span><span class="font0">: mercantilism of knowledge, education, system of market economy, marginalization of teachers in the developmental process</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This dissertation discusses “Mercantilism of Knowledge in Education: A Case Study at Melati Suksma Elementary School Denpasar”. What is observed is the learning mechanism at the school because of the influence of the system of market economy in the Indonesian economy that has gradually taken place since 1970s or in the end of 1960s. Such a system has unintentionally made state schools and private schools have different positions. The private schools have found it easy to follow the flow of the market economy (being caught in the mercantilism of knowledge), while state schools have found it difficult to follow the flow of the market economy. Consequently, private schools have appeared to be commercial educational institutions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Related to what has been described above, several problems have appeared in the implementation of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">education especially at some favorite elementary schools or those that are considered superior. There has been a gap between what is ideally expected (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">das sein)</span><span class="font0"> that schools should serve to develop and form the civilization of the nation and the fact (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">das sollen</span><span class="font0">) that many educational institutions (read: schools) have been made arena for obtaining economic advantages. The particular problem observed is the occurrence of the mercantilism of knowledge in education that has made the poor find it more difficult to acquire education of good quality. On the other hand, it is stated in the applicable rules and regulations that every citizen reserves the right to acquire education of good quality. There are three main problems discussed in this study. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">First, </span><span class="font0">why has the school management implemented the mercantilism of education and the consumers have accepted it. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Second</span><span class="font0">, how has the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">mercantilism of knowledge occurred in education? </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Third,</span><span class="font0"> what are its implications on the pupils, the school institution, the learning process in the classrooms, and on the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In general, this study aims at describing the factors leading to the appearance of the mercantilism of knowledge in education at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar; explaining the mechanism of how the mercantilism of knowledge in education at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar has taken place; and deconstructing the ideology and truth hiding behind the high cost of education at the basic education level, particularly at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar. In particular, this study aims at: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">firstly</span><span class="font0">, exploring why the school management has implemented the mercantilism of knowledge in education and the consumers have accepted it; </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">secondly</span><span class="font0">, explaining the mechanism of why the mercantilism of knowledge in education has taken place; and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">thirdly</span><span class="font0">, analyzing the implications of the mercantilism of knowledge in education on the pupils, the school institution, the learning process in the class rooms, and on the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The academic benefits of this study are: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">first</span><span class="font0">, the wider framework of thinking as to why the mercantilism of knowledge in education has occurred at the school can be revealed; </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">second</span><span class="font0">, the way of thinking concerning the extension of the global capitalistic ideology influencing the educational world can be contributed ; and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">third</span><span class="font0">, the starting point for further studies concerning the mercantilism of knowledge in education applying approaches of cultural studies or paradigm of critical theory can be established.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In addition, practically, this study is useful to the governmental elements, educational doers, and all the related parties (stakeholders) such as headmasters, teachers, school committee, foundations running private schools, and the pupils’ parents. This study will enable them to understand the responsibility and function of the school as an educational institution better. It is responsible for developing and forming the ability and civilization of the nation. It is responsible for sharpening the nation’s life. Alternatives will be recommended for both the central government and the regional government for formulating the public policy (the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">applicable rules and regional regulations) related to how to strengthen and establish the educational implement-tation especially at the basic level.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>MATERIAL AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Qualitative method was employed to conduct the research presenting the mercantilism of knowledge in education especially at the basic level. In this research the causing factors, various forms of mercantilism of knowledge occurring at Melati Sukma Elementary School Denpasar, its implications on the pupils, the school institution, the learning process in the classrooms, and on the community were identified. In the first stage, the data both primary and secondary were collected. In the second stage, the theories were selected for examining the data. In the third data, the selected data were analyzed and interpreted. In the fourth stage, the results of the research were written and constructed. To achieve those objectives, the theory of comodification, the theory of hegemony, and the theory of deconstruction were employed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results of the study can be described as follows. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Firstly</span><span class="font0">, with regard</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">to the factors responsible for the appearance of the mercantilism of knowledge in education especially at elementary schools, the following can be reported. The marginalization of teachers from the national development, the culture of reputation and the motivation of the parents to send their children to such a school, and the educational politics of the government have caused the mercantilism of knowledge in education to take place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Secondly</span><span class="font0">, viewed from the analysis of the mechanism of how the mercantilism of knowledge in education has taken place can be reported as follows. In fact, the mercantilism of knowledge in education at the school, where the research was conducted, has been created through such refined and systematic relations of domination, hegemony, and power between the school management and the pupils’ parents that the latter are less aware that the mercantilism of knowledge keeps going on. The mechanism of how the mercantilism of knowledge has taken place especially at elementary school level is through the sales of various industrial products, printed products, clothing industry, banking industry (insurance company), and even food</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">products such as the fast food products produced by McDonald.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Thirdly</span><span class="font0">, from the analysis of the implications of the mercantilism of knowledge in education, it has been revealed that the dominant structure of power has been becoming stronger, because in the process of implementing education, among those who are involved such as the teachers, the headmaster, the school committee, and the foundation, as far as private schools are concerned, there has been an interaction through the process of decision making. There is always a chance to do something, especially among the teachers, the headmaster, the foundation, and the school committee as the dominant parties. In this context, the school can serve as the arena to play in. Then, in such a play, there is an attempt to compete to get and pawn economic, social and intellectual capitals. Therefore, an educational board has been established to control how education is implemented in a regency or municipality. In this case, with reference to the Decision Letter of the Minister of National Education Number 44/U/2002, a regent or a major is appointed. Such a condition will also influence the election of the school committee. This means that</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">those who have social, intellectual and economic capitals will be elected the school committee. Therefore, there will also be a structure at school, which then makes the process of decision-making elite–based instead of mass-based. Thus, the school can function as the arena, where economic capital, social capital and intellectual capital can be exchanged. This will probably take place through the process of domination and hegemony when decisions are made by the foundation, the headmaster, and the teachers, which are then legalized by the school committee.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>NOVELTY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">There are several novelties in this study. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">first</span><span class="font0"> novelty is that the mercantilism of knowledge in education at elementary school has taken place through a mechanism which is so refined and systematic that the pupils’ parents are less aware of this. The mercantilism of knowledge in education has been being more developed, because the community has the ideology that what is expensive is good in quality, and that what is cheap is not good in quality. The fact is that this is not to be taken for granted. Such a mentality is made use of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">by the school management to arrange the funds for educational compensation, as it likes. In other words, it has done what is called the mercantilism of knowledge in education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Secondly</span><span class="font0">, the mercantilism of knowledge in education at the school where the research was conducted has been made to appear by dominating and hegemonizing the community’s way of thinking with various nice jargons such as ‘a school of democracy’, ‘in this era which schools are cheap?”, “high cost is needed for purchasing books to widen the pupils’ insight, and many more jargons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Thirdly,</span><span class="font0"> the mercantilism of knowledge in education at the school where the research was conducted has also been made to appear by making use of the power among the foundation, the headmaster, the teachers, and the school committee. This has taken place through the process of seizing and pawning the economic, social, and intellectual capitals. Then, the position of the dominating parties such as the foundation, the headmaster, the teachers and the school committee is getting stronger, because the school committee is headed by head of the foundation, the secretary to the committee is the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">secretary to the foundation, and even the school committee members are the pupils’ parents who are still related to the foundation structure. In this way, the position of the school committee as the controlling board at the school is weak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Fourthly</span><span class="font0">, high cost should be matched with excellent service such as availability of adequate facilities, preparation of professional human resources (teaching staff) and effective and efficient learning process. However, what has happened at the school where the research was conducted is that the teaching facilities such as OHP, LCD and Laptop have been available for reputation instead of for betterment of learning quality. The reason is that only one unit of each teaching facility of OHP, LCD, and Laptop is available, whereas the classes needing such facilities are 22. Furthermore, with regard to the academic and competence qualification of the teaching staff referring to the Ministerial Regulations Number 16 of Year 2007, it should be at least either S-1 or D-4 in education (SD/MI/PGSD/PGMI). However, at the school where the research was conducted, no teaching staff has the qualification of either S-1 or D-4 in education (SD/MI/PGSD/PGMI).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Fifthly</span><span class="font0">, viewed from the learning process at the school where the research was conducted, it has not referred to the national education standard (SNP) as stated in the Regulations Number 19 Number 2005. On the other hand, the school frequently refers to quality as the label for motivating the parents to send their children there. Consequently, they do not mind spending more money on educational compensation with an expectation that they will get a good quality of education for their children.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The conclusion of the research is that the mercantilism of knowledge in education taking place at the school where the research was conducted has resulted from several factors, such as (1) the marginalization of the teachers from the process of the national development; (2) the culture of reputation and the motivation of the parents to send their children to that school; (3) the educational politics of the government. The evidence that the mercantilism of knowledge in education has taken place is that on one hand the pupils make many types of payment to the school, but</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">on the other hand, the eight national education standards (SNP) as stated in the Regulations Number 10 of Year 2005 have not been achieved yet. The mercantilism of knowledge in education has been made to appear through the process of domination, the process of hegemony, and the process of playing with power among the teachers, the headmaster, the foundation, and the school committee when decisions are made. The process of domination, the process of hegemony, and the process of playing with power have been so refined and systematic that the parents as the consumers are less aware of this. Therefore, the mercantilism of knowledge in education has kept going on without any meaningful obstacles.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Adorno, Theodor &amp;&nbsp;Max Horkheimer ,1979. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dialectic of Enlightenment</span><span class="font0">. London: Verso.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Althusser, Louis ,1984. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tentang Idologi. Marxisme Strutualis, Psikoanalitis, Culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Studies</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Awandi, 2003. ‘Proses Pembodohan di Sekolah’. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pontianak Post</span><span class="font0">, 25 Januari 2003.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Atmadja, Nengah Bawa, 2006. ‘Peningkatan Kuantitas dan Kualitas Bidang Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan Melalui Perseling kuhan Lintas-Disiplin’. Makalah Dibawakan Dalam Seminar Peningkatan Kuantitas dan Kualitas Penelitian Bidang Kepen-didikan dan Kebudayaan Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha Singaraja.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Atmadja, Nengah Bawa dan Ananta-wikrama Tungga Atmadja. 2008. ’Sekolah +</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bertaraf Internasional, Unggul an, Favorit) = Biaya Mahal = Komersi Pendidikan’. (Artikel).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Baudrliard, Jean, 1988. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Selected</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Writings</span><span class="font0">, Stanford, &nbsp;&nbsp;Stanford</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Baudrillard, Jean, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Masyarakat Konsumsi</span><span class="font0">. (Wahyunto, Penerje mah Yogyakarta: Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bockock, Robert, 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hegemony. </span><span class="font0">London: Tavistock Publication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bourdieu, Pierre, 1990. (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Habitus X Modal</span><span class="font0">) + </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ranah = Praktik. </span><span class="font0">(Richard Harker, Cheelen Mahar, Chris Wilkes, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ed.</span><span class="font0">) (Pipit Maizer, Penerjemah). Yoryakarta:Jala sustra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Budiman, H. 1997. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pembunuhan yang Selalu Gagal: Modernisme dan Krisis Rasionali- Tas Menurut Baniel Bell.</span><span class="font0"> Yogyakarta: Pustka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cemerlang, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia No. 20Tahun 2003 tentang Sistem Pendidikan Nasiona</span><span class="font0">l. Jakarta: Cemerlang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Christopher, Norris, 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Membongkar Teori Dekonstruksi Jaques Derrida.</span><span class="font0"> (Inyiak Ridwan Muzir, Penerjemah). Yogyakarta: AR-RUZZ.Derrida Jacques, 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dekonstruksi</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Spiritual:Merayakan Ragam</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wajah Spiritual</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Doni Koesoema A, 2004: ’Pendidikan Manusia Versus Kebutuhan Pasar’, dalam Widiastono (ed.). </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan Manusia Indonesia</span><span class="font0">: Jakarta Penerbit Buku Kompas pp. 198 – 216.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Educare, Wahana Komunikasi Pendidikan</span><span class="font0">. NO. 11/III/Februari 2007. Jakarta : Komisi Pendidikan KWI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Endrizal, 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">’Industri Pendidikan’</span><span class="font0">. Article in Bali Post, 10 May 2006: 7.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fakih, Marsour, &nbsp;&nbsp;1999. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">GagasanGagasan &nbsp;&nbsp;Politik &nbsp;&nbsp;Gramsci.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yogyakarta: Pustka PelajarDan Insist Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fakih, Mansour, 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bebas dari Neoliberalism</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Inist.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fokusmedia, 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Standar Nasional Pendidikan</span><span class="font0">. Peraturan Pemerin tah No. 19 tahun2005. Dileng kapi dengan UU No. 20 Tahun 2003 tentang Sistem Pendidikan Nasional. Peraturan Menteri No 11 Tahun 2005 tentang Buku Teks Pelajaran.Bandung: Fokus media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gamsci, Antonio, 1976. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Selections from the Prison Notebooks, Quintin Hoare dan Nowell Smith (ed.). New York: International Publisher</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Harsono, 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pengelolaan Pembia yaan Pendidikan</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Surabaya Press Bekerjasama dengan Pustaka Book Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hasbullah, Jousairi, 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Social Capital: Menuju Keunggulan Budaya Indonesia.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: MR-United Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hendarto, Heru, 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mengenal Konsep Hegemoni Gramsci, dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">DiskursusKemasyarakatan dan Kamanusiaan</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Tim Redaksi Driyarkara Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Irawan, Ade. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mandagangkan Sekolah, Studi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kebijakan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah di DKI &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta</span><span class="font0">: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Corruption Wastch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keohane, R.O. and J.S. Nye, 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Globalization: What’s New? What’s Not? (And So What)</span><span class="font0">. Fpregn Policy: Spring.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Lie, Anita. 2005. ‘Pendidikan Kritis dan Transformasi Masyarakat Kwargaan’, dalam Rahmanto, Catur Rismiati, Praptomo Baryadi, Ari Subagio, Rohandi dan Sunardi (Tim Penyunting). Pendidikan Nasional dalam Reformasi Politik dan Kemasya rakatan. Yogyakarta: Universitas Sanata Dharma. Hal. 3 – 30.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In this opportunity, I would like to thank Prof. Dr. I Nengah Bawa Atmadja, M.A., as the Promoter; Prof. Dr. I Wayan Ardika, M.A., as the first Co-Promoter; and Prof. Dr. I Gde Parimartha, M.A., as the second CoPromoter , who have attentively and patiently given me support, encoura gement and guidance from the proposal writing to the last process of completing this dissertation report. I would also like to deliver my deep appreciation to the Directorate of Higher Education, Department of National Education through Team of the Doctorate Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Management, which has given me funds in the form of BPPS, the University of Hindu Indonesia, the Rector of Udaya na University, the Director of Post graduate Program Udayana Univesity and its staff members, and Head of the Doctorate Program of Cultural Studies Udayana University and its staff members.</span></p>