---
layout: full_article
title: "THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NOKIA LUMIA 710 AND IPHONE 4S ADVERTISEMENTS BASED SEMIOTIC POINT OF VIEW"
author: "Ni Putu Isha Aprinica"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NOKIA LUMIA 710 AND IPHONE 4S ADVERTISEMENTS BASED SEMIOTIC POINT OF VIEW</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NI PUTU ISHA APRINICA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semua iklan menggunakan tanda-tanda untuk membuatnya bagus, karena keberhasilan produk mendapatkan konsumen tergantung pada seberapa indah iklan itu. Gambar lebih mudah untuk dipahami dan memiliki dampak yang lebih dari kata-kata. Tujuan dari tanda ini adalah untuk membuat iklan yang baik. Semiotika adalah istilah yang umum digunakan untuk merujuk untuk mempelajari kapasitas bawaan manusia untuk memproduksi dan memahami tanda-tanda dari semua jenis. Misalnya Nokia Lumia 710 dan iklan iPhone 4S menggunakan iklan yang baik untuk mendapatkan konsumen. Dalam hal ini, ada beberapa perbedaan antara iklan mereka yang memberikan pengaruh terhadap produk mereka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Iklan, Perbedaan, Arti Verbal dan Non-Verbal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Advertisement is an informative or persuasive message carried by a non personal medium &amp;&nbsp;paid for by an identified sponsor whose organization or product is identified in some way. It is a little bit different from Wikipedia sources which tell that advertisement is an encapsulated communication about a product (good/services), a clearly designed, concise, aesthetically appealing and content-wise accurate communiqué intended to effectively persuade the target audience (viewers/listeners/readers) to arrive at a decision as desired by the advertiser concerning the product (goods/service).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The theory of semiotic is used to analyze the printed advertisement. Semiotics is the term commonly used to refer to the study of innate capacity of people to produce and understand signs of all kinds. All advertisements use signs in order to make good advertising, because how successfully the product gets consumer depends on how</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">beautiful the advertisement is. The kinds of pictures or signs can be found in everyday life, like in mark, symbol, zodiac, commercial or non-commercial advertisement. The purpose of that sign is to make a good advertisement. For examples Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements, those products used good advertisements to get consumers. Both of them are Communication Corporation and have a lot of consumers, but nowadays iPhone 4S becomes the best communication corporation in the world. In this case, there are some differences between their advertisements which give influence to their products</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on background above, the problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of visual sign communication elements were used in the Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What was the meaning of pictures in Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements based on each verbal sign in advertisement?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are focused:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the kinds of visual sign communication elements used in Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the meaning of pictures in Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements based on each verbal sign in advertisements.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To support the study, this study used primary data since the data were directly taken from Nokia Lumia 710 advertisement and iPhone 4S advertisement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S products were chosen for this paper because both of them are Communication Corporation and have a lot of consumers. Both of them uses advertisements to get a lot of customers, but there are some differences between their advertisements.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In composing this study, the methods applied in collecting data was the documentation method. It means the data were taken from written source. First, the Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S advertisements were downloaded. Next, the advertisements were read and observed intensively one by one in order to find out the verbal and visual elements of the advertisements. Finally, the required data were classified based on the used words and pictures, and followed by some note taking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of analyzing data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were qualitatively and descriptively analyzed based on the theory of The Principle of Non-Verbal Communication proposed by Dyer in his book ‘Advertising as Communication’ (1993). The analysis started with identifying about verbal and non-verbal sign in those advertisements. Then the relationship between the verbal and non-verbal signs of the products were found using the signifier (carries of meaning) and the signified (the concept of meaning) in Pierce’s sign theory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the differences between Nokia Lumia 710 and iPhone 4S Advertisements based on Semiotic Point of View</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of printed visual message elements in Advertisements</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The function of printed visual sign communication elements in advertisements could be derived from the description of the picture in the advertisement. Some advertisements show the role of printed visual message as the main information of message transferring. But, some of the advertisements only put a few description or information in transferring the message from the advertisement maker into the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;iPhone 4S’s advertisement</span></h1>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">VISUAL SIGN COMMUNICATION</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SIGNIFIED</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The image of iPhone 4S</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">It resembles the product in reality. The new technology of hand phone that can speak by itself.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The image of hand that hold the iPhone 4S</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">It means that only with the iPhone 4S, we can hold the world in our hand.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Discussion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the printed visual of the data is categorized into some parts of analysis. All of analysis can lead us to the best way to understand the picture meaning and the readers will know the picture meaning and its function in this advertisement. The image of the product resembles the product in reality ‘iPhone 4S’ that used the new technology for hand phone. The picture dominates 80% of the advertisement. The picture contains some colour, they are black colour for the phone colour and the skin colour for the hand, and the some application inside the phone that is colored as the original colour for these applications in iPhone 4S product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2 . Nokia Lumia’s advertisement</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">VISUAL SIGN COMMUNICATION</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SIGNIFIER</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">SIGNIFIED</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The image of Nokia Lumia 710</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">It resembles the product in reality. The America’s first 4G with windows technology.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The image of black and white Nokia Lumia 710 with different theme.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Nokia lumia 710 black shows the menu of nokia lumia 710 and Nokia Lumia 710 white show one of superiority in navigate. It means that this product can be the navigator of people’s life.</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Discussion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The general point of view about the picture of two phone of Nokia Lumia 710 explains in a simple explanation. The picture role is as the media to attract the readers if the the readers cannot understand the meaning of the verbal message in the right side of the picture of two phones Nokia Lumia 710. The picture of two phones Nokia Lumia 710 is made to emerge by the advertisement maker in order to describe the service obliged by the company to their customer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the colour of the picture, the advertisement maker makes it with different colours in each phone; white and black colour which interesting to the readers. That is the reason why the picture is easy to be seen and glowing in the advertisement page. The advertisement is considered to be involved with the perception of abstract and also to create an elegant style of European people.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of meaning based on verbal sign in Advertisements</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;iPhone 4S Advertisement</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of verbal messages of the advertisement is related to the written text in the advertisement. Based on the connotative and denotative meaning, the analyses are different for each example of data. The connotative of the first text is the point of view of people’s paradigm that is easily curious about some new products. The word “will it be sunny in Brisbane this weekend has makes the customer curious and wonder about this product. The denotative meaning of this text is the real condition asking people about the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">weather. So, the reader’s mind will wonder about the new product of iPhone 4S.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second text talks about the iPhone 4S that can help people. In this case the connotative meaning though about by the reader’s is a message that has a meaning that the new product of iPhone 4S can help people only by their voice. The advertisement maker describes the curiosity of people and its enthusiasm to make a good advertisement language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The third text describes the center point of information. Based on the connotative meaning, the reader’s interpretation about the text is concerned with more information of the company that wants to be delivered into the advertisement. The sentence “say hello to the most amazing iPhone yet” describe how amazingly the new product of iPhone 4S. The denotative meaning in this text is concerned about the location or position of the object which is low or in the bottom of the advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nokia Lumia 710 Advertisement</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the connotative and denotative meaning, the analyses are different for each example of data. The expression “America’s first 4G Nokia Windows Phone” is intended to make the customer curious and wondering about this product, especially American people. The denotative meaning of this text is the real condition that the new product of Nokia Lumia 710 is the first 4G phone in America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second text talks about the Nokia Lumia 710 that can only be bought at T-Mobile. In this case, the connotative meaning that was though about by the readers is a message that has a meaning people will have the original one of Nokia Lumia 710.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The third text describes the center point of information. The sentence “navigate your life not your phone” describes about how amazingly the new product of Nokia Lumia 710. The advertisement maker wants to make the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">reader believe in them. The reader will be wondering about this product because they want to know how Nokia Lumia 710 can navigate people’s life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The discussion of differences between iPhone 4S and Nokia Lumia 710 advertisement is based on semiotic view had was presented in the previous chapter. Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The advertisement of iPhone 4S is a good combination between the verbal and visual signs. It is concerned with the way how the advertisement maker elaborates the picture of iPhone 4S’s product with hand. The sign of the verbal message is concerned about the simple form of the text stated as a title text. The message of the sign is delivered well through the mind directed by the advertisement maker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The advertisement of Nokia Lumia 710 is slight different from iPhone 4S. Colour plays a little role in this advertisement. The advertisement maker is more concerned about the interpretation of the readers delivered in language style, form, position and size of the verbal message. The advertisement maker tries to attract the readers using the verbal message as the main author in the advertisement page.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Cohn, Neil. 2007. “A Visual Lexicon”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“A theory of Visual Communication Elements</span><span class="font2">”. London: Methuen &amp;&nbsp;Co.Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">http: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/visualsign/</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: Study of Meaning</span><span class="font2">: UNS Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Peirce, C.S. 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics and Significs</span><span class="font2">. Ed Charles Hardwick. Bloomington I.N.: Indiana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Jappy. 2011 “A Peircean approach to pictorial documents”. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">VECT, University of Perpignan Via Domitia, France</span></p>