---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ENGLISH CONJUNTIONS OF POLITICAL ARTICLES IN THE JAKARTA POST"
author: "Taufiqqurrahman cs"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">JURNAL</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">THE ENGLISH CONJUNTIONS OF POLITICAL ARTICLES IN THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">JAKARTA POST</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NAME : TAUFIQ QURRAHMAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">NIM : 0801305083</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">JURUSAN : SASTRA INGGRIS</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstrak</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Tulisan ini berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The English Conjunctions Of Polotical Articles In The Jakarta Post</span><span class="font1">. Tujuan dari pada penelitian ini adalah untuk mengamati dan menganalisis jenis kata sambung yang digunakan dalam koran harian politik, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Jakarta Post</span><span class="font1">, dan bagaimana penggunaan kata sambung tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data yang digunakan untuk penulisan ini diambil dari dua belas artikel dari </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Jakarta Post</span><span class="font1"> yang diterbitkan pada Selasa 23 Juni 2009 sampai Jumat 26 Juni 2009. Kemudian data penelitian ini dikumpulkan. Menurut Brown dan Rodgers (2002:6 ), data dalam makalah ini dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif yang mengacu pada metode di mana data dianalisis dan cara alami tanpa manipulasi apapun. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini didasarkan pada konteks situasi oleh Halliday M AK dan Hasan dalam buku mereka yang berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa, Konteks dan Teks; Aspek Bahasa dalam Perspektif Sosial-semiotik</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan jenis konjungsi yang digunakan dan bagaimana penggunaan kata sambung itu sendiri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: kata hubung, penggunaan kata hubung, article politik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is used as a means of communication by human being to communicate to each other in their daily lives either written or spoken. The sender or the receiver must avoid misunderstanding. In communication, the sender needs ability to convey the idea so that the receiver accepts without any other interpretation. Nowadays, English language is used in international communication and becomes lingua franca. The need for written information has been rising slightly, therefore, the news has been written in English language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday (1985:10) mentions three functions of writing text. They are an action, entertainment and information. The written text used for action are public signs, product labels, television and radio guides, then comic strips, drama and newspaper are used for entertainment and advertisement and political pamphlets are used for information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newspaper is one of the written texts. According to Hornby (1995:856), newspaper is a printed publication daily or weekly, with news, opinion, and advertisements. People read newspaper because of their need for the information. Nowadays in Indonesia many people start reading English newspaper because they have already understood English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Article mostly occurs in newspaper. It covers every aspect of human life depending on the types of newspaper in which it appears. Political news is the reason why people read a newspaper. Since politics is a process of forming and dividing authority in society such as decision making process, especially in a country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When people read newspaper sometimes they cannot understand the conjunction which occurs in a text. They do not know the types of conjunction, the meaning and how it is used in the texts. The analysis in this study is needed in order to know more about the types of conjunction, the meaning and how it is used in the texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The written text especially found in the newspaper is considered good when it is well organized, well structured, coherent, and cohesive. In a text organization, it emphasizes the physical appearance of the text, not about the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">language. The text structure emphasizes about how the language in the text is exploited as to achieve the intended goal of the writer. The coherence talks about the unity of idea or the message from the start to the end of the text. Meanwhile cohesion talks about the interrelation between sentences, paragraph that form the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background, there are two problems focused in this study, they are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of conjunction are used in the political articles of The Jakarta Post?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are the conjunctions used in the political articles of The Jakarta Post??</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Generally, this study tries to apply the linguistic theory on discourse analysis namely grammatical cohesion theory that focuses on the conjunction markers. Specifically, this study has two basic aims referring to the previous problems stated. The aims of this study are;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of conjunction used in political articles of The Jakarta Post.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyse how the conjunctions are used in political articles of The Jakarta Post.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this section, there are three points of discussions covering data source, method and technique of collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter is concerned with the analysis of the data source in the daily newspaper </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Jakarta Post.</span><span class="font1"> To identify the types of conjunction used in The Jakarta Post is the discussion in this chapter. The analysis on this chapter is based on the concept of conjunction proposed by Halliday and Hasan as a part of the theory of the cohesion in the Cohesion in English (1976).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data found were classified according to their types and the analysis is based upon their variants in the sentences, which can be divided into four categories, they are: Additive, Adversative, Causal, and Temporal. Then how the conjunctions are used in political articles in The Jakarta Post.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Use of Conjunctions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After last week's widely panned &quot;debate&quot; by the presidential candidates, their running mates - two ex-generals </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font1"> a US-educated economist - are tonight expected to stage a livelier exchange.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Type of Conjunctions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the article above, there were several type conjunctions which were found such as: Simple additive relation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Additive</span><span class="font1">) which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font1">, also; Simple causal relation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Causal)</span><span class="font1"> which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font1">; Durative relation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Temporal)</span><span class="font1"> which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">during</span><span class="font1">; Simple temporal relation (Temporal) which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">previously</span><span class="font1">; Conclusive and sequential relation (Temporal) which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at the end</span><span class="font1">; and Simple adversative (Adversative) which was presented by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">only, even though, yet;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example of simple additive relation:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We are told that as a poor country and we should feed our own people first before we express our sympathy for millions of oppressed Myanmarese</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font1">therefore, needs to begin formulating a post-ASEAN foreign policy.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the previous chapter, conjunction used in the political articles of The Jakarta Post has been analyzed. From the analysis there are some points that can be concluded as the answers to the problems of this writing. There are four types of conjunction occurring in 12 articles The Jakarta Post that were taken as the data source of this writing. There are additive, adversative, causal and temporal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There is one type of additive relation occurring in the text. The type is simple additive relation. Simple additive relation is presented by the words '</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and'</span><span class="font1"> and '</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font1">'. The conjunction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font1"> in the sentence is used to add the information of what has been said before. The semantic relation of conjunctive or relation is used to indicate the explanation from the previous idea.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the adversative relation there is one type of adversative occurring in the text. The type is simple adversative. Simple adversative is presented by expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">only</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">though/although</span><span class="font1">. The conjunction only normally comes before a subject it refers to. It may occur in initial position and phonologically reduced or in the other words, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">only</span><span class="font1"> does not have one meaning. Similarly, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tough/although </span><span class="font1">as conjunctive is always phonologically reduced or does not have one meaning, it may occur initial!)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In relation to causal, there is only one type occurring in the text. The type is simple causal relation. Simple causal relation is presented by the conjuntion </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font1">. The function of conjunction </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font1"> in the text is to show the relationship between cause and consequence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Aron, P. 2005. &quot;The Use of Conjunctions in the Article Stranger in Paradise in Hello Bali Magazine&quot; (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, J.D. and T.S. Rodgers. 2002. Doing Second Language Research. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 1976. Cohesion in English. London and New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 1985. Language. Context, and Text: Aspect of Language in a Social - semiotic Perspective. Victoria: Deakin University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 1995. Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary. London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ling, S.C. 2008. Corpus-based Study of Differences in Explicitation Between Literature Translations for Children and for Adults (serial online), Jun., (cited 2008. Available from: </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">URL: </span><a href="http://translation1ournal.net/journal/45explicit.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://translation1ournal.net/journal/45explicit.htm</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nunan. David. 1993. Discourse Analysis. London: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pratama. A.D.Y. 2007. &quot;The Analysis of Conjunctions Used in Bisnis Bali Newspaper&quot; (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rahayuni. N.K.S 2006. &quot;The Analysis of Conjunction on Opinion Article Texts in The Jakarta Post&quot; (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Shi, A. 2004. The Importance of Teaching Cohesion in Translation on a Textual Level-A Comparison of test scores before and after teaching (serial online), Jun., (cited 2004, Available from: RL:</span><a href="http://accurapid.com/journal/28edut1.htm"><span class="font1">http://accurapid.com/journal/28edut1.htm</span></a><span class="font1">).</span></p>