---
layout: full_article
title: "Negative Politeness Used In Cempaka Lounge At Domestic Departure Ngurah Rai Airport"
author: "I Gede Arya Wisnu Karsana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">Negative Politeness Used In </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2"> At Domestic Departure </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ngurah Rai</span><span class="font2"> Airport</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Gede Arya Wisnu Karsana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non Regular English Department Faculty of Letters and Cultures Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Study tentang politeness bertujuan untuk mengetahui negative politeness strategy dan faktor sosial yang mempengaruhi negative politeness tersebut yang diterapkan oleh karyawan Cempaka Lounge. Data dalam study ini diperoleh melalui observasi dan mencatat percakapan untuk mengetahui situasi di Cempaka Lounge. Lalu dianalisa menggunakan metode kuantitatif dan deskriptif. Data yang telah diperoleh kemudian diteliti berdasarkan teori Negativ politeness dari Brown dan Levinson (1978:131-211) dan di analisa oleh Holmes (1992) dikombinasikan dengan teori Brown dan Levinson (1987) untuk menjelaskan sosial faktor yang mempengaruhi negative politeness. Berdasarkan hasil analisi ditemukan bahwa negative politeness strategi yang di terapkan oleh karyawan adalah Strategy 1 (Be Conventional Indirect), Strategy 2 (Question, Hedge), Strategy 3 (Be Pessimistic), Strategy 4 (Minimize the Imposition), Strategy 5 (Give Deference), Strategy 6 (Apologize). Dan faktor sosial yang mempengaruhi karyawan menerapkan negativ politeness adalah participant, setting dan topik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Negative Politeness, Karyawan, Pelanggan</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Politeness makes people feel comfortable in explaining the purpose of a communication, that is, why we do need to examine more about politeness. Politeness can make people trust each other, people usually communicate their ideas through conversations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Holmes (1992:268), a polite person make others feel comfortable. Holmes stated that being polite is a complicated business in any language. Politeness is a very important principle in language use. It may be defined as taking account of the feelings of others. Holmes also stated that there are two different types of politeness , they are Positive and Negative politeness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Brown and Levinson (1978:75), negative politeness is redressive action oriented mainly toward partially satisfying (redressing) H’s (Hearer) negative face : his basic want to have his freedom of action unhindered or in other words ; to maintain claims of territory and self determination. Negative face is the desire to remain autonomous so the speaker is more apt to include an out for the listener, through distancing styles like apologies. Negative politeness strategies are oriented towards the hearer’s negative face and emphasize avoidance of imposition on the hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems of this study are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of negative politeness strategies are used by Staff members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What social factors affecting negative politeness used by Staff members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge , Ngurah Rai</span><span class="font2"> airport ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out types of negative politeness strategies used by Staff members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge , Ngurah Rai</span><span class="font2"> airport.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out social factors affecting negative politeness used by Staff members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge , Ngurah Rai</span><span class="font2"> airport.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study was taken from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2"> at Domestic Departure </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ngurah Rai</span><span class="font2"> Airport. The data were collected by making observation and note taking of conversation to know about the context of situation in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2">. It was analyzed by using quantitative and descriptive method. The data collected were investigated based on negative politeness strategy proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978:131-211). Then they were analyzed according to the theory proposed by Holmes (1992) to describ the social factors affecting negative politeness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Negative politeness is usually used to show that speaker cares about and respects the negative face of interlocutors. Unlike positive politeness which functions to minimize social distance, negative politeness is used to indicate that the speaker is aware and respect the social distance between him or her and the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Negative politeness strategies are oriented towards the hearer’s negative face and emphasize avoidance of imposition on the hearer. These strategies presume that the speaker will be imposing on the listener and there is a higher potential for awkwardness or embarrassment than in bald on record strategies and positive politeness strategies. Negative face is the desire to remain autonomous so the speaker is more apt to include an out for the listener, through distancing styles like apologies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are ten strategies of negative politeness proposed by Brown and Levinson ( 1978 ) ; Strategy 1: Be conventionally indirect, Strategy 2: Question, hedge, Strategy 3: Be pessimistic, Strategy 4: Minimize the imposition, Strategy 5: Give deference, Strategy 6: Apologize, Strategy 7: Impersonalize S and H, Strategy 8: State the FTA as a general rule, Strategy 9: Nominalize, Strategy 10: Go on record as incurring a debt, or as not indebting H</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis of negative politeness proposed by Brown and Levinson ( 1978 ) The types of negative politeness strategies used by The Staff members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2"> are summarized in the following table:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">NEGATIVE POLITENESS STRATEGY</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">OCCURENCE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">PERCENTAGE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">6,4 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">27 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">13,3 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">20 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">13,3 %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">STRATEGY 6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">20 %</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes (1992) stated that some social factors such as participant, setting and topic related to the users of language. Holmes (2001:8) also stated that Social</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">status depends on a number of factors such as social rank, wealth, age, gender and so on. In their theory, Brown and Levinson (1987: 74 - 84</span><span class="font0">), </span><span class="font2">there are three most common factors affecting the politeness of an utterance such as Social distance, Power and Rank of Position. This research uses combination of social factors mentioned by Brown and Levinson (1987: 74 – 84) and Holmes (1992). The social factors are participant, setting and topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Politeness is best expressed as the practical application of good</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manners"><span class="font2"> manners </span></a><span class="font2">or</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiquette"><span class="font2"> etiquette.</span></a><span class="font2"> Politeness makes people feel comfortable in explaining the purpose of a communication, that is, why we do need to examine more about politeness. Negative politeness is a strategy that seeks to minimize the threat to the hearer’s face. In this analysis, there are two major discussions, the type of negative politeness and the social factors that affect negative politeness. From the data classification, negative politeness strategies are applied by the staff members based on negative politeness strategies including Strategy 1 (Be Conventional Indirect), Strategy 2 (Question, Hedge), Strategy 3 (Be Pessimistic), Strategy 4 (Minimize the Imposition), Strategy 5 (Give Deference), Strategy 6 (Apologize). The social factors that affecting negative politeness used by The staff members are participant, setting and topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason of the negative politeness strategies in Cempaka Lounge can be : 1. The staff members could not speak other language with the foreigners who are coming from the countries whose native language is not English. The tourists in Bali were not only coming from the countries whose native language is English, but also they were coming from the countries whose their native language is not English, for example: Japan, Italy, Germany, etc. 2. The staff members misunderstood about what the foreigners said, because the foreigners used idiom words or technical words. Negative Politeness strategy was mostly used by The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Staff Members in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cempaka Lounge</span><span class="font2"> was Strategy 2 (Question, Hedge) while the least strategy used was Strategy 1 (Be Conventional Indirect).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Finally the politeness strategy has become first priority. Because when the customers feel satisfied, they will visit the Lounge, and they will get more respect when the staff members use polite sentences. As a result the company will get benefit from this situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Barešova , Ivona. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Strategies in Cross Cultural Perspective , Study of American and Japanese Employment Rejection Letters. </span><span class="font2">Praha : Palacky University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, P and Stephen Levinson. 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Universal in Language Usage :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Phenomena</span><span class="font2"> In Esther N. Goody (ED). Question and Politeness : Strategies in Social Interaction , (56-310). Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dellemen , Nicholas. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Question Tag and The Sociolinguistic Factors Determining ; Linguistic Politeness</span><span class="font2">. Birmingham : University of Birmingham</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Do , Nguyen Van. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A study of politeness strategies in the conventional activities of the course book “New Headway”.</span><span class="font2"> Ho Ci Minh : Thang Long University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction of Sociolinguistic.</span><span class="font2"> London : Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men and Politeness.</span><span class="font2"> London : Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Luhur , Ida Bagus Baruna. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Positive and Negative Politeness Strategies in “ Friends “ Tv Series Script.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar : Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mudiartini , Ni Komang Sri. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Strategy Used by Male and Female Characters of Letters to Juliet Movie</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar : Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Purnami , Kadek Desi. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness and Address Forms in Film “ Love Actually “.</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar : Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>