---
layout: full_article
title: "IMPLIED COHERENCE FOUND IN “ACT OF VALOR” MOVIE"
author: "Mahayana Kumara"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IMPLIED COHERENCE FOUND IN “ACT OF VALOR” MOVIE By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I MADE MAHAYANA KUMARA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NON REGULAR PROGRAM OF ENGLISH DEPARTMENT, FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi dengan judul “Implied Coherence Found In “Act of Valor Movie” Based on Coherence” bertujuan untuk mengetahui elemen-elemen apa saja yang terkandung dalam film yang membuat percakapan antara dua karakter utama yaitu Rorke dan Dave menjadi padu; menjelaskan bagaimana elemen-elemen yang terkandung di dalamnya bisa membuat percakapan Rorke dan Dave padu pada saat mereka berada di bar pada film Act of Valor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sumber data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari film yang berjudul“Act of Valor”. Data dikumpulkan melalui metode observasi. Lalu dilanjutkan dengan menggunakan teknik pencatatan, dan kemudian data-data tersebut dikategorikan berdasarkan teori-teori yang dipergunakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang sudah terkumpul dan terklasifikasi dianalisis secara kualitatif dan deskriptif dengan menggunakan Theory of Discourse Analysis yang ditulis oleh Brown dan Yule (1983) bagian-bagian yang di gunakan dari teori ini yaitu: features of context: addressor and addressee, topic, setting, channel, code, message-form, event, key, and purpose; co-text; the principle of analogy; and the principle of local interpretation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan analisis dan pemaparan ditemukan bahwa karakter utama yaitu Rorke dan Dave digambarkan sebagai karakter yang telah menjadi teman baik dalam kurun waktu yang lama. Selain itu dalam percakapan Rorke dan Dave selalu menggunakan gaya bahasa informal ketika mereka berada di dalam bar. Dalam percakapan mereka yang terjadi di bar menunjukan bahwa mereka mempunyai hubungan erat sebagai teman baik dan juga keluarga.Pada saat Rorke dan Dave berada dalam bar, mereka sangat begitu akrab dengan pelayan dan pngunjung bar lainya, ini menunjukan bahwa Rorke dan Dave sudah menjadi pelanggan tetap yang sering mengunjungi bar itu ketika mereka memiliki waktu luang. Setelah di analisis menggunakan teori Discourse analisis Brown dan Yule (1983)dapat diketahui alas an-alasan yang membuat percakapan Rorke dan Dave menjadi padu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Feature of context, co-text, the principle of local interpretation, and the principle of analogy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Students who study a language, especially English should be concerned with some requirements, including choice of right words, correct grammar, appropriate meaning and also connection among sentences or utterances in the text. The connection of the sentences is required to communicate with others to avoid any misunderstanding, so we can deliver the meaning appropriately. Communication without any misunderstanding means that listener understands the speaker’s meaning. One of the study which is concerned with the connection of sentences or utterances is coherence. Coherence is a part of discourse analysis studied in Linguistics. Discourse is the way in which language is used socially to convey broad historical meanings. It is language identified by the social conditions of its use, by those who are using it and under what conditions. Language can never be 'neutral' because it bridges our personal and social worlds. Discourse analysis is a study of language in use either in written or spoken (Brown and Yule, 1983). The examples of spoken discourse are debate, conversation, lesson, and interview. While, the examples of written discourse are newspaper, advertisement, student’s writing assignment and movie script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Related to the phenomena above, this study has focused on the analysis of coherence, as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What do the elements of feature of context in “Act of Valor” movie make</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">the story coherent?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How do co-text, principle of local interpretation, and principle of analogy construct coherence of utterances in “Act of Valor” movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find the elements of feature of context in “Act of Valor” movie which make the story coherent.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the co-text, principle of local interpretation and principle of analogy construct coherence of utterances in the “Act of Valor” movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Datum 10 Dave: “Ahh, don’t worry about it, man. You’re gonna be awesome.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m so excited for you, man. You’re gonna be a good dad.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Features of context</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Addressee and addressor</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave said that utterance as addressor and Rorke as addressee a person who was embarrassed at that bar after everyone knew he would be a father soon. What Dave uttered to addressee want to made the addressee felt calm down and not to be</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">embarrassed there.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Topic</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The topic of this utterance was about the jaded by Dave effort to make Rorke feel confident as a father even though for the first time. Dave said it because he got many experiences in his family how to be a good father.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">That was uttered at that bar when Rorke was embarrassed after Dave told everyone about Rorke’s news. Dave tried to make Rorke feel confident and told Rorke to have no reason to be embarrassed as a father for the first time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Channel</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave uttered his utterance when he knew Rorker embarrassed after he told everyone about Rorker’s news at that bar. They used spoken form to communicate, because Dave said that when they were sitting together, because Dave and Rorke had a communication in near distance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Code</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave’s utterance which was uttered to Rorker was a conversation in informal situation; therefore, when Rorker and Dave had a conversation at that bar; they used informal language to communicate with each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Message-form</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">When chatting form of conversation was used, Dave tried to make Rorke not feel embarrassed as a father and when he gave Rorke a support as a good father for his baby.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave; utterance which means to support Rorke as a father was on event of the conversation. Dave said it after he knew that Rorke was really embarrassed about what he did at that bar. That was Dave’s way to apologize for what he did to Rorke.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Key</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave thought what he had done to Rorke made Rorke feel embarrassed at that bar. Therefore, as a good friend, he tried to apologize by saying that Rorke would be a good father even though Rorke had no experience yet.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Purpose</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The purpose of Dave’s utterance was trying to make Rorke feel confident and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">support Rorke to be a good father. It was because Dave knew that Rorke was nervous as a father for the first time. Based on Dave; experiences he knew that Rorke would be a good father for his baby.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Co-text</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave uttered his utterance when he had communication with his friend at that bar. Therefore, what Dave said “you and man” meaning a person who had communication with Dave and he felt nervous to be a father for the first time. Someone who Dave means embarrassed after all the people at that bar knew his news from Dave.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The principle of local interpretation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave said it to Rorke after Dave was aware of what he did that made Rorke embarrassed and nervous at that bar. Therefore, Dave tried to apologize by saying it to Rorke. Based on Dave’s experience having a family and being a father first before Rorke, he believed if Rorke could be a good father for his baby soon.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The principle of analogy</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dave; utterance took place when Dave knew Rorke was so embarrassed and nervous at that bar. Dave told everyone about Rorke’s news who would be a father for the first time. Dave tried to make Rorke calm down on that situation and he tried to support Rorke to be a good father.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">drawn as conclusions;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to the analysis in the previous chapters, this analysis can conclude that coherence of the utterances can be constructed by some elements; there are: feature of context, co-text, principle of local interpretation and principle of analogy. The connection of sentences is required on doing communication with one to another to avoid misunderstanding; therefore, we can deliver the meaning appropriately from the words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data analysis, it can show all four ways of making coherence in the movie of “Act of Valor” movie. There are four ways of reaching and constructing coherence in the dialogues between Rorke and Dave when they also had close communication in the bar, the features of context are; addressor and addressee; topic; setting; channel; code; message-form; event; key; and purpose, co-text, the principle of local interpretation and the principle of analogy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are two utterances that completely use all of the ways of reaching and constructing in coherence. Firstly datum (10) which was said by Dave: Ahhh, don’t worry about it, man. You’re gonna be awesome. I’m so excited for you, man. You’re gonna be a good dad. Secondly in datum (15) which was said by Rorke: But now, you’ve told everyone in the bar, try and contain yourself tomorrow. OK!!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown &amp;&nbsp;Yule 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dirgantara 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis of Dealing Payment Contract of Dunia Surf Clothing Company.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Florian &amp;&nbsp;Gibson 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paragraph-, word-, and coherence-based approaches to sentence ranking: A comparison of algorithm and human performance</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font1">Cambridge Center:: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday &amp;&nbsp;Hasan 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">McCoy &amp;&nbsp;Waugh 2007. Act </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Of Valor.</span><span class="font1"> Los Angeles: Bandito Brothers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prayuni 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Classroom Discourse at SMP N 3 Denpasar</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ribawa 2011.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Lexical Choice on Cigarette Advertisement</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schiffrin 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Discourse.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge: Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language</span><span class="font1">. New York: Cambridge University.</span></p>