---
layout: full_article
title: "CODE SWITCHING IN NOVEL “LOVE ME, SAVE ME” By ROIDAH"
author: "Ni Putu Desy Kumara Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">CODE SWITCHING IN NOVEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“LOVE ME, SAVE ME”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By ROIDAH</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NI PUTU DESY KUMARA DEWI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0618351045</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ENGLISH EXTENSION PROGRAM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">FACULTY OF LETTERS &amp;&nbsp;CULTURE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paper ini berjudul “Code Switching in Novel “Love Me,Save Me” oleh Roidah. Tujuan dari penulisan paper ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi tipe dan fungsi code switching di dalam novel. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisis tipe code switching diperkenalkan oleh Poplack (dalam Romaine,1986). Sedangkan teori oleh Apple dan Muysken, 1986 digunakan untuk menganalisa fungsi dari code switching. Data yang ditemukan pada studi ini diklasifikasikan dan dianalisis berdasarkan tipe code switching, hasilnya sebagai berikut: tag switching sebanyak 5 contoh, intra sentensial switching sebanyak 2 contoh dan inter sentensial switching sebanyak 12 contoh. Sedangkan fungsi code switching sebai berikut: fungsi referential sebanyak 16 contoh, fungsi metalinguistic sebanyak 8 contoh, fungsi direktif sebanyak 7 contoh, fungsi phatic sebanyak 3 contoh. Fungsi-fungsi lainnya yaitu fungsi expressive dan fungsi poetic tidak ditemukan dalam study ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: code switching, tipe code, fungsi code</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Communication is important for human to know each other. Particularly, English as the international language has taken an important role in this modern world. In our daily interaction with others, we are constantly changing the variety of language we use. Wardhaugh (1986:00) states, “ people who use language have to choose a particular language for interacting to one another and they may decide to switch from one to another code or to mix code”. The use of English cannot be avoided in our daily life. This could result in bilingualism or multilingualism. Romaine (1995:12) following Mackey considers that the alternate use of two or</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">more languages should be simply called “Bilingualism”. Grosjean (1982:146) states “Code switching is when people tend to switch from one code to another, which can involve words, phrases, or several sentences, in conducting a communication”. Code switching plays an important role in building a good communication with other people. Code switching is an extremely common characteristic of bilingual speech and some bilingual writers reflect this in their work. The main concern of this study is code-switching which focuses on the writer who used a mixture of Indonesian and English in writing novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of code switching are used in novel “Love Me, Save Me” by Roidah?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of using code switching in novel “Love Me, Save Me” by Roidah?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the types of code switching used in the novel “Love Me, Save Me” by Roidah.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the function of using code switching used in novel “Love Me, Save Me” by Roidah.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The novel entitled “Love Me, Save Me” is one of the popular novels in Indonesia. The writer switched from Indonesian to English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected through some steps. Reading the novel carefully. Finding out sentences, which contain code switching. Collecting the theory books from library and browsing to internet in order to get more detailed information. Taking note and classifying the categories.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing data, the collected data were analyzed descriptively based on the theories applied in this study. Firstly, the data were classified to determine the three types of code switching; tag switching, intra sentential switching, and inter sentential switching. The theory of Poplack (in Romaine, 1995:122) was used to analyze the types of code switching. Secondly, the data were classified based on Apple and Muysken’s theory to obtain the function of code switching in the novel “ Love Me, Save Me”. The functions of code switching are: referential function, metalinguistic function, directive function, expressive function, phatic function, and poetic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. The Analysis of The Type of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of types of code switching based on the theory proposed by Poplack (1995).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Tag Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A switch is called tag switching when an utterance by a tag exclamation, or a parenthetical or entirely different language. Generally, tag switching is used to emphasize something or express some kind of feeling as a sudden surprise. Here is the example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sorry</span><span class="font2"> terlambat. Tadi aku dicegat teman-eman kelasku, ngobrol dulu,” ujarnya ketika sampai didekatku (page 214)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">English tag “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">So rry</span><span class="font2"> is followed with Indonesian sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">terlambat. </span><span class="font2">Tadi aku dicegat teman-teman kelasku, ngobrol dulu ujarnya ketika sampai di dekatku.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Intra-Sentential Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A switch is called intra-sentential when it occurs within a sentence or</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">clause boundary. Here is the example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Daripada jadi yang kedua, mendingan dengan ku saja Ning, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">to be my first girl</span><span class="font2">”. (page 152)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data above is categorized as intra sentential switching. The switching in the sentence above when the utterance starts in Indonesian “Daripada jadi yang kedua, mendingan denganku saja Ning”. And then switches into English sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">to be my first girl</span><span class="font2">”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Inter-Sentential Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Inter-sentential switching involves a switch at a clause or sentence boundary, where each clause or sentence is in one language or another. Here is the example of inter-sentential switching:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tas besar berisi kamera saku, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tape recorder</span><span class="font2"> dan jaket kampus tergantung di sandaran kursi. (page 39)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the sentence above, the sentence starts in Indonesian ‘tas besar berisi kamera saku’ and followed by the English phrase ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tape recorder</span><span class="font2">’ and the switch back to the base language’ dan jaket kampus tergantung di sandaran kursi’. The meaning of code switching here is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tape untuk merekam</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">b. The Analysis of The Function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The function of code switching based on the theories proposed by Apple and Muysken (1987, 118-120). The analysis of the function of code switching will be presented one by one according to each function of code switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Referential Function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Code switching referring to this function occurs when there is lack of knowledge of one language on certain subject. In this certain subject maybe more appropriately discussed in one language and the introduction of such a subject it can lead to a switch. In addition, a specific word from one of the language involved may be semantically more appropriate for a given concept. Here is the example in the novel:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dia menjawab dengan ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lip service’</span><span class="font2">, “Hati-hati dijalan ya…” aku menarik seulas senyum begitu juga dengan Alex. (page 100)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data above can be classified as referential function, because the occurrence of code switching in data above is that it is more appropriate and also suitable for the speaker to discuss the topic using the English word ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lip service’</span><span class="font2">. In Indonesian, this word has to be explained with quite long explanation because there is no shortcut to that word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Metalinguistic Function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Metalinguistic function of code switching comes into play when it is used to comment directly on the languages involved. One example of this function is when speakers switch between different codes to impress the other participant with a show of linguistic skills (Scotton, in Appel and Muysken, 1987:120). Many examples of this can be found in the public domain: performers, circus director, market salespeople. The example can be shown as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hei great couple</span><span class="font2">!” sapa Rio ketika kami sampai di hadapannya. (page 215)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data above can be categorized as serving metalinguistic function, because by switching the code, it means that the writer wants to comment directly the topic which is being discussed. The use of word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“hey great couple”</span><span class="font2"> also impresses the complement of the couple.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Directive Function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This directive function involves the hearer directly. This being directed at the hearer can take many forms. One is to exclude certain persons’ presence from a portion of the conversation. The opposite is to include a person more by using her or his language. A person may have joined the participants in an interaction. All participants – related switching can be thought of as serving the directive function of language use. The example can be shown as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mereka tengah mengobrol sambil mencicipi kue ketika aku datang yang memang bertepatan dengan waktu </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tea morning</span><span class="font2">. (page 232)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Regarding the function of code switching, the code switching in data above serves directive function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The English word “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">tea morning</span><span class="font2">” is used by the writers to make the readers understand what is being said. Switching here is used because there is an involvement of the hearers directly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressive function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It shows that the speakers emphazes a mixed identity through the use of two languages in the same discourse. Unfortunately, the expressive function of code switching does not exist in the novel of “Love Me, Save Me”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phatic function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Often switching serves to indicate a change in tone of the conversation, and hence a phatic function. This type has been called metaphorical switching by Gumperz and Hernandez – Havez (in Appel and Muysken, 1987:119). This type is also called metaphorical switching:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wow</span><span class="font2">, sekali jalan aja langsung bokek kantong om,” godaku (page 85)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Regarding to the function of code switching, the code switching in the data above serves phatic function. The use of code switching in the data above indicated a change in tone of the conversation and the main function is to highlight the information that has been conveyed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font2">Poetic function of Code Switching</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bilingual language usage involving switched puns, jokes, etc, can be said to serve poetic function of language. To pay homage to be twentieth century poet who has perhaps been the most accomplished code switcher. One thing that needs to be remembered is that by no means certain code switching has the same function within each community. While it can be described in linguistic terms straightforwardly as the use of several languages in the same discourses, there may not be one sociolinguistic definition. Unfortunately, the writer could not find the poetic function of code switching in the novel “Love Me, Save Me”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In written text especially in the novel “Love Me, Save Me..” by Roidah, there are three types of code switching : tag switching, intra sentential switching, and inter sentential switching. It can be found that the author of ‘Love Me, Save Me’ novel used all types of code switching. From the obtained data, tag switching involves an exclamation. It can be found in five utterances, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hey</span><span class="font2">”, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wow</span><span class="font2">”, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sorry</span><span class="font2">”, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hop</span><span class="font2">”, and “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hello</span><span class="font2">”. The second type is intra sentential switching which involves a word and a phrase. The switch occurs within a clause or sentence boundary. The use of inter sentential switching occurs in 12 utterances the novel of “Love Me, Save Me”, example: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“tape recorder”, “king of party”, “deadline”, “say hello”, “music room”, “lip service”, “great couple”, “tea afternoon”, “tea morning”, “feeling”, “seafood”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> The last type is intra-sentential switching which involves an utterance commonly a sentence. The switch occurs between sentence boundaries. The inter-sentential switching can be found in 2 sentences, there are:</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“The leader of The International Democratic is very kind. Dia meluangkan waktunya untuk mewawancarai sebelum berangkat” dan “Daripada jadi yang kedua, mendingan denganku saja Ning, be my first girl”.</span><span class="font2"> In terms of function of code switching, the finding shows that the functions of code switching appear in analyzing data are: referential function, metalinguistic function, directive function, and the last one is phatic function. The functions of code switching that did not occur in the data are: expressive function and poetic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Apple, R. and Muysken, P. 1987. Language Contact and Bilingualism. London: Edward Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Grosjean, Francois. 1982. Life with Two Languages, An Introduction to Bilingualism. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Roidah. 2004. Love Me, Save Me. Jakarta: Dive Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Romaine, Suzanne. 1995. Bilingualism, Second Edition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, Ronal. 1986. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Basil Backwell.</span></p>