---
layout: full_article
title: "The Translation of Cultural Terms  in The Balinese Folktales"
author: "Luh Nitya Dewi Rupini, I Nyoman Sedeng, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78131 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-78131"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78131"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p02"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p02</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Translation of Cultural Terms in The Balinese Folktales</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Luh Nitya Dewi Rupini<sup>1*</sup>, I Nyoman Sedeng<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>[123]</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Magister Linguistik Program, Faculty of Art, Udayana University <sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:nityadewirupini@gmail.com"><span class="font4">[</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">nityadewirupini@gmail.com</span><span class="font4">]</span></a><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font2">2 </span><span class="font4"><sup>2</sup></span><a href="mailto:nyoman_sedeng@hotmail.com"><span class="font4">[</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">nyoman_sedeng@hotmail.com</span><span class="font4">]</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup> </span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">[</span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span><span class="font4">]</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This study is entitled “The Translation of Cultural Terms in The Balinese Folktales</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">”. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This study is aimed at to identify the categories of cultural words and describe about translation procedure. The data were taken directly from Balinese Folktales in internet</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Documentation method was used as the method in collecting data; finding the cultural words, note taking and classifying. In analyzing the data, qualitative method was applied. In presenting the analysis, this study used descriptive method. The main theory was proposed by Newmark (1988:95). There was also the other theory by Newmark (1988:45) as the theory of translation procedures. The results of this study showed that the most used types of cultural words found in this study were ecology, material culture and social culture. In connection with translation procedure, there were only three types of translation procedure found in Balinese folktales. The translation procedures used were Literal translation, cultural equivalent, and descriptive equivalent. By translating books from Balinese to English can make other people who read and learn about Balinese culture understand easily. Also, it is the media to introduce Balinese culture to the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Balinese folktales, cultural words, translation procedures</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Absrak--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Penerjemahan Istilah-Istilah Budaya Dalam Cerita Rakyat Bali”. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi kategori kata budaya dan mendeskripsikan tentang prosedur penerjemahan. Data diambil langsung dari Cerita Rakyat Bali di internet. Metode dokumentasi digunakan sebagai metode pengumpulan data; menemukan kata-kata budaya, mencatat dan mengklasifikasikan. Dalam menganalisis data digunakan metode kualitatif. Dalam menyajikan analisis, penelitian ini menggunakan metode deskriptif. Teori utama dikemukakan oleh Newmark (1988: 95). Ada pula teori lain menurut Newmark (1988: 45) sebagai teori prosedur penerjemahan. Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa jenis kata budaya yang paling banyak digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah kata ekologi, budaya materi dan sosial budaya. Sehubungan dengan tata cara penerjemahan, hanya ada tiga jenis procedur penerjemahan yang ditemukan dalam cerita rakyat Bali. Prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan adalah terjemahan literal, padanan budaya, dan padanan deskriptif. Dengan menerjemahkan buku dari bahasa Bali ke bahasa Inggris dapat membuat orang lain yang membaca dan belajar tentang budaya Bali dapat mengerti dengan mudah. Selain itu juga merupakan media untuk mengenalkan budaya Bali kepada dunia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Cerita rakyat Bali, kata budaya, procedur penerjemahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Language is one communication media among nations whose different languages and cultures as rendering of science and culture. According to Newmark, in his book ‘A Textbook of Translation’ that “culture as the way of life and its manifestations that are peculiar to a community that uses a particular language as its means of expression. So, it can be concluded that the language is a verbal culture of a society. Or it can be said that culture is the idea, while language is the expression. When we are trying to know more about the culture, language plays an important role and to understand language one needs translations as one might not know of the particular language. Language can also be classified as the complex system of communication that humans adapt varying from various cultural backgrounds. It makes for the most of the communication system in any culture or we can say every culture. A converting process that helps people who speak different languages to understand each other’s perspective and be able to maintain a healthy communication is translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">These are three following problems to be analyzed through this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What categories of cultural terms are found in Balinese folktales?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What translation procedures are applied in translating the cultural terms in Balinese folktales?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">There are two aims in this study, namely general aims and specific aims:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;General Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The general aims of this study are to identify the categories of cultural words, describe about translation procedure, and also examine more deeply the field of translation, in this case Cultural Translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Specific Aims</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">First, to identify the categories of cultural terms found in Balinese folktales. Second, to describe the translation procedures found in Balinese folktales.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Significances of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Two significances resulted from each study, namely theoretical significances and practical significances. The two significances of this research can be detailed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theoretical Significances</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Provide information and knowledge in the field of translation especially the study of Cultural Translation. Then, can be used as a reference for further researchers who want to study more deeply about related fields of science.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Practical Significances</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Contribute to society, especially in learning cultural terms, so they can provide an explanation the exact meaning of the cultural terms. Then, provide information about translation. Especially translation procedure, so that can make easier to understand about the translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scope of Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In order to limit the discussion according to the problems, scope of discussion is needed. The discussion focuses on identify categories of cultural terms found in Balinese folktales by using the theory of cultural proposed by Newmark (1988:95). Then, describe translation procedures in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the Balinese folktales from the theory of Translation procedure by Newmark (1988:45).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The research methods are divided into four steps; they consist of first, the determination of the data source; second, Instruments of the study, third, method and technique of collecting data and method; fourth, analyzing the data in the novel; and fifth, the method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data source was Balinese Folktales in internet </span><a href="https://msatuabali.blogspot.com/"><span class="font4">https://msatuabali.blogspot.com/</span></a><span class="font4">. There were 28 Balinese folktales. While there were 6 Balinese folktales that already translated. Such as Data 1: I Belog (A Foolish Man), Data 2: I Durma (Durma), Data 3: I Lutung and I Kekua (Monkey and Turtle), Data 4: Kambing Takutin Macan (Goat Scares A Tiger), Data 5: Pan Balang Tamak (Pan BalangTamak) and Data 6: Siap Selem (The Black Hen).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Instruments of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Moleong (2010:168) states that in qualitative research, writers have a special rank, namely as a planner, implementer, data collector, analysis, data interpreter, and reporter of the research results. Furthermore, writers are human instruments capable of researching and selecting data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>6.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The method applied in collecting the data was documentation method. The technique of collecting the data was done by using these following steps. First, read the story in Balinese and its translation in order to collect the words. Second, note taking the words which was considered as containing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">translation procedures and cultural words was done followed by classifying the words in those stories. Finally the presentation of data was carried out.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>6.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The method applied in analyzed the data was using descriptive qualitative method. First, identify categories of cultural terms in the Balinese folktales by using theory proposed by Newmark (1988:95). Second, describe the translation procedures in the Balinese folktales with the theory of Translation Procedure proposed by Newmark (1988:45).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>6.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Presenting</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In presenting the analysis, this study used descriptive method. In order to answer the first problem, the data was classified into categories of cultural words by showing the data in the form of sentences based on theory proposed by Newmark (1988:95). The sentences are italic and bold font, so the readers are able to understand which belong to the categories of cultural words. Second, describe how the cultural terms are translated. Third, the analysis of those data based on the theory of translation procedure proposed by Newmark (1988:45).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This section discusses about the translation of cultural terms found in the Balinese folktales. In this study the analysis focuses on translation procedures in the Balinese folktales. Then, identify categories of cultural terms found in Balinese folktales.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">7.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Cultural Terms</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ecology</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">SL : Ditu lantas bebeke ngeleb, maka dadua bebeke ngelangi di </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tukade linggah</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL : That’s where the duck slipped from I Belog's grip, both duck swim in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">wide river.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Paragraph 2, line 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word tukade linggah is ecology. It can be referred to word tukade linggah which is translated into wide river. It is a geographical feature that can be normally distinguished from the other cultural terms in that they are usually value free politically and commercially. According to Oxford dictionary (2021), river is a large amount of liquid that is flowing in a particular direction. So, the translator should translating the word tukade linggah is translated into river because it is more suitable.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Material culture</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">SL : Ditu lantas ia baange pis </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dasa tali</span><span class="font4"> rupiah teken memene.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL: Then he was given money </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ten thousand</span><span class="font4"> rupiah by his mother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Paragraph 1, line 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word dasa tali rupiah is material culture. It can be referred to word dasa tali rupiah which is translated into ten thousand rupiah is money. Each culture in the world has its own material culture. Where material culture is translated as the element or products that made by human. The word dasa tali rupiah is translated into ten thousand rupiah because it is the real meaning of material culture in Balinese.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social culture</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">SL : Mara I Durma matuuh </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pitung oton,</span><span class="font4"> kalahina teken memene mawali ka swargan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL : When I Durma was </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">three years five months, </span><span class="font4">his mother went to the heaven and left him (Paragraph 1, line 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word pitung oton is social culture. It can be referred to word pitung oton which is translated into three years five months is an age. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">linguistic manifestations of this concept cannot be translated into a language where the audience is unfamiliar with it. The word pitung oton is translated into three years five months because it is based on the definition of Balinese traditions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>7.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Translation Procedures</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">SL : </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ditu lantas ia baange pis dasa tali rupiah teken memene.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Then he was given money ten thousand rupiah by his mother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Paragraph 1, line 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The sentence ditu lantas ia baange pis dasa tali rupiah teken memene is literal translation since the sentence is translated one by one. In the SL sentence the grammatical constructions are converted into the nearest words in the TL. So, the translator translating the sentence ditu lantas ia baange pis dasa tali rupiah teken memene into then he was given money ten thousand rupiah by his mother.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural equivalent</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">SL : Mara I Durma matuuh </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pitung oton,</span><span class="font4"> kalahina teken memene mawali ka swargan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL : When I Durma was </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">three years five months, </span><span class="font4">his mother went to the heaven and left him (Paragraph 1, line 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word pitung oton is cultural equivalent since it has a new concept of the target language. The new concept occurs in word pitung oton which is translated into three years five months. In cultural equivalent beside create a new concept the translation is not accurate but they can be used in general text. According to HinduAlkuta the word ‘oton’ or ‘otonan’ comes from the word 'pawetuan' (birth), is the commemoration of birthday in the Hindu Bali’s tradition which is based on the Balinese calendar celebrated every 210 days (every</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">6 months). So, the translator translates the word pitung oton into three years five months.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Descriptive equivalent</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">SL: Lantas teka I Kaki Perodong ngaba </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tumbak lanying</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">TL: Then, I Kaki Prodong came carrying </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a sharp spear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Paragraph 5, Line 1, I Lutung teken I Kekua (A Monkey and a Turtle))</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word tumbak is descriptive equivalent since the word is described and function the elements in explanation and translation. The translator explains the word from its description and its function. The word tumbak or spare is a weapon for hunting and fighting, its parts consists of a stick as a handle and the eye or head of a sharp spare. So, the translator translates the word tumbak into a spare and its function ‘as a weapon for hunting and fighting’. The translator adds the description about the real meaning to make the readers easily understand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This study has discussed the translation of cultural terms in Balinese folktales. There were 6 Balinese folktales and its translation. Such as Data 1: I Belog (A Foolish Man), Data 2: I Durma (Durma), Data 3: I Lutung and I Kekua (Monkey and Turtle), Data 4: Kambing Takutin Macan (Goat Scares A Tiger), Data 5: Pan Balang Tamak (Pan BalangTamak) and Data 6: Siap Selem (The Black Hen). The discussion focuses on translation procedures in the Balinese folktales. Then, identify categories of cultural terms found in Balinese folktales. Based on the result of the analysis and discussion above, the first point that can be drawn as a conclusion is the finding five types of cultural terms. They are ecology, material culture, social culture, religious culture and linguistic culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Among those cultural terms found in Balinese folktales, ecology, and social culture seem to be more dominant.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The second point that can be drawn as a conclusion is the discovering process of the translation procedure. There were only eight types of translation procedure used in the Balinese folktales. The translation procedures that were found are literal translation, cultural equivalent, descriptive equivalent, functional equivalent, shift or transpositions, modulation, translation label, and paraphrase. By translating books from Balinese to English can make other people who read and learn about Balinese culture understand easily. Also, it is the media to introduce Balinese culture to the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Bibliography</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Balfaqeeh, Noor 2009.“Strategies for Translating Idioms and Culturally- Bound Expressions within The Human Development Genre”(magister thesis).University of Birmingham. Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Braçaj, Morena. 2015. Procedures of Translating Culture-SpecificConcepts. International Journal of Mediterranean Journal of SocialSciences Vol. 6 No.1 S1hal 476-480.Albanian College Durres,Albania Guerra, Ana Fernández. 2012. Crossing Boundaries: The Translation ofCultural Referents in English and Spanish. International Journal ofLiterary Studies and Linguistics Vol.II Issue 2 hal 121-138.UniversitatJaume I of Castellón.Niroula, Puspa. 2017. “A Translation Techniques used in Translating Cultural Words of Palpasa Café” (magister thesis).Tribhuvan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">University.Kirtipur,NepalNewmark,P.(1988). A textbook of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;translation. New York: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prentice</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hall.Saberi, Dariush. 2015. “Translation’Strategies for the Translation ofCultural Markers from English toPersian in a Literary Text” (magisterthesis).University Putra Malaysia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">135</span></p>