---
layout: full_article
title: "CONTEXT OF SITUATION ANALYSIS IN THE KID MOVIE DORA THE EXPLORER"
author: "I Wayan Redinata"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">CONTEXT OF SITUATION ANALYSIS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IN THE KID MOVIE DORA THE EXPLORER</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I Wayan Redinata</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department, Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h2><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Paper ini khusus mentelaah percakapan yang muncul dalam film anak-anak “Dora the Eplorer” berdasarkan teori Context of Situation dari Halliday dan teori Conversational Analysis dari Liddicoat. Data untuk paper ini diperoleh dari satu seri film “Dora the Explorer” yang berjudul “To the Tree House” dan teknik pengumpulan data yang digunakan adalah dokumentasi. Sedangkan metode dan teknik analisa data yang digunakan adalah deskriptif-kualitatif. Temuan yang diperoleh dari analisis “Context of Situation” yaitu “Field” dari percakapan tersebut adalah tentang perjalanan Dora dan Boot ke rumah pohon, kemudian “Tenor” dari film ini adalah semua karakter didalam cerita dan semua penontonnya. Dan “Mode” dari percakapan tersebut adalah bahasa lisan (spoken). Dalam hal “Conversational Analysis” dapat diperoleh turn taking organization, sequence organization, preference organization dan dispreferred first pair part.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">: context of situation, implication, movie.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Background of study</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Movie or film is a product of media which could entertain human in their exhaustion and gives some information about something represent in the film or movie. Many people transform their knowledge into a film through the action and the language they perform in it. In relation of this fact, the language has an important role in the way to transfer the information to audience through kid movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Film or movie in this modern era is more various and give more education for the audience. Language in the kid movies is different to the adult movies because in kid movies the language is simpler than in adult movies. The kid movies transfer simple information to give more basic knowledge to the kids caused by the language is simpler.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When people speak or write, they produce text. The term ‘text’ refers to any instance of language, in any medium, that makes sense to someone who knows the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">language (cf. Halliday and Hasan, 1976: Chapter 1 (Halliday, 2004:3)). He explain that text is a rich, many-faceted phenomenon that ‘means’ in many different ways. It can be explored from many different points of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the project focused on analyzing context of situation and the implication of utterance in a kid movie by the title “Dora the Explorer” because it is one of the kid movies that attract my attention to analyze. By knowing the context of situation and utterances implication of the movie, we will clearly understand what the characters actually want to convoy in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Problem of study</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background stated above, the problem of the research can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the context of situation features in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” based on Halliday perspective?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the implication of the utterance in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” base on conversational analysis?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Aim of Study</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of study are to analyze the context of situation and the implication of the utterance in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Thus, the following terms are being proposed as the aims of study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the context of situation in the kid movie based on the Halliday perspective.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the implication of the utterance in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” base on conversational analysis.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Scope of Discussion</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research is focused to analyze the utterance which made in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” related to context of situation and conversational analysis. The theory of context of situation is proposed by Halliday and conversational analysis is proposed by Liddicoat were used to analyze the data, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context of situation which is covered by three aspects they are field, tenor and mode.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conversational analysis which is covered by four aspects they are turn-taking, sequence, preference and repairs</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Research Method</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The methodology were used in this research includes three points they are data sources, data collection, and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from one series of the kid movies by the title “Dora the Explorer” which is really interested to analyze because there are many utterance with special meanings for the audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected by documentation methode, firstly watching and listening all utterance in the movie for seven times which is followed by writing every utterance the character made along the story. Classifying the utterance is the next step easier to analyze regarding the context of situation and the implication of the utterances.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The method and the technique of analyzing data were qualitative-descriptive which is started by documentation or writing every utterance the character made in the kid movie by title “Dora the Explorer”, in terms of collecting data, and next is classified all utterance found in the movie. Each data were analyzed based on the theoretical framework that the context of situation theory by Halliday were used and followed by the Liddicoat’s conversational analysis theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Context of Situation Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As a discourse, the utterance of the character in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” has what is named context of situation; it is the environment of a text consists of field, tenor and mode. The field refers to the subject matter of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">utterance of the character and what it is all about, tenor means the participants and their statuses, and mode is the way the massage of the movie delivered to the audience. These three categories are described clearly as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The field of the utterance of the character in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance of the character in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” by the title “To the three house” is addressing to all children who like watching cartoon film. Beside it is as an entertainment, it also give them many knowledge such as about colour, number, how to find something, interaction, friendship and many others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first topic of the movie is about the introducing of Dora. She would find her friend Boot the monkey. When they have met one another, they walk around and heard mommy bagabaga asked for helping to find her child that she lost one of them. Then all the bagabaga have found and had to fly to the tree house for a big party that would be held there. Dora and Boot are invited but they didn’t know how to get it. When we don’t know how to find some place, we have to find it in a map. That is a massage which is delivered in the situation. Finally they found the way how to get to the tree house that they have to pass the crocodile lake and stone wall to get to the tree house. On the way to the tree house Dora and Boot faced many problems to get to the tree house. They met many of their friends in trouble then they helped them with happiness until at the end they reached the tree house and held a big party with their entire friends.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>The tenor of the utterance of the character in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer”</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">There are always two participants in every discourse, speaker and hearer in oral language or writer and reader in written language. In this case the speaker is all characters in the movie “Dora the Explorer” especially Dora and Boot because they did an interaction to audiences in asking for helping to find and to do something. In the other hand, the utterances in the movie have many education meanings to the audiences especially for the children about colours, number, friendship, help one another, how to do something and etc. therefore this movie is really helpful for the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">developing brain of the children and helps the parents to give education to their children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The hearers of this movie are all people around the world especially the children under 6 years old who interested in cartoon movie. They can get many new information and knowledge from the movie and it can teach about human life.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The mode of the utterance of the character in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer”</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The massages of this movie are delivered in spoken language by all character in the movie they are Dora, Boot, Bagabaga, Pari bird, Isa, Beny, and the entire friends. The characteristic of the utterances are informative, educate and semi interactive. It is informative because many utterances in the movie tell the audiences about some information such as when we lost the way we have to find out the way in the map. Next is educate because it shows the audiences about colours, numbers, help one another and etc. Then the last is semi interactive because the characters always ask many questions and help the audiences and give the audiences time to think how to help the character and decides to help them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Conversational Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Conversation analysis seeks to understand these shared procedures which participants in an interaction use to produce and recognize meaningful action (Liddicoat, 2007:7). Liddicoat was emphasized four organizations in conversational analysis they are turn-taking, sequence, preference and repairs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dora : What’s wrong mommy bagabaga?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bugs : Owh? Dora? Boot? I need your help! I have ten bagabaga babies, but one is lost!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Turn-taking in terms of current speaker selecting the next speaker occurs in this situation Dora select Mommy bagabaga as the next speaker that showed by utterance from Dora </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“What’s wrong mommy bagabaga?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dora : What sounds does a baby bagabaga make?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">[</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bug baby &nbsp;&nbsp;: Bagabaga…bagabaga…</span><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dora &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Right!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Basis adjacency pair of sequence organization in terms of question-answer occurs in this situation that question from Dora and answered by another baby bug. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Boots : I know! The baby bug is behind the flower!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dora : that is not the bagabaga baby!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this situation preference organization in terms of disagreement occurs showed by word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“not”</span><span class="font1"> from Dora.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dora : Yeah… let’s go to the big party at the tree house!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Come on say with us! Lake, wall, tree house! Lake, wall, tree house!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this situation occurs dispreferred first pair part in terms of request that Dora request the audience saying something with them.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Based on analysis above, the following conclusion can be presented that in terms of context of situation in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” that the field of the utterances is about a trip to the big party at the tree house. The tenor means who take apart or the participants which consists of two they are speaker and hearer. In this case the speakers are all of characters in the movie and the hearers are all people around the world especially children under 6 years old. And the mode of utterances in the movie is spoken by all characters in the movie. The characteristic of the utterances are informative, educate and semi interactive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The implication of the utterances in the kid movie “Dora the Explorer” based on conversational analysis is found that the pattern of the utterances involve turn-taking organization, sequence organization, preference organization and dispreferred first pair part.</span></p><a name="caption2"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. and Matthiessen, Christian. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font1">. London: Hodder Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1985. Language</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, Context, and Text: aspect of Language and a Social Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font1">. Victoria: Deakin University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M. A. K. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language as social semiotic</span><span class="font1">. London: Edward Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tarry, Helen Lacky. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language Context: A Functional of Linguistic Theory of Register</span><span class="font1">. London: Pinter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Liddicoat, Anthony J. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Conversational Analysis</span><span class="font1">. London: Continuum.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Martini, Kadek Sri. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Comparing Two Text Viewed from the Genre and Lexico-Grammatical</span><span class="font1"> (paper). Denpasar, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Odebunmi, Akin. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning expressions of some English registers.</span><span class="font1"> Nigeria:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">University of Ibadan. ( Available from:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">URL:www.educ.utas.edu.au/users/tle/JOURNAL/ )</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tan, Rudi. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Formal English Used in the Speech of President George W. Bush and its Context of Situation</span><span class="font1"> (paper). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Van Dijk, Teun A. 1997. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse as Structure and Process.</span><span class="font1"> London: Sage Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Van Dijk, Teun A. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Society and Discourse: How Social Contexts Influence Text and Talk.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sinta Wesi, Ni Kadek. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Advertisement Base on Context of Situation in Food Product</span><span class="font1"> (paper). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>