---
layout: full_article
title: "CHARACTER COMPARISON BETWEEN ANNA AND ELSA IN THE ORIGINAL SOUNDTRACK OF DISNEY’S FROZEN"
author: "Gloria Wibowo"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: 8-14</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CHARACTER COMPARISON BETWEEN ANNA AND ELSA</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">IN THE ORIGINAL SOUNDTRACK OF DISNEY’S FROZEN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Gloria Wibowo</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">email:</span><a href="mailto:gloriawibowo@yahoo.com"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> gloriawibowo@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">English Departement, Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul &quot;Perbandingan Karakter antara Anna dan Elsa di Soundtrack Asli Disney Frozen&quot;. Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk menganalisis tentang perbandingan antara karakter Anna dan Elsa seperti tercermin dalam soundtrack asli di Disney Frozen. Data diambil dari Frozen soundtrack film asli Disney, 5 lagu yang dinyanyikan oleh Elsa dan Anna: </span><span class="font2">“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Do You Want To Build A Snowman?”, “For the First Time in Forever”, “Love Is An Open Door”, “Let It Go”, and “For the First Time in Forever- Reprise”. Metode kualitatif digunakan dalam menganalisis data. 5 lagu diklasifikasikan dan dianalisa untuk menemukan hal-hal penting yang berkaitan dengan karakteristik Elsa dan Anna berdasarkan teori dari Arp dan Johnson. Kemudian, karakterisasi Elsa dan Anna dibandingkan dengan menggunakan teori dimensi karakter menurut Lajos Egri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords : character, comparison, original soundtrack</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">At this time song is very popular and it is not only for teenagers but also for adults, even the old people love listening to songs. Song does not only provide a remarkable melody but it also provides us with deeper meaning in its lyrics. Song is the most common thing in people daily life because songs can give various impacts to their listeners. In a song, we can find lyrics which complete and beautify the song and makes the hearer more interested in listening to it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3"> was chosen to be analyzed in this study because the film met with strongly positive reviews, and some film critics considered it to be the best Disney animated musical since the studio's renaissance era.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the three dimensions of characters between Elsa and Anna as reflected in the original soundtrack of Disney’s Frozen?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the differences between Elsa and Anna’s characters as reflected in the original soundtrack in Disney’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the three dimensions of characters between Elsa and Anna as reflected in the original soundtrack in Disney’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To compare the characters between Elsa and Anna as reflected in the original soundtrack in Disney’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methodology</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Research method includes data sources, method and techniques of collecting data and the last one is method and technique of analyzing data. The clear explanations of those three major aspects are given below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, 5 songs sung by Elsa and Anna were analyzed. The song was: “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Do You Want To Build A Snowman</span><span class="font3">?”, “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">For The First Time In Forever</span><span class="font3">”, “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Love Is An Open Door</span><span class="font3">” “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Let It Go</span><span class="font3"> of her, and reprise of “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">For The First Time In Forever</span><span class="font3">”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">To gather the data, the library research was employed. The data taken were in the form texts taken from the song lyrics that represent the characters of Elsa and Anna. To equip the data, the original soundtrack of Disney’s </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3"> was played several times and took notes of the important issues in the songs were analyzed. The songs were replayed repeatedly to make sure that the data were relevant and reliable to the topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In analyzing the data, qualitative method was being used. It used descriptive presentation of analysis. The 5 songs were classified and analyzed to find the important issues related to Elsa and Anna’s characteristics based on Arp and Johnson’s theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Then, the characterization of Elsa’s and Anna’s were compared using the dimension of characters theory based on Lajos Egri’s.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Comparison between Elsa’s and Anna’s Characters</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In his theories of dramatic character creation, LajosEgri(2009: 21) identifies physiology, sociology and psychology as the three dimensions of a dramatically compelling character. Below are the detail analyses of Elsa and Anna dimensions of characters:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiological</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Physiological dimension cannot be found in the lyrics of the five songs above since the lyrics don’t describe the physical characteristics of Elsa and Anna.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sociology</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the physiological dimension, the position of Elsa and Anna in their society as well as their home situation while living in their castle will be described briefly to compare their characters. Even though Elsa is the queen of Arendelle, she thinks she does not belong in Arendelle as she sees herself only as a force of destruction, implying that Elsa has low self-esteem towards herself in an extreme case, as she constantly blames herself to be the sole cause for most of her life's misfortunes, despite others stating that she is not, to the point that she deliberately forces everyone away because she is a hazard towards them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As the princess of Arandelle, there can also be a little naivety of Anna, as she believes in marrying someone immediately if the heart tells you so, despite knowing them for merely a day. Even though she greatly values romance, it is clear that Anna's most valued treasure is her relationship with her sister. Since childhood, Anna has been attached to Elsa and always looks to spend time with her. As the years passed and the sisters grew apart, the heartbroken Anna continued to try time and time again for some quality time with the one she loved most, but due to Elsa's powerful magic, it was deemed too dangerous until, through Anna's loving efforts, Elsa learned to control her icy powers, allowing her to end their &quot;imprisonment&quot; within the castle and finally share the quality time they have been longing for years upon years.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychological</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the psychological dimension, the struggles, problems, temperament, attitudes toward life, etc as per table description will be explained to compare their characters. Beneath her elegant appearance, however, Elsa is quite complex; in truth, Elsa is troubled with her abilities, a trait that stems from a traumatic incident as a child. However, ever since her power nearly caused her sister's death, Elsa had lived in fear and trauma for a great amount of her life, too afraid to let her powers out of control. As a result, she chose isolation from everyone she cared about, including Anna, out of fear that she could hurt them and kept things to herself rather than communicate or be around anyone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Growing up believing that her powers were unstable caused Elsa to cut off interaction with Anna, fearing that she could not control her powerful emotions with Anna around. Despite her moral reasoning, she came cold towards anyone who wished to see her. However, Elsa truly loved Anna and always wished to be with her whenever Anna asked — a chance Elsa greatly regretted refusing and was left in deep despair when Anna became the only family she had left.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Unlike her older sister Elsa, Anna is very eccentric, optimistic, energetic, awkward, and far from elegant. She usually acts before she speaks and can be rather impulsive, but holds a lot of innocence to her. She is free-spirited, hoping on spending her life outside the castle gates after years of being enclosed within them for the safety of the kingdom due to Elsa's ice powers. Anna is also a pure and hopeless romantic, dreaming of romance the moment the gates are finally opened for Elsa's coronation ceremony.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Despite her optimism, Anna has also struggled with some self-confidence, as she often looked down upon herself and viewed herself as nothing more than ordinary, especially compared to the radiance of her sister. It was to the point where she felt she had no one in the world who truly loved her, with Elsa seeming to want nothing to do with her. This would also explain why she was so quick to romance, as her song &quot;For the First Time in Forever&quot; would explain that she's looking for someone to act as her companion, no longer wanting to live a life alone. In the end, despite her flaws, Anna is an extremely sweet, selfless and loving character. Numerous</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">times throughout the film, she puts the safety and well being of others before her own, showing great loyalty and admiration for her friends and family, which is most notably seen with Elsa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Answering the problem of the study, it can be concluded that Elsa’s characters more like to conceal and hide her identity and true power. Ever since her power nearly caused her sister's death, Elsa had lived in fear and trauma for a great amount of her life, too afraid to let her powers out of control. As a result, she chose isolation from everyone she cared about, including Anna, out of fear that she could hurt them and kept things to herself rather than communicate or be around anyone. Despite her moral reasoning, she came cold towards anyone who wished to see her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meanwhile, Anna’s characters are more open and optimistic about everything. She is very eccentric, optimistic, energetic, awkward, and far from elegant. She usually acts before she speaks and can be rather impulsive, but holds a lot of innocence to her. Anna is also a pure and romantic, dreaming of romance the moment the gates are finally opened for Elsa's coronation ceremony. There can also be a little naivety to her, as she believes in marrying someone immediately if the heart tells you so, despite knowing them for merely a day.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">To compare between Elsa and Anna’s character, the theory dimension of character had been used and came out with below results: Physiological dimension cannot be found it in the lyrics of the five songs above since the lyrics don’t describes the physical characteristics of Elsa and Anna. As in the sociology dimension, Elsa always locks herself in her room and she does not want to talk to anyone so that it makes her alone and lonely. While on the other hand, Anna is an optimistic and cheerful people, therefore she always seeks for a companion on others. However, the person that she really cares the most is actually her sister, but due to Elsa’s rejection towards her, it truly makes her feels lonely deep inside her heart. However, what can truly distinguish Elsa and Anna’s characters completely is through their psychological dimension or personality. As the result, we can simply say that Elsa’s personality naturally hides and cold while in the other hand, Anna’s personality naturally expresses and warm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">For how different they are, for how they choose to react to things, both girls have been isolated and hate being lonely. Elsa naturally hides, and Anna naturally expresses, but Elsa being faced with losing her sister after still trying to be left alone learns to love for real. Anna, in sacrificing herself to save Elsa, learns what real love is. Both girls are incredibly, wonderfully different, but both deal with loneliness and have a strong capacity to love and be loved that is ultimately what saves them both.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Arp,ThomasR.,and Greg Johnson. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Perrine’s Literature: Structure, Sound &amp;&nbsp;Sense.</span><span class="font3">11<sup>th</sup>ed.Boston : Wadsworth, 2012. Print.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Barnett, Sylvan. 1982. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">TentangKritikSastra: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SebuahDiskusi</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">PusatPembinaandanPengembanganBahasaDepartemenPendidikandanKebudayaa n.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Buck, Chris and Jennifer Lee. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Elsa Character</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on August 10, 2014 from: </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elsa_(Disney)"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elsa_%28Disney%29</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Buck, Chris and Jennifer Lee. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Anna Character</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on August 10, 2014 from: </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_(Disney)"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_%28Disney%29</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Buck, Chris and Jennifer Lee. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on August 10, 2014 f rom:</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frozen_(2013_film)"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frozen_%282013_film%29</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Egri, Lajos. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Art of Dramatic Writing.</span><span class="font3">New York: BN Publishing, 2009.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Germanna Community College: Tutoring Service. 2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Writing a Literary Analysis Paper</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hvisdos, Jakcson. 2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frozen Soundtrack Review</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on 05 April 2014 from: </span><a href="http://slojacks.wordpress.com/2014/04/05/frozen-soundtrack-review-these-"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://slojacks.wordpress.com/2014/04/05/frozen-soundtrack-review-these-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">songs-have-been-playing-in-my-head-for-weeks-so-i-might-as-well-write-about-them/</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Inggrita, F.A. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Physiological, Sociological, and Psychological Analysis of The Main Characters in “The Rabbit” by Noah Gordon</span><span class="font3"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lopez, Robert and Kristen Anderson-lopez.2013.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">For the First Time in Forever – Reprise</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on April 2014 from </span><a href="http://www.metrolyrics.com/for-the-first-"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.metrolyrics.com/for-the-first-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">time-in-forever-reprise-lyrics-kristen-bell.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lopez, Robert and Kristen Anderson-lopez.2013.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">For the First Time in Forever </span><span class="font3">Retrieved on April 2014 from </span><a href="http://www.metrolyrics.com/for-the-first-time-in-"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.metrolyrics.com/for-the-first-time-in-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">forever-lyrics-kristen-bell.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lopez, Robert and Kristen Anderson-lopez.2013</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Let It Go</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on April 2014 from </span><a href="http://www.metrolyrics.com/let-it-go-lyrics-idina-menzel.html"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.metrolyrics.com/let-it-go-lyrics-idina-menzel.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lopez, Robert and Kristen Anderson-lopez.2013.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Do You Want to Build a Snowman.</span><span class="font3">Retrieved on April 2014 from </span><a href="http://www.metrolyrics.com/do-you-"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.metrolyrics.com/do-you-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">wanna-build-a-snowman-lyrics-kristen-bell.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lopez, Robert and Kristen Anderson-lopez.2013.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Love is an Open Door</span><span class="font3">. Retrieved on April 2014 from </span><a href="http://www.metrolyrics.com/love-is-an-open-door-lyrics-"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.metrolyrics.com/love-is-an-open-door-lyrics-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">kristen-bell.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Permana, PutuAndri. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Imagery and Figuratives Languages in The Song Lyrics of Westlife’s Love Album</span><span class="font3"> (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Umbas, Ronald. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Psychological Relationship Among the Characters of Tess, Mary, and Kenny in Novel ‘Small Town Girl’ by Lavyrle Spencer </span><span class="font3">(thesis).Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Waiten, Wayne. 1989. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pyschology Themes and Variations</span><span class="font3">. California: B rook/Cole Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene &amp;&nbsp;Austin Warren. 1973. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. London: Lowe &amp;Brydone Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>