---
layout: full_article
title: "Effectiveness of Cooperative Learning Model on Mastering Ellipsis Topic of Japanese language on Japanese Literature Student  at  Udayana University"
author: "Ni Ketut Lisna Martini Dewi"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78139 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-78139"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78139"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p08"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p08</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Effectiveness of Cooperative Learning Model on Mastering Ellipsis Topic of Japanese language on Japanese Literature Student at Udayana University</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Ni Ketut Lisna Martini Dewi Universitas Udayana </span><a href="mailto:Ketutlisna@gmail.com"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">Ketutlisna@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract- </span><span class="font4">This research was entitled &quot;Effectiveness of Cooperative Learning Model on Mastery of Japanese Language Ellipsis Topic on Japanese Literature Students at Udayana University.&quot; This study aimed to analyze the understanding and mastery of the fifth semester students of Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon's Japanese Literature Department at Udayana University in the pretest and posttest phases with cooperative learning methods. This research focused on the film ellipsis entitled The Boy and the Beast / Bakemono No Ko directed by Mamoru Hasoda. The theory in this study used a theoretical study proposed by Halliday and Hasan.This research was an experimental research that used qualitative and quantitative approaches. The research method used in this research was observation and test. Observations were made during the implementation of the treatment. In data analysis activities, this research used quantitative data analysis and qualitative data analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The results of this study indicate that there was an increase in the learning process using the cooperative learning method with the type TPS (Think Pairs Share). This could be seen from the results of the pretest and posttest which had increased although not significantly. The pretest percentage for verbal ellipsis from 42.5% increased by 18.5% to 61% for noun ellipsis from 48% increased by 15% to 63% and for clause ellipsis from 56.5% increased by 0.5% to 57%. Based on these results, it could be concluded that there is an increase in student abilities because of the treatment which was carried out for four face-to-face meetings which were carried out on a platform that had been determined by the campus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Keywords: effectiveness, cooperative learning, Japanese ellipsis</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak- </span><span class="font4">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis kemampuan pemahaman dan penguasaan mahasiswa kelas </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon</span><span class="font4"> semester V jurusan Sastra Jepang Universitas Udayana pada fase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pretest</span><span class="font4"> dan fase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">posttest</span><span class="font4"> dengan metode </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cooperative learning.</span><span class="font4"> Penelitian ini berfokus pada elipsis film yang berjudul The Boy and the Beast / Bakemono No Ko yang disutradarai oleh Mamoru Hasoda. Teori dalam penelitian ini menggunakan kajian teoretis yang dikemukakan oleh Halliday dan Hasan (1976). Penelitian ini merupakan penelitian eksperimen yang menggunakan pendekatan kualitatif dan kuantitatif. Metode penelitian yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode observarsi dan tes. Dalam kegiatan analisis data, penelitian ini menggunakan analisis data kuantitatif dan analisis data kualitatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa terjadi peningkatan dalam proses pembelajaran dengan menggunakan metode pembelajaran </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cooperative learning</span><span class="font4"> dengan tipe TPS (Think Pairs Share). Hal ini dapat</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">dilihat dari hasil </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">posttest</span><span class="font4"> yang mengalami peningkatan dari hasil </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pretest</span><span class="font4"> meskipun tidak terlalu signifikan. Persentase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pretest</span><span class="font4"> untuk ellipsis verbal dari 42,5% meningkat sebanyak 18,5% menjadi 61% untuk ellipsis nomina dari 48% meningkat sebanyak 15% menjadi 63% dan untuk ellipsis klausa dari 56,5% meningkat sebanyak 0,5% menjadi 57%. Berdasarkan hasil tersebut dapat disimpulkan bahwa ada peningkatan kemampuan mahasiswa karena adanya </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">treatment</span><span class="font4"> yang dilaksanakan sebanyak empat kali pertemuan tatap muka yang dilaksanakan dengan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">platform</span><span class="font4"> yang sudah ditentukan oleh kampus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kata kunci : efektivitas, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cooperative learning,</span><span class="font4"> elipsis bahasa Jepang</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The country of Indonesia is still experiencing the impact of the Covid-19 virus outbreak which began in early 2020. Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) was first discovered in the city of Wuhan, China at the end of December 2019. The Covid-19 pandemic had a major impact on education in Indonesia. Some local governments decided to implement a policy to leave students and start implementing learning methods with a bold system (online) or online. The learning system is carried out through a personal computer (PC), laptop or smart phone connected to an internet network connection. Teachers can do learning together at the same time using groups on social media such as WhatsApp (wa), Telegram, Instagram, Zoom applications or other platforms as learning media. Thus, the teacher can ensure that students take part in learning at the same time, even though in different places.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Online learning has a positive impact, namely teachers and students become able to use learning applications, the implementation of learning becomes more flexible because it can be carried out at home and can be done anywhere. Online learning is expected to be an effective solution in learning at home to break the chain of the spread of Covid-19. The implementation of online learning also has obstacles that are not good for teachers</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">and for students. Some of these obstacles include inadequate gadgets, limitations to meet the needs of learning support facilities such as smartphones or laptops. This obstacle is one of the fundamental obstacles during the process of carrying out teaching and learning activities, from a technical point of view. In addition to these obstacles, inadequate internet quota and unstable network are factors that are faced when learning online.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the process of learning language, especially Japanese, students do not have to learn from teacher to student. Students can also teach each other with other students. Learning strategies that provide opportunities for students in structured tasks are called &quot;Gotong Royong learning&quot; or cooperative learning systems, in which the teacher acts as a facilitator. Teachers in carrying out the teaching and learning process must choose relevant teaching methods in order to improve the quality of education. Especially in relation to online learning in the Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon class in the Japanese Literature department at Udayana University. This study aims to determine the effectiveness of the use of cooperative learning methods on the mastery of Japanese ellipsis which is studied in the fifth semester Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon class in the Japanese Literature Department, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the identification of the problems that have been described in the background, two problems can be formulated in this study. The formulation of the problem is as follows: To what extent is the understanding and mastery of the fifth semester Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon students majoring in Japanese Literature at Udayana University in the pretest phase with the cooperative learning method? How far is the understanding and mastery of the fifth semester Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon students majoring in Japanese Literature at Udayana University in the posttest phase using the cooperative learning method?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the research problems above, the research objectives can be described as follows: to analyze the comprehension and mastery skills of the fifth semester students of Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon's class majoring in Japanese Literature at Udayana University in the pretest phase with the cooperative learning method. This study also aims to analyze the comprehension and mastery skills of the fifth semester students of Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon's Japanese Literature Department at Udayana University in the posttest phase using cooperative learning methods.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This research is an experimental research that uses qualitative and quantitative approaches. In the qualitative approach, a qualitative descriptive method is used to provide an overview and interpret the results of the analysis related to the effectiveness of the cooperative learning model on the use of Japanese ellipsis in Japanese literature students at Udayana University. In the quantitative approach, a quasi-experimental method or a quasiexperimental design is used (quasi-experimental). Quasi experimental design carried out without a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">comparison class or control class (Sugiyono, 2012: 110). The experimental model used is a one group pretest-posttest design, which measures students' cognitive abilities by using a pretest that is carried out before being given treatment and a posttest carried out after being given treatment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the research model used, this study only used one research class without a control class. Before being given treatment, students will be given a pretest first to find out their initial knowledge of ellipsis or disappearance in Japanese. The pretest and posttest questions given in the experimental class are the same questions but the number of questions has been randomized first. The difference between the pretest and posttest scores of students is the data used to see the effectiveness of the learning model on student learning outcomes in accordance with the treatment given and in accordance with the objectives of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research was conducted in the fifth semester of Nihon Gengogaku Nyumon's class majoring in Japanese Literature for the 2020/2021 academic year, Udayana University, Jalan Pulau Nias, Dauh Puri Kelod, Denpasar city. The time of the research was carried out from the initial activities to the preparation of the research report. In giving treatment, learning was carried out using online learning with the Webex application and the link provided by the campus eight times face to face. This research was also carried out according to the academic calendar for the 2020/2021 academic year at Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study analyzed the topic of ellipsis contained in the dialogue film The Boy and the Beast / Bakemono No Ko directed by Mamoru Hasoda which was released in 2015 with a duration of 119</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">minutes. In addition to the films mentioned above, the dialogue film used is the film Wood Job. This film, directed by Shinobu Yaguchi, was an adaptation of the novel “ Kamusari naa naa Nichijō” (</span><span class="font2">神去なあなあ日常</span><span class="font4">) by Shion Mura which was officially released in Japan on May 10, 2014.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sources of data used in this study were primary data sources and secondary data sources. The primary data sources in this study were the dialogue film The Boy and the Beast / Bakemono No Ko directed by Mamoru Hasoda which was released in 2015 with a duration of 119 minutes and the dialogue in the film Wood Job / Kamusari naan aa Nichijou &quot;directed by Shinobu Yaguchi who released on May 10, 2014. The secondary data source in this study was data obtained from the work of others, such as theses, theses, and journals related to the discussion in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The steps of the activities carried out in this research were as follows. (1) making a research proposal, (2) conducting a preliminary study in the field, namely the Nihongo Gengogaku Nyumon class in the fifth semester of the 2020/2021 academic year majoring in Japanese Literature at Udayana University to obtain information related to learning Japanese so that problem identification can be formulated, (3) preparing research permits, (4) compiling and preparing research instruments, namely RPS obtained from the Head of the Department of Japanese Literature, ellipsis material, learning models, pretest and posttest sheets, (5) conducting pretests to determine students' initial abilities, (6) conducting treatment (action) to students in the form of learning using a cooperative learning learning model for 1 x 45 minutes for four meetings, (7) after treatment, students were given a posttest to determine the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">effectiveness of the learning model on understanding Japanese ellipsis, (8) then perform analysis and data processing, (9) making reports and research results, (10) drawing conclusions. Data collection methods and techniques used in this study were observation and tests. Observation is a conscious effort to collect data that was carried out systematically, with standardized procedures. In this study, observations were made during the implementation of the treatment. In its implementation, the observation method is assisted by note-taking techniques, namely recording events that occur in the classroom during the learning process. After the observation, the next step was the test activity. The test was carried out with the aim of knowing the students' abilities before and after being given treatment in the form of implementing cooperative learning learning models. The tests given are in the form of pretest and posttest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were two types of data analysis methods and techniques used in this study, namely quantitative data analysis and qualitative data analysis. According to Sugiyono (2015, p.23) quantitative data was data in the form of numbers, or quantitative data that was scored (scoring). According to Sugiyono (2015, p.23) qualitative data was data in the form of sentences, words or pictures.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Pretest was giving an initial test to find out an initial picture of students' abilities regarding ellipsis or elimination before being given a learning strategy (treatment). The benefit of holding a pretest was to find out the students' initial abilities regarding the material on the ellipsis topic to be delivered. The first phase (pretest) was held</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">at the second meeting in September 2020. The pretest questions consisted of 60 questions that had been prepared by the researchers. The pretest was conducted on 50 students of Japanese literature class Nihon Gengogaku Nyuumon Semester V, Udayana University. After the pretest was carried out, it was followed by treatment which was</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Verbal Elipsis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Nomina Elipsis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Klausa Elipsis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Average pretest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,51</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,53</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Posttest average</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,61</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,57</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Highest score pretest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">65</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">95</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">80</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Lowest score pretest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Posttest highest score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">85</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">90</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">90</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Lowest score posttest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">20</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Average pretest score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">42,5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">48</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">56,5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Average posttest score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">61</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">63</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">57</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">carried out for four face-to-face meetings using the internet platform that had been prepared by the campus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The learning strategy (treatment) used in this study was a cooperative learning model. Cooperative learning model as a learning model that prioritizes the existence of groups. Each student in the group has a different level of ability (high, medium and low) and if possible group members come from</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">different races, cultures, ethnicities and pay attention to gender equality. The type of learning used in this research is TPS (Think Pair Share). TPS (Think Pair Share) was a learning model that was classified as a cooperative type with the syntax: The teacher presents classical material, gives problems to students and students work in groups by means of think-pairs, group presentations (share), individual quizzes, Make progress scores for each student, announce quiz results and give rewards.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Posttest as a final test that was carried out after being given a learning strategy (treatment) in learning in online classes. The benefit of holding this posttest was to obtain an overview of the abilities achieved after the end of learning (treatment). The posttest was held on the seventh week in December 2020, at the seventh meeting. After the learning strategy (treatment) for Nihongo Gengogaku Nyuumon students in the fifth semester of Japanese literature, Udayana University Denpasar, there was an increase in understanding of ellipsis, both verbal ellipsis, clause ellipsis and noun ellipsis. This could be seen from the ability of students to answer questions about ellipsis. In the posttest there were 60 questions, where all the questions were the same as the questions in the pretest, only the order in the posttest questions has been randomized.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The pretest value with the posttest value will be compared later so that it will be known how far the effect or influence of the teaching that has been done.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It could be seen in the table above that the average results of the pretest were 0.4 for verbal ellipsis, 0.51 for noun ellipsis and 0.53 for clause ellipsis. Then after the pretest, it was continued</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Average pretest score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">verage posttest score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Enhanc ement</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Verbal Elipsis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">42,5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">61</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">18,5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Nomina Elipsis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">48</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">63</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Klausa Elipsis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">56,5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">57</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,5</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">with treatment activities. In this treatment activity, the lecturer gave an explanation to the students about the ellipsis material. After the treatment was carried out for 4 face-to-face meetings, the next step was posttest (evaluation) activities. Based on the table above, it could be seen that the average posttest result for verbal ellipsis is 0.61, for noun ellipsis is 0.60 and for clause ellipsis is 0.57. The pretest and posttest scores increased slightly, although not significantly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the results of the analysis and discussion that had been carried out on the anime &quot;Bakemono no Ko&quot; to 50 fifth semester students of Nihongo Gengogaku Nyuumon Udayana University, it could be concluded that from the results of the pretest that was carried out in September 2020 the results obtained were sufficient. After the pretest was conducted, the lecturer in linguistics subject gave treatment to students to improve students' abilities. Treatment was carried out in four face-to-face meetings using a platform that has been determined by the campus. In this study using a cooperative learning learning model with the type of TPS (Think Pairs Share). In the seventh week of the sixth phase, a posttest (evaluation) was carried out. Lecturers gave posttest questions to students with the aim of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">obtaining an overview of the abilities achieved after the end of learning (treatment). The increase in the value of pretest with posttest could be described in the following table.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the results of the comparison of the percentages in the table above, it could be concluded that the cooperative learning model with the TPS (Think Pairs Share) type given to students went well. It coulf be seen from the results of the pretest and posttest that there was an increase, although not too significant. This could be interpreted that in the teaching and learning process during the Covid-19 pandemic the use of technology (IT) was very useful and helpful.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Alwi, Hasan, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font4">. 2014. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia Edisi Ketiga.</span><span class="font4"> Jakarta : Balai Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bassnett, Susan and Kyle Conway. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation in Global News</span><span class="font4">. Coventry, United Kingdom: University of Warwick.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bielsa, Esperança and Bassnett, Susan. 2009. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation in Global News</span><span class="font4">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Branco, Sinara de Oliveira. (2007). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Chesterman’s (1997 &amp;&nbsp;2000) Translation Strategies to The Analysis of Translated Online News Reports Following Nord’s (1991 &amp;&nbsp;1997) Functionalist Approach</span><span class="font4">. (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">master thesis).</span><span class="font4"> Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Pós-Graduação em Inglês e Literatura Correspondente.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Chesterman, Andrew. 2016. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Memes of Translation, the spread of ideas in translation theory</span><span class="font4">. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Littoseliti, L., 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methods in Linguistics</span><span class="font4">. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">McLaughlin, M. 2013. “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">News Translation as a Source of Syntactic Borrowing in Italian</span><span class="font4">” </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">in The Italianist Volume 3 No. 33 page 443–463.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">National Geographic Magazine. 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pan, L. 2015. “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ideological positioning in news translation: A case study of evaluative resources in reports on China</span><span class="font4">” in Target Volume 2 No. 27 page 215–237.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rahnemoon, S. N., Ahangar, A. A., &amp;&nbsp;Nourmohammadi, E. 2017. “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Thematic structure and translation: A case study of the translation of English news into Persian</span><span class="font4">” in Lingua Volume 5 No 003 page 26–50.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Widarmanto, Thahjono. 2017. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Jurnalistik: Panduan Awal Penulis dan Jurnalis</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Araska.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">192</span></p>