---
layout: full_article
title: "VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS IN ADVERTISEMENT PUBLISHED BY THE BREEZES BALI RESORT AND SPA"
author: "Made Restu Wahyuni"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS IN ADVERTISEMENT PUBLISHED BY THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">BREEZES BALI RESORT AND SPA</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MADE RESTU WAHYUNI</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis tanda verbal dan non verbal yang terdapat dalam sebuah iklan yang dicetak dalam sebuah brosur berbahasa Inggris. Penelitian ini diarahkan untuk menjawab dua pertanyaan mendasar yang terdapat dalam pokok permasalahan. Dalam menganalisis tanda verbal dan non verbal, penelitian ini menggunakan teory Advertising oleh Leech (1966), dan teory fungsi dan makna oleh Leech (1974). Hasil kajian menunjukan presentasi non verbal mampu menjadikan sebuah iklan untuk tampil lebih persuasive, menarik dan mudah diingat. Dalam setiap iklan juga menyampaikan fungsi bahasa yang digunakan seperti, fungsi informatif dan direktif. Pada umumnya iklan memiliki makna konseptual, konotatif, dan afektif yang digunakan untuk membujuk calon konsumen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : iklan tertulis, tanda verbal dan non verbal, fungsi dan makna.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Advertising is one of the basic forms of mass-communication that is used by tourism industries to promote their products and services. The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa is one of the various tourism industries that use advertisement to inform the kindness and the characteristics of the products and also to offer the facilities of the public services. Advertising has a close relation to the business world. It is one of the means designed to create demand for such products and services.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">By looking at the background of the study, the problems need to be discussed in this study could be stated as follows: What are the forms of the verbal and visual signs which are</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">used in this advertisement? And next, What are the functions and meanings of the signs used in the advertisement?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the statement of problems stated previously, the aims of this present study can be divided into two points: to identify the verbal and visual signs which are used in this advertisement, and next to describe the functions and meanings of the signs used in this advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The research method used in this study can divided into three components, namely the data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data. </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">4.1. Data Source</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The source of the data of this study is the advertisement published by The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa in the form of brochures. The brochure consists of three parts; the first part is the cover that contains the main picture and name of hotel. The second part is the information of hotel facilities. The last part is the map of location. Those are chosen to be analyzed because they all contain the verbal and visual signs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data were collected using documentation, which means that data were taken from written source. The process of collecting the data was, firstly, by reading carefully the data source thoroughly, understanding the data, and then selecting the data which were taken as the sample for this study by classifying the advertisements which have interesting signs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data was analyzed based on the theory of signs and advertising. Firstly, by describing the signs in the advertisement, secondly, analyzing the signs which exist in this advertisement and lastly by investigating the signs to find the functions and meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data were descriptively and narratively presented in order to give a clear and complete explanation that can make the audience understand every detail of the study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis focuses on three basic issues: first, the visual signs that are presented in the advertisement, second, the verbal signs that are presented in this advertisement and the last, the analysis of the functions and meanings of signs used in advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The visual signs of the advertisement are in the form of pictures, which occupy almost half of the space of advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The headline of this advertisement is carried by the picture that also supports the texts. The visual signs consist of the picture of luxurious buildings with surrounding coconut trees, a big swimming pool completed with long chairs and standing umbrellas that appropriately can stimulate the feeling or attitude towards the product and service so that the targeted audiences want to try the product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">2.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Illustration</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For this advertisement, the illustration shown by the picture of the sky in situation of the sunset time with lighting and color are used naturally to show the real condition of this place.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">3.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The body copy of this advertisement consists of three pictures. The first picture is the biggest picture which placed on the left page that occupies more than half of the space of advertisement. There is a picture of a beautiful garden and the blue color of swimming pool with the guests swimming in the pool and beside the white sands completed with long chairs and standing umbrella. There are two pictures under the big picture; the picture of white towels shaped couples of birds and the picture of the woman who looks happy, enjoyable, and charming. It presents that this resort has a large swimming pool surrounded by white sand so it would feel like being on a beautiful beach. Another picture is white towel shaped couple of birds which imply that this resort has craftsmanship and arts in arranging the room that will make guests feel comfortable and happy. The picture of a beautiful foreign woman shows that this resort is not only preferred by the local people but also the foreigners who will feel comfort and happiness in staying this resort.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">4.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standing Details</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The standing detail of this advertisement is the picture showing the map. The picture of this advertisement is showing the map with four basic colors (blue, yellow, green, and white) and there are small signs of square shaped in different colors. This image clearly shows an easy way to find the location, and also explains other location nearest the resort with different signs and colors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Verbal Signs, functions and Meanings analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The verbal signs of the Breezes Bali Resort and Spa advertisement are formed in texts which are written in English, taking the form of the texts (phrases and sentences) the numerous verbal signs within the advertisement are analyzed in terms of their functions and meanings. This advertisement is analyzed according to the components of advertising, as follows: a) Headline</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The headline of this advertisement is the text “The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa” this text is one of the tricks used by the advertisers to arouse the curiosity of the readers to read and see pay attention to the next part of the advertisement in order to find further information. This text of the headline conveys the informational function of language and also the conceptual meaning by giving explanation about the name of this resort and where is The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa located, and beside resort, it has a spa as well. The advertiser aimed at attracting the readers to the fact that The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa is located on the renowned island of Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body Copy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The body copy is the main part of the advertising message, often divided into various sections under the headline. But in this advertisement, the body copy is located on the next part of the headline. The main texts of this advertisement are beside the picture. It tells the readers about the location, the weather, and the situation offered by The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa. On this part there are many texts that have been analyzed, as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first sentences of the body copy are placed beside of the picture. They consist of three long sentences. The first sentences states “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa is located in hip and happening Seminyak, close to restaurant, boutiques and Bali’s most flamboyant nightlife, yet only a short walk from the beach and magical Seminyak sunset.”</span><span class="font0"> The words </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“hip and happening”</span><span class="font0"> in this sentence convey connotative meaning. It is not connected to “the part of body and a thing that happens” but rather means “centre of guest activities”. This</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">sentence is used to offer the strategic location and nice situation in this resort. It presents the advertiser’s feeling and attitude toward to the topic. This sentence conveys informational function as well as directive function of language, also brings conceptual meaning since the sentence functions to arouse the audience’s interest in this resort and also it has a good location. The second sentence states “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Recently refurbished, the resort’s facilities provides everything that the modern travelers and family expected on their vacation.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence uses the word “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">refurbished</span><span class="font0">” to emphasize that the resort has a new design, building, and complete facilities and it offers a luxurious and comfortable resort. The advertiser uses this sentence to inform and express his/her feeling or attitude to something. The sentence coveys informational functions as well as directive function of language also brings conceptual and affective meaning in which the advertiser informs and expresses his/her feeling and attitude to something he/she talking about, in this case about a new design of this resort. The last sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Internet and cable TV in every room, a kid corner, two bars, a restaurant serving only the best local and western favorites, a spa centre, various of recreational activities &amp;&nbsp;facilities and the pool that is easily accessed from all rooms that runs the hearth of the resort.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to explain that the rooms have a strategic location and close to the facilities of the resort. It presents the advertiser’s persuasive list making; the goal being that the audience will be interested in staying at this resort. The sentence conveys informational function as well as directive function and also brings conceptual meaning since the sentence is giving information about a resort that has many rooms which are close to the facilities of the resort and influencing behavior and attitude the readers or audiences to come and stay at this resort.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The second sentences of the body copy are still place beside of right of the picture. There consist of two long sentences that the first sentence states “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Rooms, The Breezes Bali resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa provides 133 rooms with the level of comfort and security demanded by modern travelers.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to explain about the quantity and luxuriousity of rooms of this resort. And the next sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“All rooms are located close to the resort’s primary attraction, the two storey swimming pool with artificial beach include the following amenities: 24-hours, daily hospitality tray with selection of teas and coffee, air conditioning, en-suite bathrooms with shower, twice-daily maid service, mini bar, cable TV, wireless internet connection, direct dial telephone, laptop size electronic safe, 200-threed-count linen</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sheets, cotton Yukata.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to offer comfortable and complete facilities of every room in this resort. The sentence brings informational function as well as conceptual meaning by giving more explanation about all rooms in this resort that have complete facilities and close to the centre of activities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The third sentence of the body copy is located on the next page of headline and placed on left hand. It consists of two long sentences, the first sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Dinning Experience, Dining and having drinks at The Breezes Bali Resort &amp;&nbsp;Spa is as popular with hotel guest as it is with guests staying elsewhere and regular from around the area.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to offer one of the main facilities of this resort that is dining room. And the next sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“This Experience starts from 24 hours Room Service exclusively for in house guests, The Bar for sports events, live entertainment and various games, Pool Bar for entertainment, games and The Restaurant that serves homemade local and international cuisine.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to offer several dining room facilities where every outlet has special function and services. The sentence coveys’ informational function as well as conceptual meaning by giving information that this resort has several dining room facilities and special services of this resort.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fourth sentence is placed under the picture. It is consisting of one sentence that states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Facilities, The Bar, Pool Bar, Swimming Pool, The Restaurant, The Spa, Gym &amp;&nbsp;Tennis Court, Cinema, Kids Corner, Departure Lounge, Business Centre &amp;&nbsp;Wi-Fi, Guest Activities Desk.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to offer several facilities of this resort. This sentence brings informational function as well as conceptual meaning since this advertiser uses this sentence to inform to the readers or audiences that this resort has complete facilities, comfortable, and good services.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The last sentences of the body copy in this advertisement are placed right hand. They are consisting of four sentences, the first sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“The Spa at The Breezes Bali is attentive to the balance of each guest.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to introduce one of facilities of this resort that is The Spa. The second sentence states “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Our intentions are on each guest’s equilibrium and the balancing of the body, soul, mind, and hearth.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to explain about the good feeling that the customer gets when they try the facilities and services in this spa. The next sentence states “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">We have created many fine and unique treatment to achieves.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is used to explain several of unique treatment which makes the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">customer feel curious and wish to try all of the facilities and services. And the last sentence states </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“Our professionally trained staffs are committed to ensure that your experience will be an unforgettable moments.”</span><span class="font0"> This sentence is emphasizes that the staffs members have an excellent knowledge, well-trained, and good experiences on this field. The advertiser uses this sentence to ensure the readers or customer when they try all of this treatment, they will get a good feeling, relaxing, and new experience that will never be forgotten. All these sentences above support each other, which tell the good feeling that the customers get when they try the facilities and services in this resort. These sentences conveys informational function as well as directive function and it performs affective meaning in which the advertiser persuades the target audience to come and try all the facilities and services in this resort and spa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Standing Details.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The standing details of this advertisement are placed at the bottom of this page under the map of this resort. They are printed on white background and in blue color font. The advertisement displays the address, the phone number, facsimile number, and the email address. It’s very important to know further information such as how and where the interested readers or audience can get registered if they want to come to this resort. There is also website in standing details because internet is very important in modern communications. These sentences bring informational function of language as well as carrying conceptual meaning by giving further information to the readers or audiences specifically the foreigner, to know this resort and spa as ready to receive them in Bali.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The study discusses the verbal and visual signs in English printed advertisement to find out the messages from both aspects as well as the functions and meanings from the advertisement. The following points could be presented as the conclusion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The verbal and visual signs in advertisement support the advertisement, such as; headline, illustration, body copy and standing details. Verbal signs in advertisement are found to have informational and directive functions and also conceptual, connotative and affective meanings and are used to persuade the audiences. The pictures of visual signs in the advertisement are printed in the form impressive and attractive picture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Dyer, Gillian. 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Advertisement as Communication</span><span class="font0">. London: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, Geoffrey. N. 1966. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">English in advertisement; A linguistic Study of Advertisement in Great Britain.</span><span class="font0"> London: Logman. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perspective.</span><span class="font0"> Victoria; Deakin University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leech, Geoffrey. N. 1974. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic and English Language</span><span class="font0">, Lancaster University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Saussure Ferdinand de. 1910. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Course in General Linguistics.</span><span class="font0"> URL :</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.colorado.edu/English/ENGL2012Klages/saussure.html"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.colorado.edu/English/ENGL2012Klages/saussure.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Saussure Ferdinand de. 1910. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Third Course of Lectures on General Linguistics.</span><span class="font0"> Pergamon Press.</span></p>