---
layout: full_article
title: "Metaphors in the Album Lemonade by Beyoncé"
author: "Luh Putu Gika Winda Savitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 19.1 Mei 2017: 275-283</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Metaphors in the Album Lemonade by Beyoncé</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Luh Putu Gika Winda Savitri<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>2</sup>, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:gikasavitri@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> gikasavitri@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2">, <sup>2</sup>[email: </span><a href="mailto:made_rajeg@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2">made_rajeg@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font2"> ], <sup>3</sup>[email: </span><a href="mailto:isnu.maharani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">isnu.maharani@yahoo.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metafora dianggap sebagai bahasa yang luar biasa meskipun umumnya digunakan dalam kehidupan sehari-hari. Selain digunakan dalam bahasa percakapan, metafora juga mudah ditemukan di dalam lirik lagu. Album terbaru yang dirilis oleh Beyonce berjudul Lemonade merupakan sumber data penelitian ini. Skripsi ini diberi judul “Metafora di Album Lemonade oleh Beyonce”. Tujuan umum penelitian ini adalah memahami metafora yang ditemukan dalam album tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori metafora mutakhir yang di pelopori oleh Lakoff dan Johnson (2003) digunakan untuk penelitian ini. Selain itu, metode Metaphor Identification Procedure dari Pragglejaz (2007) membantu proses untuk mengidentifikasi ekspresi metafora dalam lirik yang terkandung dalam album. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif dan kuantitatif. Hasil penelitian mengungkap keragaman ekspresi metaforis dan metafora konseptual yang jatuh di dalam kategori struktural, orientational, atau metafora ontologis. Ada 31 ekspresi metaforis ditemukan dan 28 metafora konseptual. Kebanyakan metafora konseptual menjelaskan konsep cinta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: metafora konseptual, Beyonce, target domain, source domain.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Metaphors are commonly used in daily life. Although they are perceived as an extraordinary form of language, they can be easily heard in daily conversation. Moreover, metaphors and metaphorical expressions are frequently used to express and understand each other’s thoughts and actions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Metaphors are classified into different types, one example is the conceptual metaphor. Lakoff and Johnson (2003) and Kövecses (2010) support the idea that metaphorical expressions can be understood as conceptual metaphors. Kövecses believes that metaphor is defined as understanding one conceptual domain in terms of another e.g. source A equals source B, meaning that source A is explained by source B. In addition, Lakoff and Johnson (2003) classified those metaphors into structural, orientational and ontological metaphors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Metaphor has long been an essential component of poetry. Klarer (2004:26) states that “poetry is closely related to the term lyric, which is derived etymologically from the Greek musical instrument </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lyra</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lyre</span><span class="font2"> or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">harp</span><span class="font2">) and points to an origin of the sphere of music”. Thus lyrics, which regularly utilize metaphors, are form of poetry and a medium to express thoughts. Beyoncé, one of the well-known artists from the USA released an album called </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade,</span><span class="font2"> which refers to her personal struggles in addition to the issues that black women historically and currently face (Hawkes, 2016). Her songs are inspiring and empower young women especially women of color, and therefore, it is significant to see how she describes her own experiences through the use metaphors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the study stated above, the problems of study are as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What metaphorical expressions are found in the lyrics of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of conceptual metaphors motivate the metaphorical expressions in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meanings are implied in the metaphors found within the lyrics?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems of the study stated above, the general aim of this study is to understand the metaphors found in the album. As the metaphorical expressions found in Beyoncé’s album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade,</span><span class="font2"> the specific aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To indicate the metaphorical expressions found in the lyrics of songs on the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of metaphors based on the conceptual metaphors in the lyrics.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To uncover the meaning of identified metaphors in the lyrics.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This research is mainly analyzed using Lakoff and Johnson (2003) to classify the conceptual metaphors into structural, orientational, or ontological metaphor. Moreover, the metaphorical expressions in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2"> went</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">through a process of Metaphor Identifier Procedure by Pragglejaz Group (2007). This process determines which words contain metaphorical expression, which leads to concluding the conceptual metaphor. In order to find the meaning of the metaphor, conceptual metaphors are analyzed using the Real World Knowladge (Ahren, 2010: 7,9,10). This research is using both qualitative and quantitative methods. The qualitative method is used to describe the meaning meanwhile, numbers represent the quantity of metaphorical expressions and conceptual metaphors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the metaphorical expressions, the two words are suspected to be target and source domain would be printed differently. The word in the metaphorical expression that is printed italic is regarded as the source domain and the underlined word is regarded as the target domain. Moreover, as the metaphorical expressions come from lyrics of songs, the title will be present next to the expression.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Structural Metaphor</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The conceptual metaphors from the lyrics in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2"> that fall under the category of structural metaphor are analyzed here. Structural metaphor is a conceptual metaphor where one concept is metaphorically structured in terms of another (Lakoff and Johnson, 2003:15).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>[5-1] HAPPINESS IS DESTINATION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (1): “We not </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">reaching</span><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">peaks</span><span class="font2"> enough” – Don’t Hurt Yourself</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase “reaching peaks” is commonly known as reaching an emotional high or happiness. In this context, the meaning is similar. However, the basic meaning to “peak” is the pointed top of mountain. Knowing the difference, this expression is surely metaphorical and “peaks” is the word that is being used metaphorically. Put another way, this metaphorical expression indicates that happiness is the top of the mountain, which is the destination of a hike. Therefore, the conceptual metaphor is </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">HAPPINESS</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>IS DESTINATION</span><span class="font2">.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">When someone is on a mountain hike, his or her destination is the top of the mountain. The hike could be easy or challenging but the feeling on reaching the destination is the goal that the hikers are trying to reach. The satisfaction to have accomplished the challenge leaves the hikers to enjoy the destination even more. The longing to stay and enjoy the destination is inevitable. It takes a lot of commitment and strong intention to conquer the trail and they have to follow the correct path in order to find the top of the mountain. There is a chance that the hikers might get lost and not find the destination itself. However, their main goal is to find the destination, just as most people are trying to find happiness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If relationships are a journey, happiness is the destination. Simply, a relationship is two people trying to find happiness within each other together. They go through challenges just to find happiness. It does take a lot of commitment and strong intention to find it together. Once they have found it, they want to stay happy as long as they can. However, while finding that happiness, the couple could get lost within the journey and not find the happiness they want.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The metaphorical expression states that the people being described are not finding enough happiness to sustain their relationship. Within their journey, they might not have enough commitment to find the happiness they wanted.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>[5-2] LOVE IS A GIFT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (2): “The </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">love</span><span class="font2"> I’m </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">giving</span><span class="font2"> is unnoticed” – Love Drought</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Similarly to the lyric discussed above, this conceptual metaphor source domain is </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">GIFT. </span><span class="font2">In contrast, the target domain for this conceptual metaphor is </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">LOVE</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">The basic meaning of ‘love’ is a strong feeling of affection. However, similarly to the third data point, the target domain is not an object that can be physically transferred like a gift. Therefore, this phrase is metaphorical expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gifts are objects that are given by the giver and received by the receiver as a gesture during a celebration or special events. The giver hopes that the receiver would love the gift since he or she put a lot of thought into it. Sometimes the receiver expects</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the gift and sometimes it is not expected.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Love is a strong feeling of affection towards something or someone. A strong feeling towards a pet could be love—the owner taking care of the pet by feeding and giving shelter. Similarly the strong feeling between two human beings that would do anything for each other is called love. Many people say that they would ‘cross the ocean’ for their loved ones because of the feelings they have towards that person. Love itself could be the best gift to give someone.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Orientational Metaphor</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This conceptual metaphor includes metaphors that organize a whole system of concepts with respect to one another (Lakoff and Johnson, 2003:15). The concepts are related to spatial orientation such as up-down, in-out, front-back, on-off, deep-shallow, central-peripheral.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>[5-3] HAPPY IS UP</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (3): “I </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hop</span><span class="font2"> off my bed” – Hold Up</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">People tend to say, “I get out of my bed” instead of hopping out of bed, unless there is a reason for someone to have more energy and subsequently be willing to hop out of the bed. The upward direction leaves a sign that this potentially could be a metaphorical expression. In addition, Lakoff and Johnson provided metaphorical expressions of HAPPINESS IS UP: example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I’m feeling </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">up</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">boosted</span><span class="font2"> my spirit.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You’re in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">high</span><span class="font2"> spirits.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thinking about her always gives me a </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lift</span><span class="font2">” (2003:16).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This conceptual metaphor is also found in the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2"> with the phrase “I </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hop</span><span class="font2"> off my bed”. The hopping action can also be seen in daily life. When someone is happy, they tend to express it by putting their hands up, jumping, squeak to a higher voice, and hop. In a different culture, this conceptual metaphor might not apply. For example, Muslim kneels to the ground when they are grateful and happy. However, generally, people’s happiness is expressed upwardly. Therefore, the metaphorical</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">expression easily fit under orientational metaphor with the meaning that the speaker is getting out of bed with happiness and excitement.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Ontological Metaphor</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Metaphorical expressions found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2"> that are ontological metaphors will be analyzed thoroughly in this section. This conceptual metaphor allows readers to understand something through their experience of physical object and substances. Simply, non-physical things can be referred as objects.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>[5-5] LOVE IS A MOVING ENTITY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (5): “ You let this good </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">love</span><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">go</span><span class="font2"> to waste” – Hold Up</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason that this expression is suspected to be a metaphor is the combination of these words together: ‘love’ and ‘go’. The basic meaning to ‘go’ is to move from one place to another; however, love is abstract and it cannot physically move.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Moving entities can travel from one point to another. It could move up and down, side-to-side or fall. It could also disappear from human sight. If love is a moving entity, it means that love can move from one point to another. It could move from one person to another or disappear. There are other common phrases that are using this conceptual metaphor like “I am falling in love” and “I am falling out of love”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this expression, the love mentioned is moving towards a waste where it is not useful anymore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (6): “You and me could </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">stop</span><span class="font2"> this </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">love</span><span class="font2"> drought” – Love Drought</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A moving entity has a starting point and it can move to different direction as previously explained. Once it moves, it can also be stopped once it’s moving. For example, in this metaphorical expression, ‘love drought’ is a state where a relationship is lacking of love. This situation of lacking love could continue and will destroy the relationship. However, it could also be stopped.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>[5-6] LOVE IS WATER IN A CONTAINER</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Expression (7): “You don’t </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">love</span><span class="font2"> me </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">deep enough</span><span class="font2">” – Don’t Hurt Yourself</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Love can be described through different things. One of them is to understand love as water in a container. In this expression, one does not love someone else deep enough. Love is an abstract thing. Previously in this writing, love has been described as a gift and love as a moving entity. This time, love is water in a container.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Water in a container has depth, and it could move in a restricted manner. In real life, water in a container could be water in a glass, a swimming pool, the ocean, a lake, a river and a well. People bathe in the ocean or in the river. Many people also so exercise in these contained water by swimming, aqua zumba or water polo. With the depth of the water contained, it could be dangerous. Many people have drowned in these different types of contained water.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this metaphorical expression, love is water in a container. This means that people can do certain things in it. For example, they can swim or bathe in it. It could also be used as a measuring tool. On one hand, the love could be very shallow and it is only in the surface. For example, someone loves another only because of the look or his or her profession. On the other hand, someone could love another person deeper. Having more concrete reasons to love a person could be an example. In conclusion love is water in a container, there is a possibility that someone does not love someone else deep enough.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Throughout twelve songs in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade,</span><span class="font2"> there are twenty-eight conceptual metaphors and thirty-one metaphorical expressions found and dissected thoroughly—</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pray You Catch Me</span><span class="font2"> (three metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hold Up</span><span class="font2"> (four metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Don’t Hurt Yourself</span><span class="font2"> (four metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">6 Inch</span><span class="font2"> (two metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Daddy Lessons</span><span class="font2"> (two metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Love Drought</span><span class="font2"> (five metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Freedom</span><span class="font2"> (four metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All Night</span><span class="font2"> (six metaphorical expressions), </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Formation</span><span class="font2"> (one metaphorical expression). Unfortunately, there are no metaphorical expressions found in the songs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sorry, Sandcastle, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Forward</span><span class="font2"> that fits into structural, orientational, nor ontological metaphor. Moreover, the rest of the lyrics in this album are having literal meaning instead of being presented as metaphors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In addition to relationships, metaphorical expressions found in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lemonade</span><span class="font2"> are motivated by the idea of power. Different entities that play a role in power based on the finding in the data source are confidence, money, freedom and fame. The orientation of confidence is up which can be seen through body language. Money is described as power to get revenge. Power has also been mentioned as a valuable thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">BBC. 2015. U.S. Supreme Court rules gay marriage is legal nationwide [Internet].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-33290341"><span class="font2">http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-33290341</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">[Accessed 25 February 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hakim, Aldin Lukman. 2009. “A Semantic Analysis of Metaphors found in “Dream Theater’s” Selected Lyrics. Undergraduate Thesis. Medan: University of North Sumatra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hobbs, Pamela. 2013. Fuck As A Metaphor For Male Sexual Aggression. Accessed May 15, 2016. Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/GL/article/view/9318"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/GL/article/view/9318</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klarer, Mario. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Literary Studies.</span><span class="font2"> Darmstadt: Wissenchaftliche Buchgesellschaft.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kovecses, Zoltan. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor: A Practical Introduction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, George. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor”.</span><span class="font2"> In A. Ortony (ed) Meaphor and thought (2<sup>nd</sup> ed) (pp.202-251). New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphors We Live By</span><span class="font2">. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Accessed March 3, &nbsp;2016. Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/staff/eiaes/Pragglejaz_Group_2007.pdf"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/staff/eiaes/Pragglejaz_Group_2007.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pannier, M. and Achi, C.(2016). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Thousands of protesters take to the streets in French anti-gay marriage demonstration</span><span class="font2"> [Internet]. Business Insider. Available from: </span><a href="http://www.businessinsider.com/r-french-anti-gay-marriage-protesters-march-to-revive-issue-before-polls-2016-10?IR=T&amp;r=US&amp;IR=T"><span class="font2">http://www.businessinsider.com/r-french-anti-gay-marriage-protesters-march-to-revive-issue-before-polls-2016-10?IR=T&amp;r=US&amp;IR=T</span></a><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;[Accessed 25</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">February 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pragglejaz Group. 2007. MIP: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Method for Identifying Metaphorically Used Words in Discourse</span><span class="font2">. Accessed May 15, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2016. Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.academia.edu/235704/MIP_A_method_for_identifying_metaph"><span class="font2">http://www.academia.edu/235704/MIP_A_method_for_identifying_metaph</span></a><span class="font2"> orically_used_words_in_discourse</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Primahadi Wijaya R. Gede. 2009. “Metaphorical Expressions In The Songs By My Chemical Romance: A Semantic Analysis. Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: English Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sanjaya, I Kadek. 2016. “Metaphorical Expressions Related to God Found in COCA: A Semantic Analysis. Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: English Deprtment, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Urban Dictionary. 2010. Broken Wing. [ONLINE] Available at: </span><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=broken%20wing"><span class="font2">http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=broken%20wing</span></a><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">[Accessed 27 February 2017].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yangyang, Zhang. 2012. Discursive Metaphors Analysis: The Love Metaphor of Plant in Chinese Love Poetry. ISSN 1923-6700. Accessed May 17, 2016. Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/ccc/article/view/j.ccc.192367002012080"><span class="font2">http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/ccc/article/view/j.ccc.192367002012080</span></a><span class="font2"> 5.2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">283</span></p>