---
layout: full_article
title: "THE MAIN CHARACTER’S CONFLICTS IN STEPHENIE MAYER’S NOVEL “TWILIGHT SAGA: NEW MOON”"
author: "I Wayan Wida Permana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE MAIN CHARACTER’S CONFLICTS IN STEPHENIE MAYER’S NOVEL “TWILIGHT SAGA: NEW MOON”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">I Wayan Wida Permana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0918351044</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty Of Letters</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Karya ilmiah ini berjudul “The Main Character’s Conflicts in Stephenie Mayer’s Novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Twilight Saga: New Moon</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”. Tujuan yang ingin dicapai dalam penulisan karya ilmiah ini adalah menjelaskan berbagai jenis konflik dan strategi yang digunakan oleh tokoh utama pada novel ini dalam menghadapi konflik didalam hidupnya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam penulisan novel ini adalah sebuah novel karangan Stephenie Mayer’s yang berjudul “Twilight Saga: New Moon”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori yang digunakan dalam penulisan karya ilmiah ini diambil dari teori William Kenney yang mana merupakan teori dasar konflik.Beliau mengutarakan bahwa konflik yang terjadi dalam suatu cerita bias merupakan konflik yang berasal dari luar maupun konflik yang terjadi dalam diri sendiri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Dalam novel ini, Bella Swan digambarkan sebagai tokoh utama. Konflik yang dialami oleh Bella pada dasarnya berasal dari dalam dirinya sendiri, dimana dia berpacaran dengan seorang vampire bernama Edward dan ingin menikah dengan Edward dan menjadi bagian dari keluarga Vampir. Pada novel ini kita juga dapat menemui bahwa Bella juga memiliki conflict dengan Laurent, James and Jacob.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Novel, Main Character, Conflicts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background and Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literature is a term used to describe written or spoken material. Broadly speaking, &quot;literature&quot; is used to describe anything from creative writing to more technical or scientific works, but the term is most commonly used to refer to works of the creative imagination, including works of poetry, drama, fiction, and nonfiction. This thesis is arranged using theory of literature because this novel tells about the other type of love which is different from reality. In the story, she is in love with vampire.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Novel is a part of literary works which is usually known as narrative prose concerned with length of the story and a complex plot which is the result of human real experience and their imagination. In this thesis the writer is only focused on novel. Novel is extended factious prose narrative dealing with human character and actions of period of time. According to O Reeve (1785:26) novel is picture of real and manners and of the time in which it was written.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict within a piece may also be central to the author's view of life or the point he or she is trying to make. Conflict is the heart of any plot. The conflict can be between the protagonist and another character, the antagonist between the protagonist and nature; or the protagonist and society. It can also be an internal or psychological conflict. While a conflict can be very straightforward: good versus evil, the best conflicts and force a character to choose between two basically good outcomes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is interesting to analyze the conflicts of the main character in the story. There is a close relationship between character and conflicts. The main character can be recognized because she is surrounded by many conflicts. They are trapped to solve their conflicts which appear internally and externally. This is the background as well as one reason why this topic is analyzed in this thesis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, there are certain problems which will be discussed in this thesis. The problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are the main character’s internal and external conflicts portrayed in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stephenie Mayer’s novel “Twilight Saga: New Moon”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How do the main character face their conflict in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stephenie Mayer’s novel</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘Twilight Saga: New Moon’</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Every scientific activity should have a clear aim and is based at least on some scientific criteria. The aims of this writting are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the main character’s internal and external conflicts</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out how are the main characters facing their conflicts</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method is the tool, procedure and technique chosen in conducting research. Research is defined as human activity based on intellectual application in the investigation of matter. In finding the data, this study refers to some references, and also related to some theories. Those theories which we used as guidance in analyzing the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight Saga: New Moon.</span><span class="font1"> The research method used in this paper is classified into three parts as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study collected from the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight Saga: New Moon</span><span class="font1"> by Stephenie Mayer. There are three steps in collecting the data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading the novel</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finding and selecting the conflicts found in the novel</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Note taking and classifying</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Conflict internally and externally based on the theory of conflicts. The analysis started from finding and selecting the conflicts found in the novel then conflicts which one was internal and which one was external, the next step was to find out how the main character</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">faced their confict and the last step was analyzing the data based on the theories of the conflicts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis the main character’s conflicts in stephenie mayer’s novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“twilight saga: new moon”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella Swan Internal Conflict</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bella swan is the female character in the Novel “New Moon “. She’s in love with a vampire, Edward Cullen who will make her life in danger, because she has to face many conflicts from outside attacks. She wants to get married with Edward, although Edward is a vampire. That is the conflicts in her life. She chooses to become a vampire and then she chooses to get married with her loved Edward.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Edward loved Bella so much, and always wanted Bella to become a human forever, but Bella also loved him and wanted to live with Edward forever. Although she had lost her best friend, Jacob who really loved her but she had to refuse Jacob because she loved Edward and chose to get married with Edward. We can see the dialogue between Jacob and Bella, that Bella refuse him, because she chose to become a vampire. But Jacob never gave up getting Bella’s love.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The internal conflict of Bella came when Edward left Bella for a few months, she felt depressed for months. This shows the conflict of her life. Her father was worried about her, but she did not instead to make her father worried. Bella went to a movie with her friend and when she was there, she carelessly approached a group of men outside a bar and found that she could hear Edward’s voice in dangerous situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bella was in dilemma with her problem. She didn’t know what should be done. Bella thought miss Edward made her do something dangerous to herself and could hear Edward’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">whisper to stop doing something that endangered for her. Bella fell into a deep depression</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">due to end her relationship with Edward. In the ground up, Bella could hear 'voices' Edward when he was in danger. Because she was eager to hear 'voices' Edward, she was looking for ingredients that brought in the voices. And The internal other conflict of Bella she felt feared with age because she was a human , and her boyfriend, named Edward Cullen was a vampire that never got older age, 17 years old.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella External Conflict with Laurent</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">External conflict indicates conflict affecting two or more parties in the physical world. Outer conflict is the conflict between two persons or group, in one of which the hero is the kind person. Laurent wanted to be a “vegetarian “vampires. He traveled to Denaly, Alaska and lived with Tanya’s family, but he couldn’t control his thirsty with blood. He didn’t adopt their strict diet of drinking animal blood, and “cheated” by occasionally feeding on humans. Bella’s External conflict with Laurent came when Laurent found Bella in his mission from Victoria to killed Bella because James, Victoria’s mate was killed by Edward. It showed that Laurent had bad value because he kept revenge upon Bella. Victoria hates Bella and a friend of Victoria, Laurent hates Bella too.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella External Conflict with Jasper</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Alice, Edward’s sister, who loved to plan social gatherings, planed an elaborate birthday party for Bella at the Cullen home. Bella received wonderful gifts from the family but accidentally cut her finger while opening a gift. The smell of Bella’ s particularly sweet blood caused Jasper, Alice’s mate, to lung at Bella. The result was a cut and a broken arm. Bella, who was accident prone and used to being injured, takes it in stride and treats it as not</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">such a big deal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella External Conflict With Her Best friend Jacob.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The External conflict of Bella with her best friend Jacob, After Jacob find out that he is a werewolf, he leaves Bella, and tries to protect Bella from Laurent, vampire who want to kill her. But then he tells Bella that he leaves her because he is a werewolf. We can see the dialogue Jacob and Bella.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jacob becomes often out control and not confidence, when he knows that he is werewolf. He feels it is difficult to lose it. But after a long time he didn’t think about that anymore. He wasn’t upset about anything, he enjoy everything.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">With his power, Jacob and friends as werewolves saved Bella from vampire named Laurent that tried to kill in meadow hen. Bella came to the meadow alone. At the End of the story, Jacob told Edward about agreement between them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the conversation between Edward and Jacob, it may be concluded that agreements on the dispute between Edward and Jacob makes a treaty. Jacob says “The treaty is quite specific. And also says that he always be a friend of Bella, although it will be difficult.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bella asked Jacob to be still her friend, but Jacob found it difficult to agree, but he still tried to made it and he will always Miss Bella. This is the end of the novel. And at the end of the story she chooses to live with her loves Edward to be a vampire, Jacob is sad with Bella’s decision. But he still promises to be a friend. And Bella forgives Edward that ever leaves her and forgives Rosalie about her big mistake she has done that caused Edward almost kill himself. That’s all about the conflict among the characters in the Stephenie Meyer’s Novel New Moon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">\</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of Internal &amp;&nbsp;External Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella internal conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bella faced the problem by deciding to get married with Edward before Edward changed her into vampire.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella conflict with Laurent</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bella conflict’s with Laurent was solved by the help of a pack of werewolves which is letter known as Jacob. Laurent was killed by them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella conflict with Jasper</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bella conflict’s with Jasper end up with the help of members of the Cullen</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Family. Alice tried to calm down Jasper and brought him away from Bella. Charlie (Edward’s father) is a doctor, he was taking care of Bella until she’s fully recovered.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella conflict with Jacob</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bella decided to make a commitment with Jacob that they can still be together as a friend. Bella asks Jacob to be still her friend, but Jacob finds it difficult to agree, but he still tries to make it and he will always Miss Bella.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two kind of conflict in this novel. They are internal and external conflicts. The conflict here has much effect on the family and the characters in the novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the conflict analysis above, it can be concluded that conflict is a natural part of human relationship. It is an inevitablee part of life for variety of different reasons. Human is caught up in some of these conflicts everyday, and this applies also to characters in a story. Conflict management is needed to resolve the conflict whether it is right or wrong. The outcome of conflict may be functional of dysfunctional depending on the conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">management.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Collin, William. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Collins Dictionary of English language</span><span class="font1">. London: William Collins sons &amp;&nbsp;Co. Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Horton, Paul and Chester, L. Hurt. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">General Conflict</span><span class="font1">. New York: Random House Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Judith A. Stanford. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literary: Stories, Poems, Plays, and Essay.</span><span class="font1"> New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">. New York : Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer, Stephenie. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon: Twilight Series</span><span class="font1">. Park Avenue, New York: Little, Brown.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meyer, Stephenie. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">New Moon Dua Cinta</span><span class="font1">. PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moskowitz, Orgel. 1969. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">General Psychology</span><span class="font1">. Boston: Houghton Miffin Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reeve, Clara. 1785, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: An Introduction to Fiction, Poetry, and Drama.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Harper Collins Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Roberts, Edgar. V, and Jacobs, Henry, E. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literature. An Introduction to Reading and Writing</span><span class="font1">. New Jersey: A Simon and Schuster, Comp.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Taylor, Richard. 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding the Elements of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: Macmillan press Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Harcout, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World Inc.</span></p>