---
layout: full_article
title: "THE HEGEMONY IMPOSED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND THE RESISTANCE OF WETU TELU SASAKNESE ETHNIC GROUP AT BAYAN DISTRICT, NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY"
author: "I Wayan Wirata, I Gde Parimartha, I Made Suastika, I Ketut Subagiasta"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3599 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3599"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3599"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">THE HEGEMONY IMPOSED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND THE RESISTANCE OF </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">WETU TELU</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> SASAKNESE ETHNIC GROUP AT BAYAN DISTRICT, NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Wayan Wirata<sup>1</sup>, I Gde Parimartha<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Made Suastika<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Subagiasta<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup>Postgraduate Program, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University Email:</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">This research is entitled “The Hegemony Imposed by the Government and the Resistance of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Ethnic Group at Bayan District, North Lombok”. The interaction between the government and the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> community at Bayan District has resulted in differences in views, ideas, and behaviors leading to friction and refusal or opposition from the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This research is focused on 1) how has the hegemony imposed by the government upon the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Ethnic Group residing at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency taken place? 2) what has been done by the people of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> Ethnic Group residing at Bayan Distrik, North Lombok to resist to the hegemony imposed by the government upon them? and 3) what are the effects and meanings of the hegemony imposed by the government and the resistance of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Ethnic Group on the multicultural community life at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency?</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data needed were collected by interview, observation, and documentation and were descriptively, qualitatively and interpretatively analyzed. The theories used to give answers to the problems formulated above are the theory of hegemony (Gramsci), the theory of deconstruction (Jacques Derrida), and the theory of discourse (Foucault).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results show that the hegemony imposed by the government has taken place in a number of particular aspects such as the religious aspect, socio political aspect, cultural aspect and educational aspect. Being marginalized and being not free in developing their tradition and culture, the people of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Ethnic Group residing at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency, have been responsible for their resistance to the government and the followers Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">. The resistance has been shown by avoiding, refusing and even opposing what is considered not in accordance with their tradition and culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">One of the effects of the hegemony imposed by the government and the resistance made by the people of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Ethnic Group residing at Bayan District is that there has been imbalanced communication between the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> (which collaborates with the government) and the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu </span><span class="font0">Sasaknese Ethnic Group residing at Bayan District leading to a social conflict. The other effects have been that such a social conflict has disturbed the social life of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">community, has led to a paradox of cultural preservation, and has narrowed the power of the Wetu Telu Sasaknese Ethnic Group residing at Bayan District. From the meaning point of view, what has taken place at Bayan District has philosophical and multicultural meaning as well as the meanings of struggle for identity, cultural preservation and dynamism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Key word</span><span class="font0">: the government, hegemony, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> Ethnic Group, marginalized and resistance</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Background</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Lombok is a small island which is located in West </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Nusa Tenggara</span><span class="font0"> Province and is inhabited by an aboriginal Sasaknese group. Before Islam was introduced, the Sasaknese people believed in the souls of their ancestors and the sacred things, and offered offerings on the sacred graves.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Islam was introduced to Lombok Island in the beginning of the 16<sup>th</sup> century by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">mubalig</span><span class="font0"> (preachers) from Java, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bugis</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makassar.</span><span class="font0"> The introduction of Islam has resulted in a syncretism. It is this syncretism which has made the followers of Islam classified into two; they are the followers of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islam Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> and the followers of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islam Waktu Lima.</span><span class="font0"> Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Telu</span><span class="font0"> is the mixture of the traditional belief (the ancestor’s belief) and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islam Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> which has Al-Quran and Hadist as the references.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the colonial era to the independence era, such a difference seemed to be made bigger. During the independence era, the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> was marginalized and under pressure. The reason is that the other parties (the government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">) considered that the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> were not the followers of Islam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">During the New Order, the position of the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> was getting stronger, as they collaborated with the government. With the strength they had, they oppressed the traditional teachings of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> which was considered to contradict the real teachings of Islam. However, the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> still believe that their belief has given them blessings and enthusiasm to survive and that it contains moral messages from their ancestors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Such a condition has inspired the government to create some strategies how to avoid the traditions and customs which are related to the Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> carried out by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> Ethnic Group residing at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District from growing because it has been considered to contradict the real teachings. Such a difference in insight and understanding has led to the resistance made by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese ethnic group residing at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency to the hegemony imposed by the government.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Discussion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The hegemony imposed by the government upon the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> Etnic Group residing at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency, includes a number of particular aspects such as religious ideological, socio political, socio cultural and educational aspects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In religious ideological aspect, the hegemony imposed has been in the form of some attempts made by the government to make the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu </span><span class="font0">implement the teachings of Islam as included in the Holy Books of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Al-Quran</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hadist</span><span class="font0">. With the power it has and by collaborating with the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima,</span><span class="font0"> the government could fade and eliminate the customs and traditions related to Islam Wetu Telu performed by the Sasaknese ethnic group residing at Bayan District. The reason was that it was considered to contradict the real teachings of Islam. In addition, the government’s ideology was also implemented in the form of the construction of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> Mosques with the objective that the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> would not address their prayers at the old Mosques any longer. They were made to address their prayers at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> Mosques because the old ones were considered not to match what was ideally needed to make them ideal holy places. In the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah</span><span class="font0"> (religious proselytizing) delivered, it was insisted that it was important to refer to the true and real teachings of Islam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In socio political aspect, the hegemony imposed by the government was in the form of controlling the land owned by the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> residing at Bayan District which was then used as the land of transmigration especially for the followers of Islma </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">. In this manner, the government could extend and spread the Islam orthodoxy at the area where the followers of Wetu Telu live, that is, in Bayan District. Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> Mosques, Madrasah schools and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pondok pesantren</span><span class="font0"> (school for Koranic Studies for children and young people, most of whom are boarders). The attempts made by the government to empower the religious leaders (known as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tuan Guru</span><span class="font0">) in delivering </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah Islamiyah</span><span class="font0"> (Islamiyah religious proselytizing) finally narrowed the movements of the traditional leaders of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0">, meaning that the identity of their community was threatened. In socio cultural aspect, the government used the old mosques, the traditional costumes, the traditional ceremonies as tourist</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">attractions as well as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Perisean</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gegeruk</span><span class="font0"> Dances as the arts of Lombok, West Nusa Tenggara Province.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In educational aspect, the hegemony was imposed by sending the traditional leaders and the government civil servants coming from the community of Islam Wetu Telu living at Bayan District to the training programs and by building </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">madrasah</span><span class="font0"> schools and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pondok pesantren</span><span class="font0"> close to the governmental offices so that their security and sustainability could be maintained. It was also intended to inform to the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> living at Bayan District that it was important for them to understand Islam totally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The resistance of the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> to the ideological domination of the government which collaborated with the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> was shown by their refusal of the political discourse of the government. Such a refusal was realized by tightening the customary rules and regulations and revitalizing and maintaining the belief inherited from their ancestors and by avoiding their leaders known as Kyai </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Keagungan</span><span class="font0"> (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penghulu, Lebe, Ketib and Mudim</span><span class="font0">) from communicating too much with outsiders. They could only communicate within the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">kampu</span><span class="font0"> (the area where the followers of Islam Wetu Telu and their leaders usually met). Their resistance was also shown by refusing the assistance in the form of mosque construction, not attending </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">shalat Jumat</span><span class="font0"> (ritual prayers performed on Fridays) and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pengajian</span><span class="font0"> at the mosque.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The social political resistance was shown by throwing something at their mosques to express that they did not agree with what had been done by the government to control their land and to give it to the followers of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islam Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">. In addition, they did not agree with the content of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah</span><span class="font0"> delivered by the preachers (Tuan Guru) who were the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> or orthodox Islam either. The religious and traditional leaders of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District was made so deeply disturbed that there was no harmonious relationship between them and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tuan Gurus</span><span class="font0"> or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ustads</span><span class="font0"> (Islamic teachers). Therefore, they were not welcome by the community of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese ethnic group at Bayan District. Socio culturally, their resistance was shown by protesting that they were not involved in the competition of the local traditional costumes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With regard to educational aspect, the resistance was shown by the refusal given by the traditional leaders and the government civil servants who were followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> not to attend the training program in which the participants where trained to be preachers and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jemaah Tabliq</span><span class="font0">. The resistance was also shown by their refusal of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">madrasah</span><span class="font0"> schools or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pondok pesantren</span><span class="font0">. They showed this by not sending their children to these types of schools which were considered to give lessons related to Islam orthodoxy and to contradict the tradition and culture inherited from their ancestors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The effects of the hegemony imposed by the government and the resistance shown by the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District were that they socially affected the community, they were responsible for the paradox of cultural preservation, and they narrowed the power of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese ethnic group at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District. In addition, the politics of power performed by the government by collaborating with the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> led to a disharmony in the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To give meanings to the attempts made by the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese ethnic group living at Bayan District, a struggle was needed to maintain their collective identity. In this manner, they would have a self identity and the government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> would be aware that they should appreciate the customs, the traditions, and the belief of the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> living at Bayan District. In addition, an understanding that a culture was the form of appreciation and creativity of the community of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese etnic group living at Bayan District needed to be maintained and preserved by its community. When activities were done and rituals were performed at the old mosques, the government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima </span><span class="font0">should not interfere with them provided what was done was within the human limitations so that the meaning of cultural preservation could be provided.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Such a cultural preservation could improve the relationship between the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> at Bayan District and the government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">. By appreciating the culture of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese ethnic group at Bayan District, tolerance, togetherness and the sense of belonging to one family among the community elements at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency would be created. And this would lead to unity. It is also hoped the government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> would not interfere too much with the customs and belief of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sasaknese ethnic group living at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District. The government should respect humanity and keep anthropocentrism away. In other words, the government should not consider that the other parties were not important and that it was not everything or was the most powerful. In this manner, the Lombok great proverb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Patuh Patuh Pacu</span><span class="font0"> would come true. What is meant by this proverb is togetherness, family atmosphere and unity. In addition to the philosophical and multicultural meaning, the creativity of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> ethnic group at Bayan District should be appreciated, respected and be equally treated. From the dynamism taking place, it is important to maintain and preserve the cultures of ethnic groups which beautify and form the national culture.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>New Findings of the Research</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The new findings of the research are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theoretically, most of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> people were not familiar with the differences in religious teachings; however, the implementations were adjusted to different customs and cultures;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The differences of what was believed by the Wetu Telu Sasaknese Etnic Group from the teachings of Islam and its traditions formed the historical experiences undergone by the community of the Sasaknese Etnic Group in Lombok, West Nusa Tenggara.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As the central institution, the government should mediate and protect all the community members. However, in reality, the government was not considered to protect and serve the community optimally; consequently, refusal or opposition could not be avoided and this was not in accordance with the concept of multiculturalism.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">4.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The mission of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah</span><span class="font0"> delivered by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tuna Gurus</span><span class="font0"> and their followers in spreading Orthodox Islam scared the religious and traditional leaders of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese people at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District. The reason is that the mission of such </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah</span><span class="font0"> was considered a threat on the preservation of the great values already inherited from their ancestors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">5.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The meanings which appeared from the hegemony imposed by the government and the resistance of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> people living at </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Bayan</span><span class="font0"> District</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">were that the meaning of disharmony, the meaning of instability and the meaning of being ironic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">6.</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The government, as the ruler, played an important role in implementing the power. The government and the followers of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0"> should not be anthropocentric that they were the only most important parties and the most powerful. They should maintain togetherness, family atmosphere and unity so that a civilized, nationally moralized multicultural community would be created.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Conclusions</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The first conclusion</span><span class="font0"> is that the hegemony imposed by the government upon the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Etnic Group at Bayan District, North Lombok Regency, includes a number of particular aspects. They are religious ideological aspect, socio political aspect, socio cultural aspect and educational aspect. In religious ideological aspect, the government suggested that every Muslim should address his/her prayers at any Mosque of Islam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Waktu Lima</span><span class="font0">. In socio political aspect, the government controlled the land belonging to the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese Etnic Group at Bayan District and empowered the religious teachers (known as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tuan Guru/Ustad</span><span class="font0">) to deliver </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islamiyah dakwah</span><span class="font0"> . In socio cultural aspect, the government preserved the culture of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> people at Bayan District such as old mosques, traditional houses and arts as tourist attractions. Even their arts were used to represent the arts of West Nusa Tenggara Barat Province. In educational aspect, the traditional leaders and the government civil servants coming from the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> ethnic group were sent to attend the religious training programs and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">madrasah</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pondok pesantrens</span><span class="font0"> were established.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The second conclusion</span><span class="font0"> is that the resistance of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu Sasaknese</span><span class="font0"> people at Bayan District was shown by their refusal of the assistance in the form of rehabilitation of the old mosques, by not attending the pilgrimage to the holy place </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mekkah</span><span class="font0">, and not addressing their prayers at any mosque. In addition, they did not attend the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sholat </span><span class="font0">performed at any mosque and if they did, the left the mosque before the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">dakwah</span><span class="font0"> was delivered. Their socio cultural resistance was shown by protesting the government that they were not fully involved in any competition of local costumes. In educational aspect, their resistance was shown by refusing to be sent to any training program, by disagreeing</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">with the establishment of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">madrasah</span><span class="font0"> schools or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pondok pesaren</span><span class="font0"> in which the teachings of Orthodox Islam were provided, which, according to them, contracted their tradition and culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The third conclusion</span><span class="font0"> is that the effect of being dominated by the government on the socio community life of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese people at Bayan District was that they felt less comfortable and less peaceful. Such a domination sharpened the differences in their views in such a way that it would result in disharmony. The Islam orthodoxy and the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islamiyah dakwah</span><span class="font0"> delivered by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tuan Gurus/Ustads</span><span class="font0"> would threat their tradition and culture and finally would fade their culture. The meaning obtained by maintaining their tradition and culture was the meaning of struggling for identity. By preserving the culture as the appreciation and creativity of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Wetu Telu</span><span class="font0"> Sasaknese community at Bayan Distict, the meaning of cultural preservation would be obtained. It is hoped, therefore, that the government should respect the human values highly, in addition to maintaining togetherness, family atmosphere and unity so that a multicultural community as the realization of civilized and nationally moralized human beings would come true.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Adonis, Tito. 1989. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Suku Terasing di Bayan Daerah Propinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta : Depdikbud. Dirjen Kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ali, M. Muhammad. 1999. ”Praktek Keberagaman Islam Waktu Telu di Lombok Nusa Tenggara Barat”. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tesis”</span><span class="font0">. Program Pascasarjana Universitas Muhammadiyah Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chris. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta : Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bocock, Robert. 1986. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hegemony</span><span class="font0">. Chichester : Ellis Horword Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Foucault, Michael. 2002. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pengetahuan dan Metode, Karya-karya Penting</span><span class="font0"> (suntingan, terjemahan Aesthetics, Method and Epistemology, Essential Works of Foucault 1954-1984). Yogyakarta : Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ghozali, Adeng Muchtar. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pemikiran Islam Kontemporer</span><span class="font0">. Bandung : Pustaka Setia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Selections from Prison Notebooks</span><span class="font0">. New York : Internasional Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kaplan, David dan Albert A. Manners. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Budaya</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta : Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">McDonnell. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori-teori Diskursus, Kematian Stukturalisme dan Kelahiran Postrukturalisme, dari Althusser Hingga Foucault</span><span class="font0"> (terjemahan). Jakarta : Teraju-Mizan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mudana, I Gde. 2005. ”Pembangunan Bali Nirwana Resort di Kawasan Tanah Lot : Hegemoni dan Perlawanan di Desa Beraban, Tabanan, Bali”. ”</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Disertasi</span><span class="font0">” : Program Pascasarjanan Universitas Udayana Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Parimartha, I Gde. 1987. ”Hubungan Bali – Lombok Abad XVI : Meniti Karya Sastra”. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Widya Pustaka</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar : Fakultas sastra Unibersitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dunia yang Dilipat, Tamasya Melampui Batas-batas Kebudayaan.</span><span class="font0"> Yogyakarta : Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ratna, Nyoman Kuta. 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra dan Cultural Studies : Representasi Fiksi dan Fakta</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yogyakarta : Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Simon, Roger. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gagasan-gagasan Politik Gramsci</span><span class="font0"> (Cetakan 1, terjemahan). Yogyakarta : Insist Press-Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Strinati, Dominic. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Populer Culture</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta : Bentang Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Syakur, A.A. 2006. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Islam dan Kebudayaan “Akulturasi Nilai-nilai Islam Dalam Budaya Sasak”</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta : Adab Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Zaelani, Kamarudin. 2007. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Satu Agama Banyak Tuhan : Melacak Akar Sejarah Teologi Waktu Telu.</span><span class="font0"> Mataram : Pantheon Media Pressindo</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p>