---
layout: full_article
title: "POLITE EXPRESSIONS USED BY MEN AND WOMEN IN E-MAIL CORRESPONDENCES IN TJAMPUHAN HOTEL"
author: "Ni Luh Putu Ayu Tantri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">POLITE EXPRESSIONS USED BY MEN AND WOMEN IN E-MAIL CORRESPONDENCES IN TJAMPUHAN HOTEL</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Luh Putu Ayu Tantri</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Judul artikel ini adalah “Politeness Expressions Used by Men and Women in E-mail Correspondences in Tjampuhan Hotel”. Jurnal ini memaparkan mengenai kegunaan language features dan politeness maxims di dalam korespondensi surat elektronik di Tjampuhan Hotel. Penelitian ini dilakukan dengan cara menganalisi data di dapat melalui Microsoft Outlook.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sesuai dengan data yang di dapat, banyak ditemukan penggunaan super polite form. Kondisi ini ditemukan baik di korespondensi surat elektronik oleh pria maupun wanita. Polite form merupakan bagian dari language features. Penggunaan dari politeness maxims seperti sympathy maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim dan agreement maxim, berhasil ditemukan dalam korenpondensi surat elektronik di Tjampuhan Hotel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam pemberian informasi melalui surat elektronik tersebut, karyawan hotel di harapkan menggunakan percakapan yang formal atau di situasi lain dapat menciptakan percakapan yang bersahabat. Penggunaan kata-kata kasar atau kiasan sangat dihindari. Kesopanan merupakan prioritas utama dalam penulisan surat elektronik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: E-mail, korespondensi, kesopanan, maxims, fitur bahasa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As we all know that language is the main way to communicate and human needs to communicate with each other. Composing words onto sentences is the major problem faced by most of the people in hotel industry in terms of communicating with their guests and is continued with the explanation of information to be delivered to the guests. Having a look onto the developments of communications, specifically, the way that are going to be used to deliver the information from one person to others will increase the use of tools of communication, by telephone conversation, facsimiles, or the latest way, e-mails. In hotel industry, the uses of e-mail correspondences increases tremendously along with the need of the guests to get very fast information on any requests that they have previously asked for. Tjampuhan Hotel, a hotel located in Ubud uses e-mail as a tool in communicating to the customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problem of the present study are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of language features were used by men and women in e-mail correspondences in Tjampuhan Hotel?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of politeness maxims were used by men and women in e-mail correspondences in Tjampuhan Hotel?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of the present study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of language features used by men and women in e-mail correspondences in Tjampuhan Hotel.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the politeness maxims used by men and women in e-mail correspondences in Tjampuhan Hotel.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method explains about the process and procedure of how we get the problems and seek out the answers through finding, collecting and analyzing the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study consist of six e-mails from the Tjampuhan Hotel. The six samples of emails consist of three e-mails involving female employees (two e-mails) and the foreign guest (one e-mail) and three e-mails involving male employee (one email) and their guests (two e-mails).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected from e-mails at the reservation department of Tjampuhan Hotel from June 2012 until August 2012. The data were collected both by printing the email correspondences from Microsoft Outlook and the e-mails were forwarded.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data in this study were analyzed qualitatively based on the theory of sociolinguistics namely politeness principles proposed by Robin Lakoff and Geoffrey Leech. These two theories were focused on the language features and the politeness</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">expressions nthat influence the politeness. The data in this study were analyzed descriptively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Features and Politeness Maxim of Women Language</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the following data was based on the theory proposed by Robin Lakoff and Geoffry Leech.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>E-mail 1</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">From: </span><span class="font2">sumika [mailto: </span><a href="mailto:reservation@tjampuhan-bali.com"><span class="font2">reservation@tjampuhan-bali.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sent: </span><span class="font2">Saturday, June 16, 2012 8:45 AM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">To: </span><span class="font2">'Sylvia Ravetupu'</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Subject: </span><span class="font2">Problem at Tjampuhan Hotel; Booking Reallocation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dear Sylvia,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Good afternoon. My name is Sumika and run Reservation fro Tjampuhan Hotel, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If I may be direct; I have some bad news. Circumstance has arisen at Tjampuhan hotel, which affects your booking. One until of three-bedroom luxury pool villa has to be shut down for major maintenance work until August. The fact that we are fully booked for the period on group accommodation, regrettably we have to reallocate your reservation to our other property in Bali, just 10 minutes away, Pita Maha Resort and Spa, </span><a href="http://www.pitamaharesorts-bali.com/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.pitamaharesorts-bali.com</span><span class="font0">. </span></a><span class="font2">Unfortunately, we have no alternative but to take this course action since no other three-bedroom of four-bedroom luxury pool villas are available he at Tjampuhan Hotel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I have however consulted the matter with the GM. In light of the problem, we are pleased to give you a free upgrade to a four-bedroom grand luxury pool villa at Pita Maha Resort and Spa to compensate you for the inconvenience. We hope this is acceptable. Sena from Reservation will be e-mailing you the new confirmation letter soon. In the meantime, if you have any questions or thoughts on the matter, do contact me directly at this address.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I apologize profusely on the above and thank you for your understanding. I can assure you that Pita Maha Resort and Spa offers the same high standard of accommodation as Tjampuhan Hotel and all staff would do their best to make your stay an enjoyable one. Best regards, Sumika/ Reservation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Language Features</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Super Polite Form</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There have been three polite expressions collected. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I apologize profusely on the above … …</span><span class="font2"> (line 18)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;…… and thank you for your understanding.</span><span class="font2"> (line 18)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Best regards.</span><span class="font2"> (line 23)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is explained in point number 1 that the writer would like to express her sincere apology due to a sudden circumstance which occurs when an overbooked situation could not be avoided on dates that guest has preferred to stay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meanwhile, as stated in point number 2, the writer has accordingly expressed her thankfulness to guest that the guest understanding and the guest might be pleased to accept the reallocation offer to another villa category due to the overbooked situation. In point number 3, this sentence is also a common polite expression that in every ending e-mail, writers often put ‘best regards’, ‘regards’, or even ‘sincerely yours’ to pause e-mails after necessary information provided in body of the e-mail.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Politeness Maxims</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sympathy Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If I may be direct; I’m afraid I have some bad news.</span><span class="font2"> (line 4)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The above expression explained a situation which tried to maximize sympathy between self and other, implying indirect opinion regarding unpleasant news of something in which the correspondences was started with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">If I may be direct.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Generosity Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We are pleased to give you a free upgrade to a four-bedroom grand luxury pool villa at Pita Maha Resort and Spa to compensate you for the inconvenience</span><span class="font2"> (line 13)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On sentence number 1, focuses on the employee, and says that guest should have a better villa to stay such as a free upgrade to a four-bedroom grand luxury pool villa at Pita Maha Resort because of the inconvenience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Approbation Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I apologize profusely on the above and thank you for your understanding.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">(line 18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence expressed to minimize dispraise of other and to maximize praise of other and to recognize the addressee’s experience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agreement Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have to reallocate your reservation to our other property in Bali, just 10 minutes away, Pita Maha Resort and Spa (</span><span class="font2">line 9)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have no alternative but to take this course action since no other three-bedroom of four-bedroom luxury pool villas are available he at Tjampuhan Hotel.</span><span class="font2">(line 11)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I can assure you that Pita Maha Resort and Spa offers the same high standard of accommodation as Tjampuhan Hotel and all staff would do their best to make your stay an enjoyable one</span><span class="font2"> (line 18)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The first sentence reconfirmed the first sentence given regarding the reallocation as an action that needed to be taken due to the fully booked situation that hotel was experiencing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second sentence created a condition which offered a final option regarding the reallocation to another hotel. The confirmation was continued by a firm argument provided as implied in the third sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Features and Politeness Maxim of Men Language</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In e-mail written by men, while there was the adherence to the politeness principle, violation of maxim was also witnessed. Men applied explicit expression of politeness through words not as much as women.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>E-mail 2</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">From: </span><span class="font2">Jamie[</span><a href="mailto:jamie@asiaescapeholidays.com"><span class="font2">mailto:jamie@asiaescapeholidays.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sent: </span><span class="font2">Friday, August 10, 2012 10:24 AM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">To: </span><span class="font2">Gungtra [</span><a href="mailto:gungtra@tjampuhan-bali.com"><span class="font2">mailto:gungtra@tjampuhan-bali.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Subject: </span><span class="font2">RE: Tjampuhan Hotel Bali, 29<sup>th</sup> August-5<sup>th</sup> September, Mr. Jamie Jason –</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holiday Certificate TJ100168</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gungtra,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I have to admit this is a bit shocking given that the gift certificate that we purchased says nothing about this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We paid $ 5,000 US for this to benefit the wonderful work of Refugees International and now you want to change the rules and charge us for electricity, water and cleaning… this is ridiculous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on your original confirmation, you paid for two air tickets today. I will speak with Refugees International and advise whether we will cancel or not tomorrow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Very disappointed,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jamie Jason</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Language Features</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Super polite Form:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">E-mail 2 contains complaints addressed by Mr. Jamie Jason regarding his disappointment that hotel has suddenly revised booking conditions explained by Gungtra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In regards to the way the guest addresses the writer’s name, without using “Dear” or “Hi” reflects a direct utterance in which it does not often explain the avoidance in keeping aloofness of the relationship between the writer and the addressee, however, it is merely due to unpleasant situation being experienced by the guest.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Use of Intensive Adverbs, such as ‘very’:</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The use of intensive adverbs is only found in the expression:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Very disappointed,</span><span class="font2"> (line 12)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the expression above, linguistically speaking, the adverb </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font2"> modifies an adjective </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">disappointed</span><span class="font2"> as well. At this stage, a very disappointment of incorrect information obtained by Mr. Jamie Jason after he has confirmed his flight.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Use of Empty Adjectives</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The use of empty adjectives is essentially to show the person’s approbation and admiration for something. In e-mail 2, indeed, numbers of adjective could be collected, however, these are not considered as empty adjectives. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This is a bit shocking given that the gift certificate…</span><span class="font2"> (line 3)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This is ridiculous.</span><span class="font2"> (line 7)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Very disappointed</span><span class="font2"> (line 12)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the e-mail number 2, there were three adjectives collected which show negative responses from Mr. Jamie Jason. Due to incomplete information provided on the confirmation including the extra charges he has to pay. Therefore, it creates inconvenience which has caused him upset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Politeness Maxims:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Agreement Maxim</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will speak to Refugees International and advise whether we will cancel or not tomorrow.</span><span class="font2"> (line 9)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In e-mail 4, there was only one maxim found and this was an agreement maxim. The e-mail sender explained that he would discuss with a company providing a complimentary voucher booking in certain time and advised whether or not the booking would be cancelled. This was an agreement between the e-mail sender and the reservation at the time the conversation took place.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In e-mail correspondences, the uses of language features were successfully collected. The features that are found in all e-mail correspondences that were analyzed were various, they were; the use of super polite form, hedges, intensive adverbs and empty adjectives. Additionally, the use of super polite forms was apparently applied in all e-mail correspondences by the staff of the Reservation Department, both women’s and men’s e-mail correspondences. The reason that the use of super polite form in both</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">women’s and men’s e-mail correspondences by the reservation department staff is to maintain a good and long term relationship with the guests. Politeness has become the first priority to be applied in all e-mail correspondences by the reservation staff. That is why the use of slangs, jargons and taboo words are avoided. The politeness maxims that were applied in the e-mails are due to provide the essential roles to be applied by all employees for the purpose of establishing excellent communication between the guest and the employees.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Ashley, A. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Handbook of Commercial Correspondences.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coates, Jennifer. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men Language.</span><span class="font2"> London: Longman Group Limited</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gains, Jonathan. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Electric Mail-A New Style of Communication or Just a New Medium?</span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Investigation into the Text Features of E-mail.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from:</span><a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.sciencedirect.com/science</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 2001. General Linguistics. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Women’s Language”: a functional approach.</span><span class="font2"> London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lakoff, Robin. 1975. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Women’s Place.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Harper&amp; Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Meikasari. 2002. “Positive Politeness Strategies in Verbal Communication in Drama Gaucho by Gloria Gonzales” (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prabandari. 2007. “Nominal Address Term and Politeness in Movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Princess Diaries”</span><span class="font2"> (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ramawati. 2001. “Context of Situation Used in E-mail Correspondences with Refrence to Led Studio Silver Jewelry and Moira Furniture (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>