---
layout: full_article
title: "PRODUCTION OF THE ENGLISH DENTAL FRICATIVES BY THE ENGLISH LEARNERS AT BALI STAR ACADEMY"
author: "Adolfina K. Mnao"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PRODUCTION OF THE ENGLISH DENTAL FRICATIVES</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">BY THE ENGLISH LEARNERS AT BALI STAR ACADEMY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ADOLFINA K. MNAO</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">NON-REGULAR PROGRAM, ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURES, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2015</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini dilakukan dengan tujuan untuk menemukan dan menganalisa produksi frikatif dental pada sekolompok pelajar Indnesia di Bali Star Academy. Dengan menggunakan metode deskritif kualitatif, peneliti mengumpulkan data dari sampel yang berjumlah 13 pelajar yang telah diperkenalkan kepada fonologi Bahasa Inggris melalui pelajaran Phonics sejak Taman Kanak-Kanak. Semua sesi pengumpulan data direkam dan ditranskripsikan, lalu dianalisa. Hasil analisa dikelompokkan menjadi dua bagian yaitu total produksi dari frikatif dental yang salah dan total produksi dari frikatif dental yang benar dalam setiap kata yang diucapkan oleh masing-masing anak, kemudian dikategorikan secara sistematis dalam “Better Grade and Worse Grade”. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa 66.67% kata frikatif dental mampu diproduksi dengan benar walaupun frikatif dental [θ] dan [ð] tidak ada dalam sistem fonologi Bahasa Indonesia. Sedangkan pada beberapa kata lain, kedua fonem tersebut digantikan dengan fonem lain dalam bahasa Indonesia yang memiliki bunyi terdekat. Proses penggantian ini dianggap sebagai suatu kesalahan dalam pengucapan. Kesalahan ini terjadi sebagai akibat dari proses interlingual. Selain itu, beberapa faktor tertentu juga mempengaruhi produksi frikatif dental . Diantaranya adalah usia, bakat, motivasi, dan kepribadian. Namun demikian, penelitian ini hanyalah memaparkan sebuah fenomena yang terjadi pada sekelompok pelajar Indonesia di Bali Star Academy dalam memproduksikan frikatif dental beserta faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi proses tersebut. Oleh sebab itu, penelitian selanjutnya sangat diperlukan dengan tujuan untuk menyingkapkan apakah dengan adanya kesadaran fonologi sedari dini dapat mempengaruhi produksi frikatif dental dari penutur asing yang mempelajari Bahasa Inggris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">: fonologi Bahasa Inggris, frikatif dental, analisis kesalahan bahasa</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the context of speaking, one’s mastery on the sound system, structure and vocabulary play an important role because a two-way communication will effectively take place if the expressions are formed using appropriate rules and pronounced using correct sound. However, in the application of communicative competence, the production of dental</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">fricative hardly closes that of native-like production. It is found that when pronouncing English words with dental fricatives, instead of using the proper dental fricative pronunciation, the learners tend to substitute nonexisting Indonesian phoneme of English with the closest Indonesian phonemes. With reference to these backgrounds, aim of this study is afterward established; that is to analyze the production of English dental fricative by the Indonesian learners of English. In addition to the difference of production among individuals, a consideration is set upon several factors—age, aptitude (phonemic coding ability), motivation, personality, and learning strategies—that are attributable to the ability of the learners.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is conducted on the basis of this problem formulation:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the production of dental fricative is applied by the English Learners at Bali Star Academy?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the factors that affect the English Learners at Bali Star Academy in the production of English dental fricative?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems, there are two goals that are mainly focused as this study is conducted. Its first aim is to investigate the production of English dental fricative by English Learners at Bali Star Academy. Secondly, the study aims at analyzing the other factors that affected the ability in the production of English dental fricative between English Learners at Bali Star Academy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study employed a qualitative research method, which, according to Seliger and Shohamy (1989: 124) is: “a useful approach whenever an investigator is concerned with discovering or describing second language acquisition in its natural state or context and where there</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">are no assumptions about what that activity consists of or what its role is in acquisition”. Measurement for qualitative researchers occurs during the data collection process. The measurement is used to analyze the finding of this study, especially proving the finding in percentage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The population of this study included the 14 students from Grade 4 at Bali Star Academy in English learning stage. The decision for choosing these students of Bali Star Academy as the population of this study was based on the fact that Bali Star Academy is a semi-home schooling based on Christ-Centered Curriculum in which Phonics as the central subject to be taught from kindergarten, and these students have been studying Phonics since kindergarten. In addition toward the Phonics method, the dental fricatives [</span><span class="font0">θ</span><span class="font2">] and [δ] have been introduced as one of the consonant digraphs—two consonants that represent a new speech sound—studied in Phonics at the second semester of K4 (Kindergarten for the 4-year-old students) and the first semester of K5 (Kindergarten for 5-year-old students). In this scope, chosen to be the sample to be involved in this study consisted of 13 (thirteen) Indonesian students of Bali Star Academy. One student was excluded from the sample due to the parental background.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The methods of collecting data used in this study were method of documentation and method of questionnaire. The techniques used to collect the data were audio recording and questionnaire. This technique was used along side other information and data collection method to give more context and depth written description.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Method used in analyzing the data is qualitative description.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Techniques used in analyzing data were qualitative and quantitative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">analysis. Qualitative analysis was used to obtain a particular description of the dental fricatives produces by each respondent. The recorded sound production by the participants was subsequently transcribed in the phonemic realization. The symbol used in the process of the transcribing was based on IPA or the International Phonetic Alphabet (revised to 2005) in Ogden (2009). Then the transcription was identified to support the analysis. Quantitative analysis was used to obtain precise picture of the frequency and rarity of particular phenomena, in this case, the production of dental fricative by the English learners at Bali Star Academy. The quantitative analysis was merely used to carry out the finding in percentage before it was also descriptively explained and analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the English Dental Fricatives by the English Learners at Bali Star Academy</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of the English Dental Fricative Consonants Produced by the English Learners at Bali Star Academy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The findings were obtained from 13 primary students of Bali Star Academy who are Indonesian. The students were requested to pronounce the rooster of words that contains English dental fricative consonants. The English dental fricative is divided based on the voicing—fortis (voiceless) and lenis (voiced). Both of the fricatives [θ] and [ð] could by far be placed either in initial, medial, or final position of English words. The following table shows what obtains in the production/perception of the dental fricatives by this category of speakers of English as a second language:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">English word</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Pronounced as</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">[θ]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">thank [θæŋk]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[tæŋk]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">pathetic [pəәˈθɛtɪk]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[pəәˈfɛtɪk]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">moth [mɒθ]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[mɒs]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">[ð]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">those [ðəәʊz]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[zəәʊs]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">father [ˈfɑːðəә]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[ˈfɑːdəә]</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">bathe [beɪð]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[beɪd]</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1 The Production of Dental Fricative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results of this study as what was profoundly analyzed in previous investigation significantly indicated several evidences about dental fricative [θ] and [ð]. First, dental fricatives [θ] and [ð] which do not appear in Indonesian phonological system have been exposed as a part of Phonics method studied by the English learner at Bali Star Academy. The absence of these two phonemes [θ] and [ð] resulted in the substitution those phoneme with the closest phoneme in Indonesian phonological system as follows: [d], [f], [s], [t], or [z].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The following finding below displays the percentage of error and also correctness of each dental fricative:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">No.</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Dental Fricative</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Result</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Correctness</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Error</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[θ]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">76.92%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">23.08%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">[ð]</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">56.41%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">43.59%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">133.33%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">66.67%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Mean</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">66.67%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">33.33%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 2. The Percentage of Error and Correctness of the Dental Fricative</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the total percentage obtained through the calculation process as described above, it can be inferred that the error in producing English dental fricative by the English Learners at Bali Star Academy was still found which was also dominated by the pronunciation of the learners at Bali Star Academy. However, the finding stated that only 66.67% of the words could be produced by the respondents. The other words, however, tended to be substituted with the closest phonemes that were chosen to be compatible in substituting the absence of English dental fricative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of the Other Factors That Affect the English Learners at Bali Star Academy in the Production of English Dental Fricative</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Certain factors beside the absence of dental fricative in Indonesian phonological system have affected their production of dental fricative. Those factors are age, aptitude, motivation, and personality. Regarding to the age, it is inferred that the error in producing English dental fricative by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the English Learners at Bali Star Academy was still found in the pronunciation. However, it is quite promising to see the result of the correctness for the respondents have been begun kindergarten with well-developed phonological awareness as a result of being introduced earlier through the Phonics Method. Next, Factor of aptitude as postulation that there is a talent that is specific to language learning, and phonemic coding ability is used as base to measure it. Students with a good understanding of phonological awareness have the underlying framework in place not only for reading but also speaking. Another factor determining the success of learning process is motivation, which lead the learners to learn the particular language and to try to achieve a correct pronunciation. Some of the respondents have shown that the best achievement is not only able to speak English but also to speak it with the correct pronunciation. As the aftermath of the mispronunciation, certain actions are taken to lessen the error made. Finally the factor of personality, where the anxiety—low or high—might affect the learners in acquiring the proper pronunciation during the process of learning. Based on the finding, the Better Grade respondents with lower anxiety level might find themselves were very well facilitated during the language learning, and thus be more selfconfident.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study has shown that it is true that dental fricatives [θ] and [ð] do not appear in Indonesian phonological system; however, they do appear in English phonological system. The finding that the Better student is more than 50% is quite impressive due to the earliest introduction of the phonological awareness. However, this study was merely intended to display the production of the English learner at Bali Star Academy and describe the factors that affect the production itself. Therefore, the substance of the content discussed in this study as the basic knowledge is open for further investigation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Bessi, Wong Pui San. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Phonetic study in the Pronunciation of Dental Fricative /</span><span class="font2">∂</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">/ and</span><span class="font2"> /</span><span class="font0">θ</span><span class="font2">/ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">among Hong Kong Learners.</span><span class="font2"> Chinese University of Hong Kong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Claggett, Doreen. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Christ-Centered Teacher’s Manual for Early Childhood</span><span class="font2">. Niceville: Christ Centered Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Claggett, Doreen. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Phonics Lessons for Flashcard 32-66</span><span class="font2">. Niceville: Christ Centered Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Corder, S. P. 1967. The significance of learner’s errors. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">IRAL - International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, V</span><span class="font2">, 161-170.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dörnyei, Zoltan. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Questionnaires in Second Language Research: Construction, Administration, and Processing</span><span class="font2">. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ellis, R. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The study of second language acquisition</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fitzpatrick, J. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Phonemic Awareness: Playing With Sounds to Strengthen Beginning Reading Skills.</span><span class="font2"> Creative Teaching Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gussenhoven, C., and Jacobs, H. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding Phonology</span><span class="font2">. 3<sup>rd</sup> ed. London: Hodder Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jensen, John T. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Generative Phonology: An Introduction. </span><span class="font2">Amsterdam: Benjamins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lennon, P. 1993. The Advanced Learner, Effective, Social And Motivational Factors. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Learning Journal</span><span class="font2"> No 8, September 39-43.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Matsuoka, R. and Smith, I. 2008. &quot;Age Effects in Second Language Acquisition : Overview.” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Nursing Studies</span><span class="font2">, Vol. 7 (1) 33-40 Retrieved July 2014. </span><a href="http://www.pdfioo.org/k-277389.htmI"><span class="font2">http://www.pdfioo.org/k-277389.htmI</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mitchell, R., and Myles, F. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Second Language Learning Theories.</span><span class="font2"> 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. London: Hodder Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Marsono. 1999. Fonetik. Yogyakarta: Gadjahmada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morissan. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Survei</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Kencana Prenadamedia Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mousa, Ahmed Ibrahim 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Acquisition of the Labio-Dental Fricative /v/ in English L2 and Jamaican Creole: A comparative Study</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">International Journal of English Linguistics; Vol. 4, No. 1; 2014.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muliawan, Jasa Ungguh. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metodelogi Penelitian Pendidikan</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Gava Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Neuman, L. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basics of Social Research Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches</span><span class="font2">, 2d ed. New Jersey: Pearson/Allyn and Bacon</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nunan, D. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language teaching methodology: A textbook for teachers</span><span class="font2">. London: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ogden, Richard. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to English Phonetics.</span><span class="font2"> Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Owolobi, D. 2012. &quot;Production and Perception Problems of English Dental Fricatives by Yoruba Speakers of English as a Second Language Theory and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Practice in Language Studies</span><span class="font2">. June 2012, Vol. 2 (6) 1108-1113 Retrieved July 2014. </span><a href="http://www.academypublisher.com"><span class="font2">http://www.academypublisher.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Richards, Jack C., 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Error Analysis: Perspectives on Second Language Acquisition</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman Group Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Roach, Peter. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English Phonetics and Phonology: A Practical Course. 2<sup>nd </sup>ed.</span><span class="font2"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saville-Troike, Muriel. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Second Language Acquisition.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Seliger, Herbert W. &amp;&nbsp;Shohamy, Elana G. 1989. Second Language Research Method. Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Skandera P., &amp;&nbsp;Burleigh. P. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Manual of English Phonetics and Phonology: Twelve Lessons with an Integrated Course in Phonetic Transcription. </span><span class="font2">Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suandi. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Metodologi Penelitian Bahasa</span><span class="font2">. Singaraja: Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sumaranama, I Kadek Restu. 2012. Mother Tongue’s Interference In The Pronunciation Of English Fricative Consonants By Balinese EFL Learners. English Department, Faculty of Letter, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tanjung, Bahdin Nur &amp;&nbsp;Ardial. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pedoman Penulisan Karya Ilmiah (Proposal, Skripsi, dan Tesis) dan Mempersiapkan Diri Menjadi Penulis Artikel Ilmiah.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta: Kencana Prenadamedia Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wright, Erik Olin. 1997. &quot;Rethinking, Once Again, the Concept of Class Structure.&quot; Pp. 41-72 in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reworking Class,</span><span class="font2"> edited by j. Hall. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.</span></p>