---
layout: full_article
title: "THE PLOT OF BOB MARLEY’S BIOGRAPHY WITH REFERENCE TO FILM ENTITLED “MARLEY”"
author: "Yudis Adi Pratama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE PLOT OF BOB MARLEY’S BIOGRAPHY WITH REFERENCE TO FILM</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ENTITLED “MARLEY”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">I Putu Yudis Adi Pratama</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department-Non Reguler Program, Faculty of Letter and Culture,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul “Alur cerita Biografy Bob Marley berdasarkan film yang berjudul ʻMarley’”. Makalah ini bertujuan untuk menganalisa dan mengidentifikasi jenis dan bagian-bagian plot yang ada didalam film biografy dokumenter yang berjudul “Marley”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori yang diaplikasikan dalam penelitian ini berdasarkan pada teori dari Tarigan (1984) yang mengklasifikasikan plot kedalam 3 jenis utama yaitu; Lucky Plot, Actor Plot, dan Thinking Plot. Teori dari Kenney (1984) yang membagi 3 unsur plot yaitu; Beginning (Exposition), Middle dan The end (Endouement), digunakan untuk menganalisa unsur-unsur plot di dalam film tersebut. Pengumpulan data dalam penelitan ini dilakukan dengan menonton film dengan seksama dan mengumpulkan transkrip dari film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan analisis dan pemaparan, ditemukan bahwa 3 jenis utama plot yang ada dalam film tersebut yang pertama pada Lucky Plot mengacu kepada Action Plot, selanjutnya berdasarkan jenis yang kedua yaitu Actor Plot mengacu kepada Reform Plot, dan yang jenis plot yang terakhir yaitu Thinking Plot mengacu kepada Education Plot. Bedasarkan analisis selanjutnya tentang 3 unsur dasar plot seperti, Beginning, Middle, dan The End dapat ditemukan dalam film ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Plot, Biography, Bob Marley.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Biography is simply the history of a lifetime. It narrates the most important facts of someone’s life, his or her childhood, adolescence, military service, wars he or she lived through, educational background, professional life, marriage, children, and most outstanding achievements. Also it tells anecdotes, memories, trips and dearly cherished moments. It is our most precious legacy to the world and mainly to our family. A biography involves a whole life, building a bridge between generations, bringing us close to our grandchildren, great grand children and generations, planting in their hearts the pride of belonging.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Biography can be judged in relation to the light it throws on the actual production of poetry; but we can, of course, defend it and justify it as a study of the man of genius, his moral, intellectual, and emotional development, which has its own intrinsic interest; and finally, we can think of biography as affording materials for a systematic study of the psychology of the poet and the poetic process, since it breaks up the literary tradition to substitute the life – cycle of an individual. Then, the biography approach ignores also quite simple psychological facts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">From the above explanation there are two problems that are discussed they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of plot occurred in Bob Marley’s Biography film?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What element of the plot used in Bob Marley’s biography film?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out kind of plot occurring in The Bob Marley’s biography film.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the element of plot used in The Bob Marley’s biography film.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lucky Plot</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The story in the biography of Bob Marley according to Lucky Plot belongs to Tragic Plot, as shown in the following paragraph:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bob experienced an injury on his right toe while playing football. The doctor later proclaimed that it was a malignant melanoma and advised him to have his toe amputated. However, he refused, insisting it would be against Rastafarian belief, so he only underwent a surgery in Miami to remove the cancer cells. Meanwhile, the cancer, which previously considered to have been completely removed, had grown within Bob's body. It eventually spread to his vital organs, making him repeatedly collapsed. During their tour in New York, he once again fainted, thus was rushed to hospital. The doctors found out that the cancer had come to his brain and predicted Bob's life would last less than a month. Looking upon Bob's condition, the group intended to cancel their tour, but he insisted to continue performing on stage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the above citation we can see that Lucky plot belongs to Tragic plot because the doctor proclaimed that Bob’s disease was a malignant melanoma and advised him to have his toe amputated. Bob didn’t know it from the beginning until the doctors found out that the cancer had come to his brain and predicted Bob's life would last less than a month.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Actor Plot</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the name, actor plot is the plot of a story which occurs based on</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">the development of protagonist and antagonist actors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Actor Plot the story of Bob Marley Biography it belongs to</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Reform Plot, as can be seen in the following paragraph:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">When a horrible incident occurred as a number of gunmen infiltrated his house at Hope Road in Kingston. They shot him along with Rita and their manager, Don Taylor. Fortunately, no one was killed even though they were all seriously injured. Bob received wounds on his upper body and arm while Rita on her head. This assassination attempt raised an assumption that it was done due to a political motivation as he had given his support for the prime minister of Jamaica, Michael Manley. Many believed that Edward Seaga, the Opposition leader, was the man behind this incident.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the above citation we can see that Actor Plot belongs to Reform</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Plot in this story. Bob Marley was responsible for the incident that disturbed his career, it occurred in his house in Kingston and many believed that Edward Seaga, the Opposition leader, was the man behind this incident, but when he performed the concert in Jamaica Bob was successful in getting the two political rivals, Manley and Seaga, who came together to the stage and made a symbolic peacemaking gesture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thinking Plot</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Thinking plot will be found if the characters in the story have a development such as in their paradigm, attitudes and behavior as the story move.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Thinking Plot the story of Bob Marley Biography belongs to</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Education Plot as can be seen in the following paragraph:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In 1966 also marked Bob's first acquaintance with Rastafarianism through his wife who had converted to this religious movement during his leaving. Rastafarianism basically possesses a doctrine on selections from the Bible with many members bolstering nonviolence actions and the rejection of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">materialism. Its followers regard Ethiopia as the Promised Land and Haile Selassie as a messiah. After Bob marked as Rastafarian Bob more enjoy spending his life with his family and his friend. As a follower of Rastafarianism, the group believed that marijuana was the mean to bring them closer to Jah (God). It also affected to his career because when used a marijuana he got an inspiration to write a poetic song based on social life in Jamaica. It made Bob’s song more enjoy to listen because in every his song has peace and freedom messages to all people in the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on citation the above we can see thinking plot of this story belongs</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">to education plot because Bob’s life improved when he marked as Rastafarian in 1966. After Bob marked as Rastafarian, Bob more enjoy spending his life with his family and his friend. As a follower of Rastafarianism, the group believed that marijuana was the mean to bring them closer to Jah (God).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The story in the biography of Bob Marley according to Lucky Plot, belongs</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">to Tragic Plot, because the story told us about the true life of Bob Marley when he was a child, and he was striving for success play Jamaican Reggae music with his friends with difficult condition at the tisme, until as he was suffering from cancer and die from the disease.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Actor Plot the story of Bob Marley Biography belongs to Testing Plot because during their tour in New York, he once again fainted, thus was rushed to hospital. The doctors found out that the cancer had come to his brain and predicted Bob's life would last less than a month. Looking upon Bob's condition, the group intended to cancel their tour, but he insisted to continue</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">performing on stage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Thinking Plot the story of Bob Marley Biography belongs to Education Plot because, 1966 also marked Bob's first acquaintance with Rastafarianism through his wife who had converted to this religious movement during his leaving. Rastafarianism basically possesses a doctrine on selections from the Bible with many members bolstering nonviolence actions and the rejection of materialism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Brooks, Cleanth and Werren, R.P. 1959. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Understand of Fiction</span><span class="font0">. New York: Appleton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DiYanni, Robert. 2004. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: Reading to The Fiction, Poetry, Drama, and The Essay, Third Edition.</span><span class="font0"> USA: MeGraw-Hill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kembara, Ade. 2006. The Analysis of Plot in Sheldon “Memories of Midnight”. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kennedy, X.J. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Fiction, Poetry, and Drama</span><span class="font0">. Harper Collins Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Little, Graham, 1963. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Approach to Literature</span><span class="font0">. Sydney: Science Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Welleck, Rene and Warren, Austin. 1948. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font0">. San Diego, New York: Here Court Brance Javanoich.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Segartini, Dewi. 2004. Biographical Analysis of Paul Laurence Dunbar’s “Promise”. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tarigan, Hendry Guntur.1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-Prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font0">. Bandung : Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yuliani, Widhi. 2001. Plot Construction of “Message In The Bottle” By Nicholas Sparks. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>