---
layout: full_article
title: "Verbal And Non-Verbal Signs in Garnier Product Advertisement"
author: "I Gst Agung Triana Rakanita, Ida Ayu Made Puspani, Ni Kt. Alit Ida Setianingsih"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 72-77</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Verbal And Non-Verbal Signs in </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Product Advertisement</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Gst. Agung Triana Rakanita<sup>1*</sup>, Ida Ayu Made Puspani<sup>2</sup>, Ni Kt. Alit Ida Setianingsih<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:trianarakanita97@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> trianarakanita97@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>2</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:dayupuspani@yahoo.com"><span class="font2"> dayupuspani@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font2"> <sup>3</sup>[email: </span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">alit_ida@yahoo.com]</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis makna dari tanda verbal dan non-verbal yang terdapat dalam sebuah iklan produk perawatan kulit merek Garnier yang berbahasa Inggris. Dalam penelitian ini tiga teori yang diaplikasikan untuk menjawab dua pokok permasalahan. Adapun teori yang dimaksud, diantaranya teori tentang tanda oleh Chandler (2001), teori makna dan fungsi oleh Leech (1974) dan teori istilah warna oleh Cerrato (2012). Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa tanda verbal dan non-verbal saling berhubungan satu sama lain dikarenakan apa yang ditulis oleh pengiklan dalam bentuk tanda verbal sesuai dengan apa yang disampaikan oleh pengiklan dalam bentuk tanda non-verbal. Dalam menganalisis makna dan fungsi di dalam iklan ini, makna konseptual dan fungsi informatif yang paling banyak muncul. Selain itu, di dalam tanda non-verbal istilah-istilah warna sangat penting diaplikasikan untuk menarik perhatian para konsumen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: tanda verbal dan non-verbal, makna dan fungsi, iklan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Advertising is one of the basic forms in communication exactly in mass media to persuade audience to take some action with respect products, ideas, or services. According to Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (2010:22), advertising means the activity and industry of advertising things to people on television, in newspapers, on the internet, etc. Advertising involves magazines, printed flyers, banners, billboards, posters, newspapers, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of an advertisement can be divided into two types of sign: verbal and non-verbal sign. Basically, Chandler (2001:27) stated that verbal sign is something that deals with text and word. Non-verbal sign is the pictures or gestures that are not spoken</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">but still try to convey meaning. A sign can be defined as </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">signifier</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">signified</span><span class="font2">. Signifier is the form which the sign takes whereas signified is the concept it represents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of language and sign in advertisement play an important role to convey commercial message to the consumers to make them interested in. It is mostly associated with advertising is interactional because it is used to express, maintain and terminate contact between the advertiser and the consumer. Although advertiser and consumer are not in visual contact, they communicate through the channel which in this case is an advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What were the types of meaning and function of verbal and non-verbal messages in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> product advertisement?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What were the meanings of verbal and non-verbal sign presented in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> product advertisement?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of the study were:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the types of meaning and function of verbal and non-verbal messages in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> product advertisement.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the meanings of verbal and non-verbal sign presented in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier </span><span class="font2">product advertisement.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data that was used as the object were presented in the form of skincare product advertisement. This study used a skincare product advertisement which the brand was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2">. The data was taken from internet site.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason to choose Garnier due to this brand was quite popular in various places and it was an attractive advertisement which consisted verbal and non-verbal sign.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methods and Techniques of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data was collected by documentation method and note taking technique was applied. There were three steps of techniques to collect the data. The first step was obtaining the printed skincare product advertisement from the internet. The second step was reading and identifying the verbal and non-verbal sign in the advertisement. The third step was noting down and classifying the meanings of verbal and non-verbal sign and the types of meanings and functions of verbal and non-verbal sign on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier </span><span class="font2">product advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methods and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Qualitative method was used in analyzing the data. The data was analyzed descriptively through three steps. First, the verbal and non-verbal signs of the advertisement were classified by using theory of sign proposed by Chandler (2001). Second, the types of meaning and function of the advertisement were classified by using theory of meaning and function proposed by Leech (1974) and the third, the colour terms of the advertisement were described by using the theory of colours by Herman Cerrato (2012).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> product advertisement was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> Sakura White. It was the newest product of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2">. The benefit of this product is for brightening up the skin tone and makes it more luminous.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Meaning and Function of Verbal and Non-verbal Messages in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Sakura White Advertisement</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The meaning and function was analyzed according to the components of the advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The headline of this advertisement is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">5000 Sakura Pearls in Super Hydrating Gel</span><span class="font2">. This sentence reflected conceptual meaning because it showed sparkled beads of pink pearls in the product. The headline also has informational and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">aesthetic function due to the advertiser gives new information to the readers that this product contains a thousand beads of pink pearls in it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There were two body copies of this advertisement. The first sentence was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">For rosy, glowing, soft skin</span><span class="font2">. It reflected conceptual meaning and informational function because the advertiser gives information about the result when using this product through the image of a young girl whose skin is baby pink, gentle and glowing. The second sentence was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">New Garnier Sakura White</span><span class="font2">. It reflected conceptual meaning and informational function because the advertiser gives new information through the image of a bottle of the product which contains sakura white flowers in it and this product is a new product which is offered by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The signature line (logo) of this advertisement is in the form of the brand name of the product </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Take Care. Garnier.</span><span class="font2"> It reflected conceptual meaning because it showed the brand name of the product in this advertisement. It also contained informational function because the advertiser introduces the product by mentioning the name of the product to the readers. The advertiser wants the readers to get and buy this product.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meanings of Verbal and Non-verbal Sign Presented in </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> Sakura White Advertisement</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbal Sign</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The headline was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">5000 Sakura Pearls in Super Hydrating Gel</span><span class="font2"> signified the gel product contains 5000 sakura pearls. The sentences as the body copy were </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">For rosy, glowing, soft skin</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">New Garnier Sakura White</span><span class="font2">. The first sentence signified this </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2"> product can makes the skin more pink, shining, and gentle. The second sentence was the recent product of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Garnier</span><span class="font2">. The signature line (logo) was </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Take Care. Garnier.</span><span class="font2"> signified the brand name of the product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Non-verbal Sign</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The image of a young and beautiful Thai girl whose skin is rosy and smiling with a pink flush on the cheeks which described when the girl used the product, it makes her skin beautiful and her cheeks is more pink. There is a bottle of sakura white product beside the girl which colour is pink, purple, and white which represents that the product can make the girl skin become clean, more bright, looks sweet, and admirable. The images of two beads of pink pearls, sakura flowers, and pink gel described that this product contains beads of pink pearls, sakura flowers extract, and the foam is a gel-like texture in pink. The background colour of the advertisement is pink and white which symbolizes femininity, admiration, cleanliness, and freshness. There is also an image of green leaf which closes to the logo of the product. It represented the naturalness and freshness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Generally, the types of meaning and function were conceptual meaning and informational function which were recognized in this advertisement in order to persuade the consumers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the meanings of verbal and non-verbal sign, it can be said that those signs were related to each other due to what was written by the advertiser in the form of verbal sign was appropriate with what was described by the advertiser in the form of non-verbal sign. The advertiser conveyed the meanings through interesting images and colours of non-verbal signs and the verbal signs have creative language and simple structure which can be easily attracting one’s attention and it makes the consumer easy to understand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Chandler, Daniel. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotic for Beginners</span><span class="font2">. Aberystwyth: Aberystwyth University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cerrato, Herman. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Meaning of Colors: How Colors Impact Our Daily Life In Business, Art, Work And Love</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, Gillian. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font2">. New York: Methuen &amp;&nbsp;Co. Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. 1966. English in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising. A linguistics Study of Advertising in Great Britain</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman Group limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font2">. London: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Garnier Sakura White Advertisement. Resources: http:/</span><a href="http://www.rakuten.com.sg/"><span class="font2"> www.rakuten.com.sg/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">77</span></p>