---
layout: full_article
title: "CONFLICTING CHARACTERS POINT OF VIEW IN THE DOOR IN THE WALL"
author: "I Made Sukma Pradnya Paramita"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONFLICTING CHARACTERS POINT OF VIEW IN</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE DOOR IN THE WALL</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Made Sukma Pradnya Paramita English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ilmiah yang berjudul “Conflicting Characters Point of View in The Door in the Wall” membahas tentang sudut pandang yang bertentangan di dalam cerita. Cerita ini mengisahkan Redmond yang menceritakan kisah temanya, Wallace. Tulisan ini difokuskan pada titik konflik pada sudut pandang yang digunakan narasi dalam cerita tersebut.selain itu, disini juga menganalisis narasi di setiap karakter di cerita ini. Teori utama yang disulkan William Kenney menentukan bahwa sudut pandang dapat membedakan ke narasi orang pertama, narasi orang ketiga, dan narasi yang mengetahui segalanya. Di cerita ini menggunakan macam sudut pandang, yaitu sudut pandang orang pertama dan sudut pandang orang ketiga. Sudut pandang orang pertama terjadi ketika di cerita itu diceritakan oleh salah satu peserta atau karakter dalam cerita. Narrator biasanya menggunakan kata ganti orang pertama “aku” untuk menyebut dirinya. Sudut pandang orang ketiga memberikan pandangan menrik dalam cerita, yang dilihat dari banyak character dan latar belakang yang lebih luas ke dalam cerita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata Kunci : konflik, sudut pandand, character, story</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background Of The Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature has always been part of being human, it is a type of entertainment and its forms were created for the reader to enjoy. The definition of literature is generally limited to great books, whatever their subjects are, notably for their literary form of expression, and their criterion is either aesthetic worth alone or in combination with general intellectual distinction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Talking about literature, there are three genres within it; those are poetry, prose, and drama. Prose itself can be divided into fiction and nonfiction. Nonfiction is a story that is constructed based on true or factual information such as biography, autobiography, diary, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">essay. In addition, fiction is created based on the imagination of the writer. Fiction can be divided into short story, novel and novelette.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems of this writing which could be formulated as follows: (1) How many point of view can be identified in this story? (2) How do these point of view come into conflict with each other?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two Specific aims of this study, they are: (1) To find out how many points of view can be identify in the story. (2) To find out how the point of view came into conflict with each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Research method is the procedure used in writing scientific paper, which includes the method of determination of the source data, the process of collecting data, and how the data analyzed, resulting to the finding of the research (Kenney, 1966)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULT AND DISSCUSSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biography of H. G. Wells</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">H. G. Wells </span><span class="font2">(1866-1946) or Herbert George Wells was a historian and novelist. He was also one of the most preeminent writers of science fiction. Wells is perhaps most famous for his novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The War of the Worlds</span><span class="font2">. This novel was made famous by Orson Welles’s radio adaptation presented in 1938.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synopsis of The Door In The Walls</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Confiding to his friend Redmond who narrates “The Door in the Wall,” Lionel Wallace relates that a preoccupation is gradually coming to dominate his life, one that is even affecting his career as a successful politician. Long ago as a lonely child of five he had wandered out of his home into the streets of West Kensington in London, where he noticed a green door set in a white wall. It was very attractive to him, and he wanted to open it, but at the same time he felt that his father would be very angry if he did.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">One morning a few months later, Wallace was found dead, having apparently mistaken a door at a dangerous construction sight for the elusive door in the wall.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Object and Incident under Different Views</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The object or more precisely the incident causing the conflict of point of view in the story, as already seen in the synopsis, is the obsession of Lionel Wallace to always want to go into the garden he believed was there behind the white wall with a green door.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the instant of coming into it one was exquisitely glad--as only in rare moments and when one is young and joyful one can be glad in this world. And everything was beautiful there ..... (Page 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the quotation above, Redmond retells about the Garden as told to him by Wallace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wallace describe all these moment of hesitation to Redmond with utmost particularity. He was pretending to examine this thing, and coveting. This situation caused the raising of conflict between some of the characters and the narrator in the story as well as to the reader.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wallace’s Point of View</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Politician Lionel Wallace is the protagonist of the story </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Door in the Wall</span><span class="font2">. As a child living in a joyless home, he discovers a door leading to a visionary garden of happiness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">&quot;Let me tell you something, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Redmond</span><span class="font2">. This loss is destroying me. For two months, for ten weeks nearly now, I have done no work at all, except the most necessary and urgent duties. My soul is full of inappeasable regrets. At nights--when it is less likely I shall be recognized--I go out. I wander. Yes. I wonder what people would think of that if they knew. A Cabinet Minister, the responsible head of that most vital of all departments, wandering alone--grieving--sometimes near audibly lamenting--for a door, for a garden!&quot; (Page 27)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The paragraph above is part of the story in which Wallace tells Redmond that he is not in a good shape, he does not work at all, because his soul is full of inappeasable regrets. Wallace was wondering what other people knew about his condition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Father’s Point of View</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Wallace tried to tell his father about the garden, but his father did not trust him. He even accused his son of telling a lie to him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wallace tells his father about the garden—and is punished for telling what his father assumes is a lie. In time, and as a result of this punishment, Wallace succeeds in suppressing the memory. But he can never quite forget it completely and often dreams of revisiting the garden. Throughout his life he unexpectedly comes upon the door in the wall in different parts of London, but each time he is rushing to an important commitment of one sort or another and does not stop to open it. (page 25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The quotation above shows that Wallace’s father had a rough character. His cautious nature is shown by his trepidation upon encountering the door, because he knew his father would be angry if he opened it. Wallace was conditioned to deny his imagination and put all his effort into becoming successful.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Redmond’s Points of View</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The main character of this story is Redmond. The narrator of “The Door in the Wall,” meets his old friend Wallace for a dinner one night. Wallace told Redmond the story of the door in the wall. At first, Redmond did not know if he should or should not believe his friend’s wild tale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">&quot;It leapt upon me for the third time--as I was driving to Paddington on my way to Oxford and a scholarship. I had just one momentary glimpse. I was leaning over the apron of my hansom smoking a cigarette, and no doubt thinking myself no end of a man of the world, and suddenly there was the door, the wall, the dear sense of unforgettable and still attainable things. (page 22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this paragraph, Redmond grew more sympathetic to Wallace. From the Wallace had a memory glimpse and until he sees the door the wall.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reader’s Point of View,</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The choice of narration technique by the author would tend to several effects to the creation of degrees of credibility of the character and the story to the readers. And, of course, the choice of certain narration was able to give some impression to the readers whether it, story was interesting or not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“…Now that I have the clue to it, the thing seems written visibly in his face. I have a photograph in which that look of detachment has been caught and intensified. It reminds me of what a woman once said of him--a woman who had loved him greatly….” (Page 16 )</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the paragraph above, Redmond understood that Wallace told him a story about his woman he met in the garden. Because it was narrated from first person point of view, the readers only saw what Wallace, as the narrator of this story, told about. Readers only knew the feeling of Redmond, but not that of the other characters.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflict of Viewpoints</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">First person narrator in a novel or short story is the author himself, especially if his role is that of a passive listener. In this case however the narrator cannot be Wells, since Wallace calls him Redmond, not Herbert.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">&quot;Let me tell you something, Redmond. This loss is destroying me. For two months, for ten weeks nearly now, I have done no work at all, except the most necessary and urgent duties. My soul is full of inappeasable regrets. (page 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the quotation above, we can see there is a conflict of points view which began when Redmond’s point of view collide with Wallace point of view. The first part of the story tells about the confusion of Redmond about Wallace’s story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The main character of this story is Redmond. The narrator of “The Door in the Wall,” meets his old friend Wallace for a dinner one night. Wallace tells Redmond the story of the door in the wall. First person point of view occurs when the story is told from the inside; it means that the story is told by one of the participants or character in the story. The narrator naturally uses the first personal pronoun “I” in referring to himself. First-person narrations may be conscious of telling the story to a given audience, perhaps a given place and time, for given reason.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“He told it me with such a direct simplicity of conviction that </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I </span><span class="font2">could not do otherwise than believe in him”. (Page 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The quotation above is a fragment of the short story. In the fragment above, Redmond still could not believe Wallace’s story. But when he lay in his bed and recalled the things Wallace told him. It was frankly incredible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the paragraph above we can recognize that in presenting the character Redmond, the narrator is seen to use the first person narrator. But when we explore this story deeper, we can see that the use of the first personal pronoun only occurs in all letters that Wallace sent to Redmond.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>VI. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After the whole analysis of the various points of view used in the narration of the story </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Door in the Wall</span><span class="font2"> in the previous chapter, the conclusion of the analysis can be presented here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that Redmond has a different viewpoint from Wallace. Wallace believes that behind that door there was a beautiful garden, rich with flora, enormous scenery, which was Wallace's ideal world and paradise; however, he was deprived of the change for entering it because his father considered it only as a fantasy or illusion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From Redmond point of view, the stories of Wallace, was not a true story. Redmond doesn’t believe all that Wallace told him. After hearing the story more deeply from Wallace, Redmond began slowly to put sympathy on Wallace. Redmond was told all about the life of Wallace before he died. Wallace’s father had a rough character. Since he was first seen Wallace told about his garden in the door, his father scolded him .Wallace's father just wanted him to be the one to come in handy later.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As the reader, I follow the Redmond’s view point. I do not believe the truth of Wallace’s story. Therefore, Wallace was the only one who considers the garden behind the door a reality. Because we the readers felt Sympathy to Wallace, we also vacillated about what Redmond told to us. In conflict of view point, we can conclude that all have different viewpoints on Wallace. First Redmond did not believe what Wallace said. After hearing more about the story, Redmond felt confused but sympathetic to Wallace. Wallace's father did not agree to Wallace. But Wallace himself who believed the garden in the existence of died of an accident at last. This means that we as readers finally assume the same point of view as Redmond the narrator.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h3><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>VII. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h3></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Agus. Rachman. 2000. Conflict Analysis of The Main Character In Ile</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> (thesis). Denpasar:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Diyanni, Robert. 1994. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reading: Fiction Poetry, Drama and the Essay.</span><span class="font2"> England Steven Pensinger</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William . 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York : Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Klarer, Mario. 2004, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introducy to Literary Studies</span><span class="font2">. Second edition. London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larasati, Risa. 2009. The Analysis of Point of View Used in the Narration of the Characters in “Sophie’s World” By Jostein Gaarden (thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mitchell, Adriana. 1986 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Inside The Novel</span><span class="font2">. South Melbourne, Victoria.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nurjayanti. Dewi. 2007. The Conflict of Main Character and Her Social Life in Windmills of The Gods by Sidney Sheldon. (thesis) Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pujiastuti, Ida Ayu. 2000. Analysis of the Intrinsic Aspect of Madam Doubtfire by Annefine. (Thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Purnama, M. Ida Ayu Nyoman. 2001. Tecnhnique used in Character Potrayal in Dickens’ David</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Copperfield. (Thesis). Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene &amp;&nbsp;Austin Warren. 1962. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font2"> New York : A Harvest Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from:</span><a href="http://www.blogs.uniosnabrueck.de/WellekWarrenNatureOfLit.pdf"><span class="font2">http://www.blogs.uniosnabrueck.de/WellekWarrenNatureOfLit.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Downloaded on July 5, 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wells, H.G. 1911 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the door in the Wall and the Other Stories.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: </span><a href="http://www2.hn.psu.edu/faculty/jmanis/hgwells/Door-Wall.pdf"><span class="font2">http://www2.hn.psu.edu/faculty/jmanis/hgwells/Door-Wall.pdf</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Downloaded on July 5, 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Davidyuk, Yuliya. 2014. Linguistic Verbalization of Basic Literary Concepts in the Short Stories</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">by O.Henry. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Languages and Literatures</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: </span><a href="http://aripd.org/journals/ijll/Vol_2_No_1_March_2014/17.pdf"><span class="font2">http://aripd.org/journals/ijll/Vol_2_No_1_March_2014/17.pdf</span></a><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Downloaded on October 1, 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>