---
layout: full_article
title: "The Positive Politeness Strategies Used by Johnny Cash and Larry King in the Interview on CNN"
author: "A. A. Gde Bharga Wisnawa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Positive Politeness Strategies Used by Johnny Cash and Larry King</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">in the Interview on CNN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A A. Gde Bharga Wisnawa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Non – Reguler Program Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wawancar biasanya di lakukan dengan percakapan yang langsung antara pewawancara dengan yang di wawancara. Sehubungan dengan studi ini, sebuah wawancara antara Johnny Cash dan Larry King menampilkan percakapan yang khusus yang mana sangat menarik untuk di teliti karena menampilkan makna-makna kesopanan selama percakapan. Jurnal ini berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Positive Politeness Strategies Used by Johnny Cash and Larry King in the Intreview on CNN.</span><span class="font1"> Jurnal ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis-jenis dari makna kesopanan yang positif berdasarkan dari teori oleh Brown dan Levinson (1987) dan politeness maxim oleh Leech (1983) sebagai teori pendukung dan alasan kenapa strategi dari makna kesopanan ini di aplikasikan. Data di daperoleh melalui metode dokumentasi. Proses pengambilan data di lakukan dengan mengunduh interview dan naskah dari internet. Dan menonton video wawancara, teknik pencatatan juga di lakukan. Data di presentasikan melalui metode kulitatif, dan di analisa menggunkan metode deskriptif. Dapat disimpulkan dan di temukan beberapa penggunaan strategi makna kesopnan oleh Johnny Cash di antaranya strategy 2 (Exaggerate), startegy 3 (Intensify interest to H), strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers), strategy 5 (Seek agreement), strategy 6 (Avoid disagreement), strategy 7 (Presuppose/ raise/ assert common ground), strategy 8 (Joke), strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of concern for H’s wants). Dan Larry King menggunkan strategy 1 (Notice attend to H), strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers), strategy 5 (seek agreement), strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of and concecrn for H’s wants), strategy 10 (Offer and promise), strategy 11 (Be optimistic), strategy 12 (Include both S and H in the activity), strategy 13 (Give or ask for reasons), strategy 15 (Give gift to H). Berdasarkan dari politeness maxim ditemukan: The Approbation Maxim, The Agreement Maxim, The Sympathy Maxim yang mana telah di analisa sebagai teori pendukung. Alasan mengapa strategi dari makna kesopanan yang positif digunakan karena konteks dari situasi (hubungan antara peserta, keadaan, dan topik) karena percakapan berlangsung dalam keadaan wawancara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keyword: kesopanan, strategi kesopanan, wawancara.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">People may know that someone is being polite or impolite through the way they speak in conversation in order to maintain the relationship with others. In other words,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">being polite means that we try to keep our manners or behaviors and our language not to hurt other people’s feelings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Related to this study, an interview at November 26, 2002 with Johnny Cash as interviewee by Larry King as interviewer on CNN (Cable News Network) shows a particular conversation which is very interesting to analyzed because it might be shows the application of politeness strategies during the conversation. Therefore, it is very interesting to investigate Brown and Levinson’s politeness strategies especially positive politeness strategies in the interview between Johnny Cash and Larry King.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The poblem of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of positive politeness strategies and politeness maxim are most frequently used by Johnny Cash and Larry King?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why the positive politeness strategies are applied in the interview between Johnny Cash and Larry King?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study:</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the strategy of positive politeness strategies and politeness maxim appears in the interview between Johnny Cash and Larry King.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the reason why the positive politeness strategies are applied in the interview between Johnny Cash and Larry King.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source of this study was taken from interview video between Johnny Cash and Larry King on CNN. It was downloaded from the internet, exactly from </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font1">. The process of collecting data was done by downloading the interview video and the transcript from the internet. And the process of collecting data was done by watching the interview video, in addition the transcript of the interview is used to support in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">order to analyze the data. Note-taking technique also used to collect the data. The data analysis technique in this study or research was presented in quantitative method. The data in this study was analyzed by using descriptive method. The finding is analyzed by the relevant theory, the data that have been collected were classified according to strategy of positive politeness strategies that suggested by Brown and Levinson (1987), which words in utterance and what the indicate to the strategy of positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>The Positive Politeness Strategies Used by Johnny Cash</span><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Strategy 2 (Exaggerate)</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;KING : Did you ever have a song that you thought was going to be phenomenal, and didn't do it?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CASH : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Exactly.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Johnny Cash applies this strategy by using exaggerative expressions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(exactly)</span><span class="font1"> to conveys a dramatically praise in order to make a conversation more intimate.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Startegy 3 (Intensify interest to H)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Well, there's a great compilation of my work that they've put together, all the companies that I worked for, you know? And everybody is trying to outdo the other one.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Johnny Cash talks about the great compilation of his work to Larry King in order to tell him about the story of his works. In the conversation above Cash uses </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“you know”</span><span class="font1"> to make King interest about the story and make vivid conversation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I have been with you many times, Larry, and it's all been uphill every time. You remember? </span><span class="font1">(language or dialect)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Johnny Cash uses a language or dialect in the conversation by mention </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Larry</span><span class="font1"> only, as we know Larry is the first name of Larry King. Therefore, Cash shows the intimacy between them.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Strategy 5 (Seek agreement)</span></h1>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font1">a. KING</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">: You sang with Sun?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font1">CASH</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yes, I was on Sun Records.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font1">b. KING</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">: When Presley was there?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">• </span><span class="font1">CASH</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yes, when Presley was there.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Those sentences indicates that Johnny Cash agrees with Larry King when King asks to Cash. In this case the sentence can be analyzed with politeness maxim as well, by exaggerating his intonation, Cash maximize his agreement between him and King. In order it seems that Cash is applying </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Agreement Maxim: maximize agreement between self and other.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Strategy 6 (Avoid disagreement)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Well, I don't know. It was a money thing, I guess. RCA- Victor went to Sam Phillips to buy Elvis and they bought him. And he was the nucleus of the whole thing -- the rockabilly thing was revolving around</span><span class="font1">. (hedging opinion)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the utterance above Cash is hedging at his own opinions. It seems to avoid disagreement to Larry, we can see in this sentence “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Well, I don't know. It was a money thing, I guess”</span><span class="font1">. Therefore, that sentence shows that Cash so as not to be seen to disagree with King. To soften FTA’s, Cash chooses to be vague about his own opinion. It also indicates that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Agreement Maxim: minimize disagreement between self and others</span><span class="font1"> is applied when Cash tries to avoid disagreement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Strategy 7 (Presuppose/ raise/ assert common ground)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yes. Well, I don't go out and sing. I don't do concerts any more because the physical thing of going out there and doing concerts and the planes and the cars and the hotels and all that. And the backstage is where it's so dark I have a hard time. My vision is -- my vision is over. I'd probably say 60 percent gone because of the neuropathy. And the diabetes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Strategy 7 is asserting common ground, Cash tries to draw King into his story through his statetment. Cash says that the situation is certainly true, he tells about the vision and he can not do concert because the neurophaty and diabetes.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Strategy 8 (Joke)</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;KING : And no anger at the, Why did God do this to me?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CASH : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oh, no. No. I'm the last one that would be angry at God. I'd really took if I shook my fist at him.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this utterance Johnny Cash tries to make a joke that truly he does not really mean it, we can see the sentence “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I'd really took if I shook my fist at him.</span><span class="font1">” if Johnny Cash is wouldn’t took a shook his fist to God, he is joking and does not really mean it.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of concern for H’s wants)</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font1">.KING : Are you bitter?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font1">CASH : Bitter? No.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font1">KING : Angry? You're a young guy. You're only 70.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">CASH : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">No, I'm not bitter. Why should by bitter? I'm thrilled to death with life. Life is</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">-- the way God has given it to me was just a platter -- a golden platter of life laid out there for me. It's been beautiful.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this case, Cash tries to avoid the other willingness by using the other willingness as an alibi to King it appears in this sentence “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">No, I'm not bitter. Why should by bitter? I'm thrilled to death with life</span><span class="font1">” when King asks to Cash. King asserts two willingness but Cash wants to do only one of King’s willingness.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>The Positive Politeness Strategies Used by Larry King</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Strategy 1 (Notice attend to H)</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How would you describe your voice? Since there's no voice like it.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. I mean, it's not -- you don't hear yourself any where, right? I mean, there's no one -- are you a bass?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Both of the utterances that used by Larry King has a purpose to praise Johnny Cash in order to make his wants fulfilled that the King conveys his interest to Cash. Obviously, that King wants the Cash to describe the King’s want. It can be analyzed by politenes maxim, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Approbation Maxim: maximize the expression of beliefs which express approval of other.</span><span class="font1"> It is preferred to praise Cash.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">All right, Johnny, first and foremost, how are you doing? How's your health?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As an interviewer Larry King is applying this strategy to conveys in-group of language or dialect to Johnny Cash, it is clearly he uses this strategy to show intimacy of relationship between Larry King and Johnny Cash by calling Johnny Cash first name </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(Johnny)</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Strategy 5 (Seek Agreement)</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CASH : I think so. I think everybody that saw him perform did, yes.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;KING : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yes.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance indicates that Larry King is obviously agree with Johnny Cash, by repeating the sentence, it seems King applied </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Agreement Maxim: maximize agreement between self and other</span><span class="font1"> as well to Cash.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of and concecrn for H’s wants)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Now your singing contemporaries pass away -- I just want to get this right. Waylon Jennings died in February battling diabetes, had part of a foot amputated. You shared an apartment in the '60s. What was it like to lose him?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this case, Larry king asserts two willingness to make things right about Johnny Cash, first is he asks the to make things right by use this sentence “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I just want to get this right</span><span class="font1">” and then King tries to avoid the other willingness by using the other willingness as alibi by using this interrogative “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">What was it like to lose him?</span><span class="font1">”.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Strategy 10 (Offer and promise)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Let me take a break and you think about it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larry King uses this strategy is clearly to offer Johnny Cash a chance to think, by applying this strategy King may claim that (with a certain sphere of relevance) whatever Cash wants, King wants for him and will help to obtain in order to redress the potential threat of some FTAs.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>strategy 11 (Be optimistic)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">That song cracked up everybody whenever you sing it, right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This strategy is used by Larry King because he is optimistic that Johnny Cash will be fulfilled what he wants. By stressed </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“right”</span><span class="font1"> in the of the sentence is to make sure if Cash wants to fulfill King’s want.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Strategy 12 (Include both S and H in the activity)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My daughter's here with me tonight and she had to remind me, Kia, that we should show the album. It's called &quot;Cash&quot;. There's that face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">King wants if he and Cash are included in the activity by using this sentence ” </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">that we should show the album</span><span class="font1">”. It has a meaning to do it with “you”. By using </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">we</span><span class="font1"> form, both King and Cash will show the album to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Kia”</span><span class="font1"> King uses this as another way to illustrate the cooperative strategy. It has purpose to fulfilled desire.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Strategy 13 (Give or ask for reasons)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">You thought that couldn't miss. Okay. Now, what surprised you? What song did you record that did well that you didn't think much of?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larry King wants to hear a reason from Johnny Cash therefore King uses this strategy. We can see in this sentence “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Explain</span><span class="font1">”. One of conventionalized positive-politeness form is the indirect suggestion, which demand rather than give reasons. In this case it can be analyzed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Approbation Maxim: maximize the expressions of beliefs which express approval of other.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Strategy 15 (Give gift to H)</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It was good</span><span class="font1"> (good)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Be well.</span><span class="font1"> (sympathy)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the utterances it can be understand that Larry King make a good utterances to show an intimacy relationship conversation to respect each other. Furthermore, sympathy utterance, by using this strategy King conveys his respect or support to Johnny Cash. In this case, it can be analyzed also with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Sympathy Maxim: maximize sympathy between self and other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The findings are found: strategy 2 (Exaggerate), startegy 3 (Intensify interest to H), strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers), strategy 5 (Seek agreement), strategy 6 (Avoid disagreement), strategy 7 (Presuppose/ raise/ assert common ground), strategy 8 (Joke), strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of concern for H’s wants), these are used by Johnny Cash. And Larry King use strategy 1 (Notice attend to H), strategy 4 (Use in- group identity markers), strategy 5 (seek agreement), strategy 9 (Assert or presuppose S’s knowledge of and concecrn for H’s wants), strategy 10 (Offer and promise), strategy 11 (Be optimistic), strategy 12 (Include both S and H in the activity), strategy 13 (Give or ask for</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">reasons), strategy 15 (Give gift to H). According to politeness maxim there are found: The Approbation Maxim, The Agreement Maxim, The Sympathy Maxim which was analyzed as supporting theory. The reason why the positive politeness strategies applied by Johnny Cash and Larry king in the interview is influenced by some factor, such as: the context of situations (the relation between participant, setting, and topic), age (it means that the younger speakers have to speak politely to the older speaker), and social status (such as occupation, education wealth).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, P. And Levinson, Stephen C. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Some Universal in Language Use. </span><span class="font1">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hobb, P. 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Medium is the Massage: Politeness Strategies in Men’s and Women’s Voice Mail Message.</span><span class="font1"> Los Angeles: University of California.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, J. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction To Sociolinguistic.</span><span class="font1"> London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, G. 1983. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Principle of Pragmatic</span><span class="font1">. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luhur, Baruna. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Positive and Negative Politeness Strategies in Friends TV Series Script</span><span class="font1"> (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mutunda, Sylvester. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistic Study of Politeness Strategies in the Lunda Culture.</span><span class="font1"> Tucson: University of Arizona.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Putra, I Ketut Adi Astina. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Politeness Strategies Used in the Movie Jerry Meguire </span><span class="font1">(undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Purnami, D. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness and Addres Forms in Film Actualy Love</span><span class="font1"> (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Faculty of Letters.</span></p>