---
layout: full_article
title: "The Types And Meaning Of Slangs Used In “Blind Side” Movie"
author: "Ester Dwi Astuti, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 17.3 Desember 2016: 30 - 35</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Types And Meaning Of Slangs Used In “Blind Side” Movie</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ester Dwi Astuti<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>2</sup>, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font3"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts Udayana University </span><span class="font1">1</span><span class="font3">[teng_upz@yahoo.c°-id] </span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">[</span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] </span><span class="font1">3</span><a href="mailto:ngurahparthama@gmail.com"><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font3">ngurahparthama@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">This paper entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Types and Meaning of Slangs used in The Movie Blind Side</span><span class="font3">. The aims of this paper are to identify and classify the types of slang words and describe the slang meaning of slang words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data were collected by using the following steps, first watching Blind Side by John Lee Hancock (2009) (and based on the book </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Blind Side: Evolution of a Game</span><span class="font3"> by Michael Lewis) repeatedly and finding the statements that reflect the slang words and phrase used in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The theories applied in this study were based on the theory of slang word about Primary slang and Secondary slang stated by Chapman (1988) and seven types meaning of slang word: Conceptual or denotative meaning, Connotative, Stylistic, Affective, Reflected, Collocative and Thematic meaning stated by Leech (1973). The method used to collect data was the documentation method. And the methods of analyzing data were the descriptive and qualitative methods.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis showed that there were two types of slang words in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side </span><span class="font3">movie. They are primary slang and secondary slang. The type of slang word in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie was mostly in the form of primary slang. From all types of meaning, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie often used conceptual meaning or denotative meaning than other meanings were in the forms of words and phrase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: Slang, meaning, types, movie.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Jurnal ini berjudul </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Types and Meaning of Slangs used in The Movie Blind Side.</span><span class="font3"> Tujuan dari jurnal ini mengindentifikasi dan mengelompokkan tipe dari kata slang dan menjelaskan arti dari kata slang tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data sudah terkumpul dengan menggunakan tahapan, pertama menonton film Blind Side dari John Lee Hancock (2009) (dan berdasarkan dari buku </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Blind Side:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Evolution of a Game</span><span class="font3"> dari Michael Lewis) mengulang dan menemukan pernyataan yang mencerminkan kata dan frase slang yang digunakan dalam film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Teori-teori yang digunakan pada jurnal ini berdasarkan pada teori kata slang tentang primary slang dan secondary slang yang diungkapkan oleh Chapman (1988) dan tujuh arti kata slang: Konseptual atau denotatif, konotatif, stilistik, afektif, kolokatif, dan tematik diungkapkan oleh Leech (1973). Metode dalam jurnal ini untuk mengumpulan data mengunakan dokumentasi. Dan metode menganalisis data menggunakan metode deskriptif kualitatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Analisis menunjukan bahwa ada dua tipe kata slang di film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side,</span><span class="font3"> yaitu primary slang dan secondary slang. Tipe kata slang di film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> paling sering ditemukan pada bentuk primary slang. Dari semua tipe arti kata slang, film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side </span><span class="font3">sering mengunakan konseptual atau denotatif daripada arti kata slang yang lain dalam bentuk kata dan frase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci : Slang, meaning, types, movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Sociolinguistics is the study of language in relation to Society. Sociolinguistics becomes a recognised part of courses at the university level on ‘linguistics’ or ‘language’ (1978). Sociolinguistics takes account only of the structure of language, to the exclusion of the social contexts in which it is learned and used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Movies as films are a type of visual communication which use moving pictures and sound to tell a story. Movies can have a broad cultural and social impact, affecting people to feel many kind of feeling, think, and act. Movies are also intended to entertain a way to have fun, to give comedy, horror, romance, and many other genres of movies. Movies can be fictional (made up), or true, or a mix of two different stories in one movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Slang is the continual, unofficial interpretation language (words or grammar), everchanging use and definition of words in informal conversation. Slang is often using references as a means of comparison or showing likeness because the language is too recent or not used widespread enough to be assimilated officially.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this journal, slang words are interesting topic to analyze and discuss in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> because it is a great movie, inspiring movie and presented by John Lee Hancock as the director. There are some people of Memphis, Tennessee society (people multilingual communities) and also white people who used slang of informal function even harsh words around the main character in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3">. So, the types and meaning of slang words were interesting to be analyzed and this research focused on the slang words that contain the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the background above, this study is concerned with the conversation of the movie Blind Side. There are two problems formulated as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of slang words used in Blind Side movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the meaning of slang words used in Blind Side movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to the background and problems above, the main of this study can be stated as follows; this paper was identified and classified based the types of slang words in the movie Blind Side. This paper also described the meaning of slang words in the movie Blind Side.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The research methods were divided into four steps; they consist of first, the determination of the data source; second, method and technique of collecting data and method; third, analyzing the data in the movie Blind Side; and fourth, the method and technique of presenting data. Research is defined as application to the investigation of matter. The primary purpose of applied research are discovering, interpreting, and the development of methods and systems of the advancement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method used in this paper to collect data was used the documentation method. The data were collected by watching the movie, reading script and making a note. While reading script the movie, it was very important to observe every conversation carefully. The data were selected based on primary slang and secondary slang to observe the types of slang words and describe the meaning of slang. The data were seen and read carefully until the end. While reading and watching the whole data source, the observation of the data source was the most important because it showed the point to collect the data. After obtaining the point, it was followed by note taking some of the important points. Finally, the data were classified according to the types of slang words and the meaning of slang in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This section showd the data from movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> using the theory of Chapman (1988) primary slang and secondary Slang to identify and also classify the indicated data of slang’s types, and describe the meaning of slang based on Leech’s (1974) theory; seven types of slang words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The methods used in this paper were the descriptive and qualitative methods. Descriptive method is using word to give infomation about someone or something in his/her look or what may happen in area which is analyzed and Qualitative method usually requires the data in the form of words instead of number. The data were analyzed in accordance with the theories proposed by Chapman (1988) and Leech</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1974) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in order to find a certain conclusion, which is the result or findings of this study. The techiques of analyzing the data are as follows: reading the script, underlining the indication of slang words in conversations, classifying the slang types based on the definition of theory.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method and technique of presenting data in this paper is descriptive. Technique to present data in this present paper is as follows; first, describing the types and meaning of slang words. The types of slang proposed by Chapman (1988) was used as the main theory. There are two types of slang: primary and secondary slangs. This paper found the data that indicate primary and secondary slangs. Then one example was mentioned from the primary slang. For example, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ain't (is not</span><span class="font3">). The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ain't </span><span class="font3">is called primary slang because it is often used in daily life. Then, one example was mentioned from the secondary slang. For example, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">redneck</span><span class="font3">. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">redneck</span><span class="font3"> for calling someone as a rural dweller because he/she spends a great deal of time living arround with people that is different from him/her origin. Next, the meaning of slang was described according to theory proposed by Leech (1974) as the supporting theory. After that, one example of seven types found in this paper was mentioned. For example, based on the online dictionary of slang, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fat ass</span><span class="font3"> is noun. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fat ass</span><span class="font3"> refers to overweigh/obese person. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">fat ass</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence above is classified as the denotative meaning because it is general meaning related to the body part/anatomy in sexuality which means </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ass/buttocks</span><span class="font3">. Finally, the conclusion of all results in chapter three was drawn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Types and Meaning of slang word Used in “Blind Side” Movie.</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Slang</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This section was classified based on the types of slang words in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie script. There are two types of slang : primary and secondary slangs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Primary slang</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">His mama's on the crack pipe and he </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ain't</span><span class="font3"> got nobody.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Chapter 7, scene 14 continued: 14. Said by Big Tony).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ain't (is not; am not; are not; do not; have not; will not; etc)</span><span class="font3"> in data 1, used in the United States is generally limited to the South and Midwest. This word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ain't </span><span class="font3">is called primary slang because it is often used in their daily life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">I've been waiting for over an hour and I look around and all I see is people </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">shooting the bull</span><span class="font3"> and drinking coffee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Chapter 64, scene 102 continued: 102. Said by Leigh Anne.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">shooting the bull</span><span class="font3"> in data 1 above is identified as secondary slang because this phrase expresses action on their attitude in some situational context.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of slang</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sean: You </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font3"> do what?!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leigh Anne: Don't pretend you didn't hear me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font3"> has the same meaning as the formal form </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">want to</span><span class="font3">. It is usually used by the English people in their daily communication. The denotation of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font3"> is the actual definition of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">want to</span><span class="font3"> rather than the nuances of the meaning or the feelings it implies. The denotation of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">want to</span><span class="font3"> does not carry the associations, emotions, or attitudes that the word might have. So, this data were classified as the conceptual meaning or more specific the denotative meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Big Tony: The little ones Steven and the big ONE'S -</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cotton: Big Mike.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Big Tony: Yeah. That's right.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cotton: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mother of God</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the Urban dictionary the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mother of God</span><span class="font3"> is interjection exclamation of alarm / amazement/ disbelief of something and also of what people did by identifying the conversational context. If this phrase is seperated one from another, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mother</span><span class="font3"> would stand alone and has the meaning of family members (woman) in relation to a child or children to whom someone has given birth. And </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">God</span><span class="font3"> has the meaning of the creator and ruler of the universe and source of all moral authority. But in data 2, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mother of God</span><span class="font3"> can not be seperated from creating a correct meaning. But it can change with others noun, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mother of fuck, mother of bitches</span><span class="font3"> or any else.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">So, data 4 convey collocative Meaning, since the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mother</span><span class="font3"> acquires the company of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">God</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">After analyzing the types and meaning of slang word in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie, this present paper found that there were two types of slang words in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie; they are primary slang and secondary slang. The type of slang word in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie is mostly in the form of primary slang with twenry data found in the conversation in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Side</span><span class="font3"> movie. In this paper the primary slang words that have characteristics like pristine speech of subculture were also found; such words and phrases are very natural to speak and they are general expressions used by young people and urban street gangs in their daily life. Then, the secondary slang words found are the characteristics like the word and phrase used to express someone’s attitudes, contempt, superiority, and cleverness; the word slang expresses something in secret way, it is usually borrowing someone else’s verbal dress, the word contain stylistic rather than true identification and depends on situational context. From the secondary slang point of view, this present paper found nine eleven data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis the meaning of slang words in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie, there were six types of meaning found in the conversation. They were conceptual meaning or denotative meaning, connotative, stylistic, affective, reflected, and collocative meaning. Among the six types that had been found, conceptual meaning or denotative meaning were more often used than the other meaning which is the form of words and phrase. This present paper found twelve data of conceptual meaning, two data of connotative meaning, six data of stylistic meaning, five data of affective meaning, ten data of reflected meaning, four data of collocative meaning and data from thematic meaning was not found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Blind Side</span><span class="font3"> movie conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Chapman, Robert L. 1988. A New Dictionary of American Slang. London: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publishers Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font3">. Harmondsworth: Penguin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Internet </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">:</span></p>
<h1><a href="http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=slang"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=slang</span></a></h1>
<p><a href="http://onlineslangdictionary.com/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://onlineslangdictionary.com/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">35</span></p>