---
layout: full_article
title: "IDIOMS FOUND IN THE MYSTERY MR QUIN BY AGASTHA CHRISTIE AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN MR. QUIN YANG MISTERIUS BY JULANDA TANTANI"
author: "Hendy Hartady"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">IDIOMS FOUND IN THE MYSTERY MR QUIN BY AGASTHA CHRISTIE AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN MR. QUIN YANG MISTERIUS BY JULANDA TANTANI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hendy Hartady 0701305106</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University 2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal yang berjudul &quot;&nbsp;IDIOMS FOUND IN THE MYSTERY MR QUIN BY AGASTHA CHRISTIE AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN MR. QUIN YANG MISTERIUS BY JULANDA TANTANI &quot;&nbsp;bertujuan untuk mengeksplorasi lebih dalam tentang ekspresi idiomatik. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis jenis idiom yang ditemukan dalam novel The Mysterious Mr Quin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode penelitian kepustakaan, yang berarti membaca novel dan mencatat idiom apapun yang terjadi dalam teks sumber, dan mencari setaranya dalam bahasa target dan dianalisis secara kualitatif. Teori utama yang digunakan teori idiom sebagai frase yang diusulkan oleh Leech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam analisis, jenis ekspresi idiomatik disajikan pertama. Analisis kesetaraan yang ditemukan setelah membandingkan sumber dan bahasa target. Dalam hasilnya, ada tujuh jenis idiom yang telah dianalisis dalam novel, yaitu phrasal verbs, phrasal-prepositional verbs, prepositional phrase, idioms with verbs as keywords, idioms with nouns as keywords, idioms with adjectives as keywords, dan idiomatic pairs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Setiap idiom memiliki makna tergantung pada konteks dan cerita. Meskipun ada beberapa idiom yang memiliki bentuk dan kata-kata yang sama, mereka memiliki arti yang berbeda sesuai dengan konteks dan cerita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: terjemahan, terjemahan idiomatik, proses penerjemahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In learning English, learners learn to know the meaning of English words; either they are in single words or in groups. They usually open up the dictionary to find the meaning of words. Yet, in English, there are words that cannot be found in the dictionary, and there are phrases or sentences that cannot be explained in grammar theories. This special feature of English language is called idiom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As defined by The New International Webster (1900), an idiom is an expression not readily analyzable from its grammatical construction or from the meaning of its component parts. It is the part of the distinctive form or construction of a particular language that has a specific form or style present only in that language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">While, Hornby, et.al. (2000) states that idiom is the kind of language and grammar used by particular people at a particular time or place. Furthermore, idioms, as linguistic feature, present some of the most difficult materials for learners of English as a foreign or second language to successfully understand. The difficulties in understanding idioms arise from two different characteristics of language. The meaning of many idioms often does not correspond to their individual components.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In some senses, idioms are the reflection of the environment, life, and historical culture of the native speakers and are closely associated with their innermost spirit and feelings. They are commonly used in all types of language, informal and formal, spoken and written. As idioms are important part of languages, understanding of a language requires understanding of its idioms and the tactics for idiom translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this paper, the idioms in The Mysterious Mr.Quin novel was analyzed. The central problem to be analyzed is what the types of idioms used in The Mysterious Mr.Quin’s novel?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This writing about translation is interested to explore deeper about idioms, such as to classify and prescribe the types of idioms those are used in The Mysterious Mr.Quin’s novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed by using qualitative method since this method can be used to describe and interpret qualitative data. There are some steps followed in analyzing the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">First, the idioms were classified based on by identified the phrase in source language. Second, the idioms were found classified based on their types. Third, the data analysis was presented. Finally, conclusions were drawn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are seven types of idioms analyzed. As follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phrasal Verb</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dried up (page 9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mr Satterthwaite was sixty-two- a little bent, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dried up</span><span class="font2"> man with a peering face oddly elflike, and an intense and inordinate interest in other people’s lives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dried</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Up</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= adverb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dried up</span><span class="font2"> is formed by Verb + Adverb. So, it belongs to a form of phrasal verb.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phrasal-Prepositional Verbs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To sell up (page 43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Before the Elliots had </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to sell up</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= Preposition</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sell &nbsp;&nbsp;= Verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Up &nbsp;&nbsp;= Adverb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the form above, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to sell up</span><span class="font2"> belongs to a form of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prepositional Phrase</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prepositional Phrase</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By all means (page 14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘Bed, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">by all means</span><span class="font2">,’ she said lightly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= Preposition</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= determiner</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Means = verb / adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the form above, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">by all means</span><span class="font2"> belongs to a form of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prepositional Phrase</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms with Verbs as Keywords</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Get hold of (page 38)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Unkertons would naturally be mad to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">get hold of</span><span class="font2"> him and the bride!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Get = verb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hold = verb / noun</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Of = prepositional</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the from form above, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">get hold of</span><span class="font2">, belongs to a form of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">idioms with verb (get) as keywords</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms with Nouns as Keywords</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb. There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is : Switched on (page 13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">He strode across the wide hall where they were sitting, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">switched on</span><span class="font2"> an extra light.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Switch = noun</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On = adverb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Switch on</span><span class="font2"> is formed by Noun + Adverb. So, it belongs to a form of idioms with nouns (switch) as keywords.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms with Adejectives as Keywords</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb. There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A little out (page 102)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Three times before he had met Mr Quin, and each time the meeting had resulted in something </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a little out</span><span class="font2"> of the ordinary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A = determiner</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Little = adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Out = adverb</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Turned back</span><span class="font2"> is formed by Verb + Adverb. So, it belongs to a form of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">idioms with adjective (little) as keywords</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idiomatic Pairs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this section some data are classified as Phrasal Verb. There are thirty-four data found in the novel. One of them is : Happy or unhappy (page 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In a queer intuitiveway, he felt certain that she was either </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">v</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ery happy or very unhappy</span><span class="font2"> – but he didn’t know which, and it annoyed him not to know.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Form :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Happy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Or &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= conjunction</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Unhappy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= adjective</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based form above, so </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">happy or unhappy</span><span class="font2">, it belongs to a form of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">idiomatic pairs</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem and the analysis on the previous chapter, the following points can be described as the conclusion of the study. There seven types of idioms founded in the Agatha Christie’ s novel entitled The Mysterious Mr Quin as SL text. Those types of idioms can be presented as follows: phrasal verbs, phrasal-prepositional verbs, prepositional phrase, idioms with verbs as keywords, idioms with nouns as keywords, idioms with adjectives as keywords, and idiomatic pairs are often shown in each chapter. Idioms which were found have no exact grammatical structure. Especially for the fourth until sixth form of idioms: idioms with verbs as keywords, idioms with nouns as keywords and idioms with adjectives as keywords. The keywords were determined based on which word that mostly influences the whole phrase and the meaning of its. So, most idioms which are formed by verbs: phrasal verbs form, and have a verb as keywords have many forms of verb based on the tenses of the sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bibliography</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Christie, Agatha (2003). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Mysterious Mr. &nbsp;&nbsp;Quin</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;London:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">HarperCollinsPublishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tantani, Julanda (2008). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Mr. Quin yang Misterius</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;Jakarta: PT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GramediaPustakaUtama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Biber, Douglas, Susan Conrad and Geoffrey Leech (2002). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Longman Student Grammar of ,Spoken and Written English</span><span class="font2">. England: Pearson Education Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A Swith A P Cowieand A C Gimson (2000). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">* * *</span></p>