---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS BETWEEN HOOLIGAN PEOPLE IN “GREEN STREET HOOLIGANS” MOVIE"
author: "I Made Weda Mahayana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: 37-43</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF CONFLICTS BETWEEN HOOLIGAN PEOPLE IN “GREEN STREET HOOLIGANS” MOVIE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I Made Weda Mahayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">email:</span><a href="mailto:mahayana.weda@gmail.com"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> mahayana.weda@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Prodi Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Conflict Between Hooligan People In “Green Street Hooligans</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">” Movie” bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis konflik yang dihadapi oleh para karakter, dan juga menganalisa serta mendeskripsikan baik dari penyebab terjadinya konflik maupun strategi yang digunakan untuk menyelesaikan konflik tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Metode yang digunakan dalam mengumpulkan data adalah metode dokumentasi. Langkah-langkah yang digunakan dalam mengumpulkan data yakni dengan menonton film Green Street Hooligans, mencari kalimat-kalimat yang berhubungan dengan topic. setelah data tersebut telah diklasifikasikan sesuai dengan tipenya, akhirnya data yang sudah diklasifikasi tersebut telah dianalisa mengacu kepada teori dari Gail dan Myers dan juga teori dari Deetz dan Stvenson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sesuai dengan analisa terhadap konflik dari film </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Green Street Hooligans, terdapat elemen-elemen dari konflik eksternal dan internal ditemukan di dalam cerita ini yang terjadi pada para karakter. Untuk konflik eksternal, terdapat pada cerita tersebut bahwa konflik lebih banyak terjadi secara interpersonal dan secara kelompok. Analisis terhadap konflik eksternal focus kepada penyebab terjadinya konflik dan juga strategi mengatasi konflik. Untuk penyebab terjadinya konflik pada konflik eksternal terdapat tiga dari empat persoalan yang berbeda di cerita ini, yaitu perbedaan pendapat, pertentangan tujuan dan pertentangan peran. Dan yang tidak terdapat di cerita ini adalah keterbatasan sumber informasi. Ada juga beberapa strategi untuk mengatasi konflik ditemukan di cerita ini seperti penghindaran, kompetisi, pasifikasi dan integrasi kreatif. Strategi yang tidak terdapat di cerita ini adalah kompromi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Conflict, source, strategy</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In literature, there are literary works that can be divided into fiction, poetry, prose, essay, and drama. Between all of the literary work, drama is one of the interesting. It is because drama contains of plot that makes awareness that</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">events not merely as an element in a chronological series but also an intricate pattern of cause and effect of the conflict that occurs in the story. In other words, plot is the events. Which have cause and result in the story (Kenney, 1966:13-14).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conflict was chosen as the topic of this study because conflict is one of the important aspects in the story itself. The story itself would not be interesting without conflict, because conflict creates tension and interest in a story by adding doubt as to the outcome.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The movie that analyzed in this study was entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Green Street Hooligans </span><span class="font3">by Lexi Alexanders and Dougie Brimson. The movie is about football hooliganism in England. This movie was selected as the data source because in this movie contains points of conflicts which are not only occur on the main character, but also on the other characters and some conflicts that faced by the hooligans group that are interested to analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Related to the background above, There are three problems discussed in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kind of conflicts of the Hooligans people do occur in “Green Street Hooligans” movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the sources of those conflicts in “Green Street Hooligans” movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the strategy used to manage the conflicts in “Green Street Hooligans” movie?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In relation to the problems that have been mentioned, the aims are as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify kinds of the conflicts of the hooligans people that occur in ”Green Street Hooligans” movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the sources of those conflicts in “Green Street Hooligans” movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze and describe the strategy used to manage the conflicts in “Green Street Hooligans” movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are three points that contain in research method, those are data source, method and technique in collecting data, and method and technique in analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study was taken from movie entitled “Green Street Hooligans”. The movie was produced by Lexi Alexanders and Dougie Brimson. This movie was published by Odd Lot Entertainment on September 9<sup>th</sup> 2005. This movie was selected as the data source because in this movie contains points of conflicts which are not only occur on the main character, but also on the other characters and some conflicts that faced by the hooligans groups that are interested to analyze.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method used in collecting data was documentation method. The first step to do in collecting data was selecting the data source by watched the movie repeatedly to understand the conflicts, the source of the conflicts, and the solutions to the conflicts occur in the story. After watched the movie, the next thing to do was taking note on the conflicts, the source of the conflicts, and the solutions to the conflicts. The next step was trying to understand the point. And the last step was reading the script of the movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data of this paper was analyzed by using qualitative method. The collected data that was identified and then it classified in accordance with their type of conflict according to the theory by Gail and Myers (1992: 271). The next step was analyzing the conflict for the second time based on the source of the conflict and the conflict management strategies that are used to solve the problems related to the theory proposed by Deetz and Stvenson (1986).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis consist of kinds of conflicts such as: external and internal conflict exist in the movie which is covering analysis of source of the conflict and the strategy used to manage the conflicts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were two kinds of conflicts occurred in this story, such as external conflicts and internal conflicts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of External Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of external conflict in this study covers the interpersonal conflict and group conflict occurred on the main character, between main character and supporting character, and also between supporting character and the other supporting character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Interpersonal Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is the conflict pointing to the main character, Matt, and the secondary character, Pete, who may be pitted against some other persons. These action will bring about the violence action such as fight, argument, and physical struggle. Some of the examples are as below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(At 00.03.56 – 00.05.09)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The first example of interpersonal conflict is found in the story when Matt Buckner has a conversation with Jeremy Van Holden in their room. It is happen when Jeremy trying to give Matt some money for taking position to be blame which are probably Jeremy who is in charge for the cocaine that was found in their room.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the example, the source of the conflict that occurred between Matt Buckner and Jeremy Van Holden is </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">incompactible roles </span><span class="font3">because both of them not playing their role which is to be as the guilty one and the innocent one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this case Matt Buckner used </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">avoidance </span><span class="font3">as his management strategies to avoid the future conflict if he resist for the accusation to him. He is too afraid of Jeremy because he is one of the Van Holdens family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(At 00.14.37- 00.16.21)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The second example of external conflict is found in the story when Pete Dunham is on the way to a football match together with Matt Buckner. In one condition, Pete was ordered to take Matt with him if he wants the money from Steve. There is conversation between them which is Pete asking Matt to give him a half of money that was given from Steve. Both of them got into an argument.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The source of the conflict between Matt Buckner and Pete Dunham is </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">incompactible goal </span><span class="font3">because Matt’s intention or goal is to fulfill his promise to Steve to go to football match with Pete and not to give Pete the money that was given from him. But in other side, Pete doesn’t want to take Matt with him to watch a football match.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this case Pete Dunham used </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">pacification </span><span class="font3">as his management strategies to force Matt to give him a half of money that was given by Steve Dunham.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(At 01.36.27 – 01.38.10)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The next example of external conflict in this story found at the end of the fight between Green Street Elite against Millwall hooligans, it is happen when Pete Dunham notices that Tommy Hatcher is going to approach Shannon and her son after he see Tommy Hatcher is going to Shannon’s car when she just arrives at the place where these two groups of hooligans fight each other. Pete realize that there is nobody could stop Tommy Hatcher while in the middle of these hooligans fight. With all wounds and bloods on his body, Pete Dunham decides to save Shannon and her son from Tommy Hatcher and his friend who is trying to hurt her. He sacrifice himself by taunting Tommy Hatcher in purpose to stop him from getting Shannon and her son.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Incompactible goals </span><span class="font3">become the source of the conflict between Pete Dunham and Tommy Hatcher because in this conflict there are a different goals from each of them which is Pete Dunham notices that Tommy Hatcher is looking to avenge his son’s death by hurting Steve’s family or maybe taking their lifes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the example, in this conflict Pete using </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">creative integration </span><span class="font3">as the conflict management strategy by taunting Tommy Hatcher in order to stop him walking to hurt Shannon and her son.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Group Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is the conflict pointing to a group of hooligans which in this movie called Green Street Elite, who may be pitted against some other group of hooligans. The example of group conflict is as below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(At 00.00.45 - 00.02.28)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">It can be seen from the beginning of the story that started on the night at the train station in London when Pete and his friends are playing with rubbish that are interrupted by some of Totenham fans. They begin by humiliating each other about the previous football match of West Ham United against Totenham Hotspurs that was held a moment ago. All of them becomes fired up and causes a brutal fight on that night.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conflict that occurred between West Ham United fans and Totenham Hotspurs fans mean that </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">different opinion </span><span class="font3">became the source of the conflict between West Ham fans and Totenham fans because both of these groups trying to maintain their football club reputation from the insults of their opponent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this case both of these hooligans used </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">competition </span><span class="font3">as their conflict management strategy for this conflict because both of these group are stand still to their opinions fighting for which team is better.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of internal Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The analysis of internal conflict in this study covers the personal conflict occurred on the main character and the supporting character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5.2.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Personal Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is the conflict pointing to the main character, Matt, and the supporting character, Bovver. Those example in this movie are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(At 00.31.14 – 00.33.05)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The first example of personal conflict is happen when Matt face his first fight against a group of Zulu hooligans.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this scene, internal conflict happened on Matt Buckner when he get involved into a fight between the GSE hooligans against Zulu hooligans. At the first time, Matt get afraid of facing 20 hooligans to fight against, and in his side are just 7 men which are Pete, Dave, Ike, Swill, Ned, Keith and himself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">To overcome Matt’s conflict, the conflict management strategy that used in this conflict is </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">creative integration</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Base on the analysis of conflict between hooligan people in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Green Street Hooligans</span><span class="font3"> movie, there are elements of external and internal conflicts found in the story that occurred on Matt Buckner, Pete Dunham and Bovver as the characters in this story. The analysis on the external conflict focused on the source of the conflict and also conflict management strategy. For the source of the external conflicts there are three of four different issues found in the story. The three issues for the sources of the conflicts that are found in the story are different opinion, incompatible roles and incompatible goals. The issue that is not found in this story is limited resources. As to overcome the conflict, there must be strategies uses to manage the conflicts. Therefore, there are also some of conflict management strategies found in the story such as avoidance, pacification, competition and creative integration. But in addition, there was one strategy that is not found in the story is compromise. From conflict analysis above, it can be concluded that is a natural phenomenon that usually become a part of a communication relationship. Hooligans usually face some of these conflicts. It is usually happen as the outcome of their unruly, violent and destructive behaviour. Conflict management is needed to resolve their conflict whether it is right or wrong. The outcome of conflict may be functional or dysfunctional depending on how they use the conflict management strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Alexander, Lexi. 2005. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Green Street Hooligans</span><span class="font3">. California: Odd Lot Entertaintment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anonymous, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Green Street Hooligans Script – Dialogue Transcript</span><span class="font3">. Drew’s Script-O-Rama. Resources: </span><a href="http://www.script-o-rama.com"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.script-o-rama.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Deetz, Stanley A. &amp;&nbsp;Sherly L. Stvenson. 1986. Managing Interpersonal Communication. New York: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How To Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font3">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Myers, Gail E. &amp;&nbsp;Michele F. Myers. 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Laboratory Approach</span><span class="font3">. Singapore: McGrowHill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Robbins, Stephen P. 1979. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Organizational Behavior Concepts and Controversies</span><span class="font3">. New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">43</span></p>