---
layout: full_article
title: "Categorized Functions and Psychological Aspects of The Main Character in the movie “The Princess Bride”"
author: "I Putu Hery Gunawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 19.1 Mei 2017: 284-296</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Categorized Functions and Psychological Aspects of The Main Character in the movie “The Princess Bride”</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Putu Hery Gunawan<sup>1</sup>*, I Nyoman Udayana<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department – Faculty Of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[</span><a href="mailto:gunawanhery77@gmail.com"><span class="font1">gunawanhery77@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nyomanudayana@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">nyomanudayana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">*</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul Categorized Functions and Psychological Aspects of The Main Character in the movie “The Princess Bride” oleh William Goldman adalah situasi di mana ada dua ide, pendapat, perasaan atau keinginan yang menentang. Film Princess Bride adalah film romantis yang ditulis oleh William Goldman, dan diterbitkan pada 25 September 1987. Cerita ini tentang sebuah kisah seorang wanita muda cantik bernama Buttercup yang tinggal di pedesaan Florin. Dia jatuh cinta dengan anak petani bernama Westley, yang sangat dia cintai. Westley hanya bisa mengekspresikan cintanya ke Buttercup dengan menjawab semua permintaannya dengan menjawab, “Seperti yang Anda inginkan.”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini memfokuskan pada fungsi dikategori karakter, dan disajikan dalam hal karakter utama dari film melalui aspek psikologis. Fungsi dikategori karakter yang dianalisis berdasarkan teori sastra yang diusulkan oleh Wellek dan Warren (1995: 227) yang terbagi menjadi dua jenis, yaitu dinamis atau statis dan karakter antagonis atau protagonis . Deskripsi disajikan dalam karakter utama dan dianalisis berdasarkan teori yang diusulkan oleh Bernhardt (1953) yang membagi aspek psikologis dalamapa yang diinginkan, emosi, dan perasaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kesimpulan dari analisis ini adalah, Karakter dalam film ini dikategorikan sebagai berikut: karakter utama adalah Buttercup (statis, protagonis karakter), karakter kedua adalah Westley (statis, protagonis karakter), dan karakter pendukung Humperdinck (statis, antagonis karakter), Fezzik (statis, protagonis karakter), Inigo (statis, protagonis karakter), dan Vizzini (statis, antagonis karakter) analisis ini membawa beberapa kesimpulan. Buttercup adalah tokoh utama dalam cerita, dia adalah seorang gadis yang mencintai Westley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: karakter, karakter utama, analisis psikologis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Character as one of the main elements in fiction is really important. A character is obviously relevant to us and to our experience if they are like ourselves or like others whom we know. It is properly understood as one form of the relevance. A character is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">being relevant if there are a lot of people like him in the real word. Human being is free but the fictional character is never entirely free because it is part of an artistic whole and must always serve the needs of that whole. A really free character would be free of his duty to the story of which he is a part and a story, which admitted such freedom, could never achieve unity (Kenny, 1966:24).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To analyse a literary work is to identify the separate parts that make it up, to determine the relationship among the parts, and to discover the relation of the parts to the whole. Character is one important aspect because it carries the author’s message that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education and many others (Kenny, 1966:5).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The study was focused on the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride.</span><span class="font1"> It is a 1987 American romantic fantasy adventure comedy film, particularly on categorized functions of the characters. The reason to analyze categorized functions of the characters in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">script</span><span class="font1"> is that the movie was very interesting and could build such atmosphere that tends to affect the emotion and feeling of the reader. This type of movie was comedy, adventure, and fantasy movie which was written by William Goldman. This movie told a girl named Buttercup who loved the farm boy named Westley.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background above, the problems of the study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What categorized functions of the characters are found in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the main character presented in terms of psychological aspects in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out what are the categorized of the characters in this movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the psychological aspects of the main character in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this study were taken from the movie entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride </span><span class="font1">which is a 1987 American romantic fantasy adventure comedy film directed and coproduced by Rob Reiner, Adapted by William Goldman from his 1973 novel of the same name. Released in the United States on September 25 1987,the film is number 50 on Bravo’s &quot;100 Funniest Movies&quot;, number 88 on The American Film Institute’s (AFI) &quot;AFI’s 100 Years…100 Passions&quot; list of the 100 greatest film love stories, and 46 in Channel 4's 50 Greatest Comedy Films list.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research data were taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride</span><span class="font1"> movie, that is a 1987 American romantic fantasy adventure comedy film which was directed and co-produced by Rob Reiner, Adapted by William Goldman</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> All the data were collected descriptively, reading the script of the movie repeatedly, understanding the content of the movie. The next step was taking notes of the part of the movie script that gives information about the characters, and the data were analysed carefully.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were analysed using the qualitative method based on the theoretical framework. The analysis started with the overview of the biography of William Goldman and that was followed by the synopsis of the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Princess Bride</span><span class="font1">. Afterwards, the category and functions of the characters were analysed using the theory from Wellek and Warren (1995: 227), Description of psychological aspects was analyzed based on the theory of Bernhardt (1953).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Categorized functions found in the movie “The Princess Bride” A. Buttercup</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first content which shows that Buttercup was a static character is, when Buttercup and the Man In Black were running to the top of the hill and Buttercup said “I know who you are, you are Dread Pirate Robert, Dread Pirate Robert is cruel”. Buttercup thought Westley who she loved so much but he had been killed by the Dread Pirate Robert and Buttercup could not keep her own anger in mind. Dread Pirate Robert said “yes maybe, I have killed a lot of people from the ugly, rich, and scabby”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup convinced someone that she was referring to a farm boy poor with perfect eyes like the sea after a storm. It can be seen from (00.36.25.) the conversation below: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Grassy Hilltop, alongside a gully</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He stops and seats her on another rock.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dread Pirate Roberts : Faithfulness he talked of, Madame, your enduring faithfulness. Now tell me truly, when you found out he was gone, did you get engaged to your prince at the same hour, or did you wait a whole week out of respect for the dead?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You mocked me once. Never do it again! I died that day!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pause, quieter</span><span class="font1">. And you can die too for all I care!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup pushes Roberts down the hill</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dread Pirate Roberts : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling</span><span class="font1">. As... you... wish!!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh my sweet Westley, what have I done?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup jumps down the hill, rolling after him. Various grunts and groans are heard as they roll.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After Buttercup pushed down Dread Pirate Robert and he rolled from the top of the hill, Dread Pirate Robert said, &quot;As you wish&quot; and Buttercup knew that was Westley and she jumped down herself from the hill.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Protagonist Character</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The first content shows that Buttercup is protagonist character is when Buttercup was dreaming at night that she was married with Humperdinck when she came out of the palace everyone bows, unless someone's grandmother and grandmother said Westley certainly will come and pick you wherever you are and your true love is Westley. When she woke up she went to Humperdinck’s office and said “Westley will come for me, I love Westley. And he'll come for me, give me 10 days if he does not come I will kill myself in the morning”. It can be seen (00.53.50.) in this conversation it can be seen that Buttercup willingly offers herself only for Westley, and Westley will definitely come for me. In the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Humperdinck's Office</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup enters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: It comes to this. I love Westley. I always have. I know now I</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">always will. If you tell me I must marry you in ten days, please believe I will be dead by morning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : I could never cause you grief. Consider our wedding off. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">To</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rugen while rising.</span><span class="font1"> You, uh, returned this Westley to his ship?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Count Rugen : Yes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : Then we will simply alert him. Beloved, are you certain he still wants you? After all, it was you who did the leaving in the fire</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">swamp. Not to mention that,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">uh, pirates are not known to be men of their words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: My Westley will always come for me.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Westley</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Westley is a static character can be seen at (00.02.47). When Westley was in the farmed house, in there he spent the whole day together with Buttercup and Westley felt very happy because he can always help Buttercup for polish his horse’s saddle, fill the buckets with water, fetch Buttercup the pitcher, Westley always answered Buttercup’s requests with “As you wish”. As you wish is a word which he always said to Buttercup when she asked for help, because Buttercup wanted Westley to be always there for her. In the conversation below: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Farmhouse</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandfather : &quot;'As you wish' was all he ever said to her.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Farm boy, Sets down buckets near Westley. fill these with</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">water... please.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: As you wish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandfather : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup walks away from him.</span><span class="font1"> &quot;That day she was amazed to discover that when he was saying 'As you wish', what he meant was, 'I love you.' </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Segue to Interior Farmhouse. Westley enters with firewood.</span><span class="font1"> And even more amazing was the day she realized she truly loved him back.&quot; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Westley sets the wood down and begins to exit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Farm boy! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He pauses and turns in the doorway</span><span class="font1">. Fetch me that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">pitcher.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Protagonist Character</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The first content to show Westley is a protagonist character can be seen (01.24.35) when Buttercup in his room and Westley also exists there but Buttercup was not aware of it, when Buttercup wanted to commit suicide because she has promised to Humperdinck if Westley within 10 days did not come she would commit suicide, and after ten days Westley had not come, finally Buttercup took a knife and put the tip to her chest, but Westley intervened. Immediately Buttercup was shocked because she did not think thatWestley was in her room and Westley said “I will come for you”. In the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Honeymoon suite</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup enters and sits. She removes a dagger from a wooden box and places the tip of it to her chest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lying on bed.</span><span class="font1"> There's a shortage of perfect breasts in this world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">'Would be a pity to damage yours.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup : Westley! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">She runs over.</span><span class="font1"> Oh, Westley darling! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kissing him.</span><span class="font1"> Westley, why won't you hold me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley : Gently.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup : At a time like this, that's all you can think to say, &quot;gently&quot;?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;: Gently! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup lets go of his head which slams into the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">headboard.</span><span class="font1">Unh!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And finally Buttercup felt happy because Westley had arrived to rescue Buttercup on time and they hugged and kissed on bed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Humperdinck</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Humperdinck is static character as can be seen from (00:48:52) when Humperdinck and his soldiers found Wesltey and Buttercup while they were in the fire swamp. Humperdinck asked Westley to surrender, but Westley did not want to surrender and Humperdinck sends his soldiers with crossbows to kill Westley, but all were thwarted by Buttercup because Buttercup did not want to lose Westley a second time. She was willing to submit himself to Humperdinck because she believed that Westley certainly would eventually come for her as in the conversation below: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Outside the Fire Swamp, in a lightly wooded area </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">They walk out holding hands.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : I tell you once again, surrender! </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Buttercup notices the soldiers with crossbows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: It will not happen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : For the last time, surrender!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Death first!!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Will you promise not to hurt him?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : What was that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: What was that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: If we surrender and I return with you, will you promise not to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">hurt this man?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Antagonist Character</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This can be seen in the previews about Humperdinck as a static character. A part of Humperdinck is a static character but he becomes an antagonist too. When he wanted to get Buttercup by torturing Westley it can be seen at (01:05:59) when Buttercup said “Westley will come for me because there is nothing separating our love”. And at that time Humperdinck approached Westley and directly takes control of The Machine, and puts it to the highest setting to 50, as can be seen in the following conversation: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Pit of Despair</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Humperdinck runs in and leans over Westley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck : You truly love each other, and so you might have been truly happy. Not one couple in a century has that chance, no matter what the storybooks say. So I think no man in a century will suffer as greatly as you will. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Takes the control of The Machine, and puts it to the highestsetting</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inigo</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Inigo is a static character as can be seen (01.07.15) when they arrived at Outside entrance to Pit of Despair they met someone named Albino and Inigo asked where the man in black was, but Albino did not answer and Fezzik hit her Albino’s head, as can be seen from the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Outside entrance to Pit of Despair</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The two have stopped the Albino, who is pushing a wheelbarrow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fezzik : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bonks Albino and leaves him out cold.</span><span class="font1"> I'm sorry, Inigo. I didn't mean to jog him so hard. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inigo is kneeling with his sword drawn.</span><span class="font1"> Inigo?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo : Father, I have failed you for twenty years. Now our misery can end. Somewhere, somewhere close by, is a man who can help us. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Closes eyes.</span><span class="font1">I cannot find him alone. I need you. I need you to guide my sword. Please. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He stands.</span><span class="font1"> Guide my sword. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He stumbles around, led by the sword. The sword hits a tree.He leans against the tree, pressing the hidden knot and he door swings open. They enter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the conversation above, Inigo asked his father to help him find the Man In</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Black, because Inigo knew that he could not find a Man In Black himself and Inigo wanted her father to guide his sword.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Protagonist Character</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Inigo is a protagonist character in this movie, it can be seen (00.17.28) when Inigo and Fezzik were on the cliff, Inigo knew there was someone which had followed them, and that person was a Man in Black. Because it was such a long time waiting for the Man in Black to reach the top of the cliff, Inigo helped the Man in Black by assisting him with a rope to reach the cliff safely as in the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: At the top</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Man In Black : If you're in such a hurry, you could lower a rope or a tree branch or find something useful to do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I could do that. I've got some rope up here, but I do not think you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">would accept my help, since I am only waiting around to kill you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Man In Black : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nods.</span><span class="font1"> That does put a damper on our relationship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: But, I promise I will not kill you until you reach the top.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Man In Black : That's very comforting, but I'm afraid you'll just have to wait.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">E. Fezzik</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Fezzik is a static character when he helped Inigo from Assistant Bruce and Fezzik hit him until he became unconscious. It can be seen (1:01:00) at the time when Inigo whom was drunk when Fezzik took him to a small cabin. And there Fezzik fed Inigo and submerged his head until he was well. It can be seen in the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Inside a small cabin</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fezzik is feeding Inigo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandfather : &quot;Fezzik and Inigo were reunited. And as Fezzik nursed his inebriated friend back to health, he told Inigo of Vizzini's death and the existence of Count Rugen, the six fingered man. Considering Inigo's lifelong search, he handled the news surprisingly well.&quot; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inigo falls head first into a bowl of food.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandfather : &quot;Fezzik took great care in reviving Inigo.&quot; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fezzik dunks Inigo's head into two buckets in turn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pulling away from Fezzik and the tubs of water.</span><span class="font1"> That's enough!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">That's enough! Where is this Rugen now, so I may kill him?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Protagonist Character</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Fezzik as a protagonist character is when Fezzik helped Inigo and Westley into the palace. As there were 30 soldiers who kept guard in front of the palace. He transformed into a huge man with a scary voice and he inflamed himself looking like a demon; it can be seen at (1:19:35) that all at once the guards ran scared but there was only one doorman who still survived that was Yellin. Yellin was trying to close the doors quickly but Fezzik stopped him and he tore Yellin’s sleeves while asking for the key. Because Yellin felt scared he gave the key to Fezzik. It can be seen in the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Outside the castle gate</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fezzik &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: The Dread Pirate Roberts is here for your souls!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yellin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Stay where you are! Fight! Stay where you are!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inigo drags Westley to Yellin, standing in front of the door.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Give us the gate key.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yellin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I have no gate key.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Fezzik, tear his arms off.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yellin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh, you mean this gate key. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Removes the gate key from his vest</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">and hands it to them.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>F. Vizzini</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The first content that shows Vizzini is the static character as can be seen on (00.33.10), when Vizzini and Buttercup were in an open area, then Man In Black came to save Buttercup but Vizzini did not want to give up Buttercup easily. Then Man In Black challenged Vizzini to battle of wits. Vizzini poured the wine into the glass while Man In Black was taking poison in his shirt and gave it to Vizzini to smell it but he did not smell anything. It was because the Locane powder poison were odorless, tasteless, dissolves instantly in liquid, and was among the more deadly poisons known to man. Then Man In Black took the glass and turned back his body and he put poison in that glass. Then he put the glass in front of each. Then they battle of the wits had been begun. After that, Vizzini gestured up and stayed away from the table. When the Man In Black looked back at Vizzini while he was switching the glass, he thought that the poison was in his glass. Then Vizzini asked Man In Black to drink it, after that Vizzini laughed because he had switched the glass when Man In Black looked back. In fact, the Man In Black refused it because the poison was in his glass and Vizzini laughed, stopped suddenly, and fell dead. It also can be explained in the conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Open area</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vizzini &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I will, and I choose-- What in the world can that be?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Vizzini gestures up and away from the table. The Man In Black looks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Man In Black : What? Where? </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Vizzini switches the goblets. Turning back.</span><span class="font1"> I don't see anything.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vizzini &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Well, I- I could have sworn I saw something. No matter. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Smirks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Man In Black : What's so funny?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vizzini &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I'll tell you in a minute. First, let's drink. Me from my glass,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Picks up glass.</span><span class="font1"> and you from yours. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">They drink.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Antagonist Character</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Vizzini can be classified as an antagonist character as can be seen in (00:08:10) When he and his friends were at the top of the cliff to carry off Buttercup. When he climbed on top of him to see that there is someone following that is the Man In Black. After they arrived at the top Vizzini immediately decided to cut the rope because he was afraid the Man in Black to know his where abouts. It also can explain by conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: At the top</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Once at the top, Inigo helps Buttercup and Vizzini. Vizzini saws at the rope with his dagger. Fezzik and Inigo are looking down at the masked man clinging to the cliff after Vizzini has cut the rope.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo : You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">means. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pause, hushed.</span><span class="font1"> My God! He's climbing!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vizzini: Whoever he is, he's obviously seen us with the princess and must therefore die. You, carry her. We'll head straight for the Guilder frontier. Catch up when he's dead. If he falls, fine. If not, the sword.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Inigo : I'm going to duel him left-handed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The main character presented in terms of psychological aspects in the movie “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Princess Bride”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>A. Want</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The first want of Buttercup in this movie script could be seen in the following quotation in which she wanted Wesley to always be there to help her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following (00.02.47) is the quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Farmhouse</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buttercup : Farm Boy, polish my horse's saddle. I want to see my face shining in it by morning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: As you wish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Grandfather &nbsp;&nbsp;: &quot;'As you wish' was all he ever said to her.&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Farm boy, Sets down buckets near Westley. fill these with</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">water... please.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Westley &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: As you wish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Farm boy! He pauses and turns in the doorway. Fetch me that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pitcher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When they were in a farm house, they lived and spent the time together during the day. At the time, Buttercup came and approached Westley. She asked Westley to clean up his horse saddle, set down buckets and fills these with water, fetch me that pitcher. And Westley always replied &quot;as you wish&quot;. “As you wish” is a word which he always said to Buttercup when she asked for help, because Buttercup wanted Westley always to be there for her. Buttercup did not want Westley to stay away from her because she loved him so much. She also wanted to be spoiled by Westley. After that, Buttercup left Westley by smiling happily.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emotion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first emotion of Buttercup can be showed in the story where she was willing to wait for Westley. She did not care whatever would happened to her at that moment. She only thought about Westley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following (01.17.40) quotation is as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Buttercup's room</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Humperdinck fastens Buttercup's necklace.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buttercup</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Humperdinck</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buttercup</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">: You don't seem excited, my little muffet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Should I be?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: Brides often are, I'm told.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: I do not marry tonight. My Westley will save me. She leaves. He smiles and follows her</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When the wedding would bega, Humperdinck tied a necklace on the Buttercup’s neck. Humperdinck thought that Buttercup seemed like did not have any spirit for the marriage this night. Buttercup seemed very anxious because she wished that Westley would come to cancel the wedding, and Buttercup would not hurt Westley if he knew that she and Westley had been married. Buttercup was sure that Westley certainly would come tonight because they have a bond.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feeling</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first feeling of Buttercup is when she knew that Westley was dead but she still adored how perfect he was with all his weaknesses that he had.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following (00.36.57) quotation:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Scene: Grassy Hilltop, alongside a gully</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">He stops and seats her on another rock</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Buttercup &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No. A farm boy. Poor. Poor and perfect. With eyes like</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">the sea after a storm. Pause. On the high seas, your ship attacked. And the Dread Pirate Roberts never takes prisoners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above tells that when Buttercup with Dread Pirate Robert was on grassy hilltop and she knew the one who had killed Westley was the Dread Pirate Robert. She felt resentment to the Dread Pirate Robert who had killed his love. On his past, Dread Pirate Robert used to kill many people. He asked what her love was like, she explained that the person she loved was a farm boy, poor and perfect with eyes like a sea after a storm. Even though he had his weaknesses but Buttercup still loved him</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">forever, even Westley had been dead she kept praising him and always thinking about him wherever he was.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the analysis in the previous chapters, there were several points that could be concluded as the conclusion of this study. There are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The categorized functions from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Princess Bride</span><span class="font1"> are the main character Buttercup who is a static protagonist character. Secondary character is Westley who is a static protagonist character. Supporting characters are Humperdinck who is static antagonist character, Inigo who is static protagonist character, Fezzik is static protagonist character and Vizzini is static antagonist character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of psychological aspects of the main character is divided into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">want, emotion, and feeling</span><span class="font1">. The want of the main character is described by the narrator of this story which mostly about the fact that she wants to sacrifice Westley that she loved her so much. The emotion in human being is reflected in the main character of the story in The Princess Bride which is reflected through Buttercup attitude. And the feelings of the main character in this fictional story are mostly about her relationship with Westley and Humperdinck.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font1"> Toronto: McGraw – Hill Book Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dwikayana, Kadek (2006).</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of the Main Character of Earnest Hemingway’s “The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Old man and The Sea”.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar. Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Griffith, Kelley. 2006. Writing Essays About Literature. Wadsworth Publishing; 8 Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jones, Edward H, Jr. 1968. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Outline of Literature: Short Stories, Novels, and Poems</span><span class="font1">, New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The MacMillan Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font1">. New York. Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mertadana, I Made Meyge (2006).</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of Main Character of Lord of the ring fellowship of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the ring by J.R.R Tolkien.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar. Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner.Kathlyn and Rausch.Ralph. 1991. NTC’s Dictionary of Literature Terms, McGraw-Hill</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nechifor, Ruxandra.2013:3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Character Analysis Methods</span><span class="font1">. International journal of communication</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Research</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Roucek &amp;&nbsp;Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology an Introduction</span><span class="font1">. New Jersey: Littlefield, ADAMS &amp;&nbsp;CO.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stanford, Judith. 2006. Responding to Literature: Stories, Poems, Plays, and Essays. McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social Sciences/Language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudjiman.Panuti. 1987. MemahamiCeritaRekaan. Indonesia. Pustaka Jaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sukada, I Made.1987.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar:Kayumas&amp;Yayasan Ilmu dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seni Lesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek,Rene. 1955. A History of Modern Criticism: 1750-1950: English Criticism, 1900-1950.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yale University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harcout, Brace and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">World, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1973. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: &nbsp;lowe &amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brydone Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. London: lowe &amp;&nbsp;Brydon ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiguna, Ida Bagus Jaya (2006). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Main Character in John Grisham’s the Client</span><span class="font1">.Denpasar. Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ThePrincessBridemoviescript"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ThePrincessBridemoviescript</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">296</span></p>