---
layout: full_article
title: "forewords"
author: "forewords forewords"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-13306 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-13306"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-13306"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Foreword</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">International Journal of Bioscience and Biotechnology (IJBB) previously published by Udayana University Bioscience and Biotechnology Forum. Based on the committee meeting in the 5<sup>th</sup> ICBB (International Conference of Bioscience and Biotechnology) that held on 19-20 September 2014 the journal will be managed by Asia-Oceania Bioscience and Biotechnology Consortium that was established since that meeting. The consortium was established by the committee that consist of scientists from Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia, Japan, Korea, India, and Timor Leste.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The IJBB published twice per year that is on April and September. We invite submission of manuscripts from the region of Asia and Oceania and other region of the world. We also conduct an International Conference on Bioscience and Biotechnology every year on September in Udayana University, Bali, Indonesia as the secretariat of the consortium and the journal and possibly conducted somewhere depend on the decision of the committee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">We thank you very much for the understanding of the change of the management and kind participation for the conference and submission of the manuscripts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chief Editor</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Prof. I Gede Putu Wirawan, Ph.D</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ASIA OCEANIA BIOSCIENCES AND BIOTECHNOLOGY CONSORTIUM • </span><span class="font2">iv</span></p>