---
layout: full_article
title: "IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS AND THEIR TRANSLATION PROCEDURES"
author: "Anak Agung Anom Dessy Astriani"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS AND THEIR TRANSLATION PROCEDURES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. A. ANOM DESSY ASTRIANI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Inggris merupakan bahasa internasional yang hampir digunakan diseluruh dunia. Banyak karya sastra inggris yang diterbitkan dimana-mana, terutama novel. Tentunya di dalam sebuah novel mengandung idiomatic expression. Karya tersebut akan diterjemahkan oleh penerjemah guna membantu pembaca yang kurang mengerti bahasa inggris. Dengan adanya translation procedures, penerjemah akan lebih mudah untuk menerjemah sebuah novel.sehingga membantu mengurangi kesalahan terjemahan dalam penerjemahan dan menjaga arti sebuah kalimat yang diinginkan oleh bahasa sumber. Makalah ini akan menjelaskan jenis-jenis idiomatic expressions dan penggunaan translation procedures untuk menerjemahkan sebuah novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: idiomatic expressions, translation procedures</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As we all know, there are many languages in the world where each language has differences from the others. Translation consists of transferring without distortion the meaning of the source language into the target language, meaning which must be kept constant, even when the form of the source language changes as it is turned into the form of the target language (Larson ,1998:181). Translation is basically change of form. When we speak of the form of a language, we are referring to the actual words, phrases, clauses, sentences, etc. A good translation not only transports the sense but also the choice of words and the way of expressing. Especially for translations of high standing literature the translator should be home in both languages. Translation is difficult due to the two different linguistic systems and cultures but, by the translation techniques, we can translate novel or book properly.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of idiomatic expressions were applied in Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What translation procedures were implemented in transferring the idiomatic expressions Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify and describe the types of idiomatic expression were applied in Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the translation procedures implemented in transferring the idiomatic expressions in Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data was taken from Sidney Sheldon’s novel entitled “Tell Me Your Dreams” which was translated into Bahasa Indonesia entitled “Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu” by Listiana Srisanti.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The methods used in collected the data in this writing was documentation method. There were three forms of data: reading, note taking, listing, and comparing. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The methods used in analyzing data were qualitative. The data was identified and classified into their types of idioms based on Seidl and McMordie in the book entitled English Idioms and How to Use Them (1980). Then the data was descriptively analyzed with translation procedures proposed by Vinay and Drabelnet in the book entitled A Methodology for Translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Idiomatic Expression and Their Translation Procedures in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“Tell Me Your Dreams” and in “Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Idiomatic Expressions were Applied in Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There were seven types of idiomatic expressions found in Sheldon’s novel “Tell Me Your Dreams” and in “Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Particular words with special idiomatic uses</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: “The newspapers are going to have a good time with this one, Sam. I can see the headline now—MANIAC STRICKES SILICON VALLEY.” Sheriff Dowling sighed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Sheldon, 1999: 65)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Koran-koran akan berpesta dengan Koran ini. Aku sudah bisa membayangkan judulnya—MANIAK MENYERANG SILICON VALLEY.” Seriff Dowling menghela nafas (Srisanti, 2009: 82)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of idiomatic expression of a good time belongs to adjective with special idiomatic uses. Good is adjective and time is special idiomatic uses. Because time refers to does something or opportunity. Have a good time means to do something fun but, in Indonesia it becomes berpesta, a good time in literary means waktu yang bagus, the sentence “Koran-koran akan waktu yang bagus dengan Koran ini, Sam” is awkward. To make it equivalences and links to the SL text, the translator used berpesta to trigger the meaning of the sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms with Adjectives and Nouns in Combination</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: Ashley was a stick-in-the mood who liked to stay home at night and read a book or watch the History Channel or CNN (1999: 26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Ashley orang kuper yang senang tinggal dirumah malam hari dengan membaca buku atau menonton History Chanel atau CNN.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of expression of stick-in-the mud is compound adjective, translated idiomatically into kuper. Hyphenated compound adjective can be formed when there is a verb preceding a preposition. In this case, the verb “stick” preceding a preposition “in” and followed by the noun phrase “the mud”. Stick-in-the mud means a person</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">who cannot make some fun, stylist, or easy going. The equivalence in Indonesia is kuper, and it means antisocial.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verb with Prepositions and Adverbial Particle</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: “It’s gotten worse lately. She’s scared because afraid to die and she’s afraid I’ll leave her. All the yelling is cover-up to hide that fear” (1990: 107)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Belakangan ini keadaannya memburuk. Dia ketakutan karena dia takut mati dan takut saya akan meninggalkannya. Teriakan-teriakan itu cuma tameng untuk menyembunyikan ketakutannya” (2009:128)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the sentence above the idiom cover up by dictionary means hide something. Which in Indonesia means menyembunyikan sesuatu. In translating ancidiom a translator must be able to develop a sensitivity the use of an idiom and use them naturally in the TL. It means that the translation is presented in such away that it can derived the same response from the source text into the target text. From the comparison between the idiom in SL and its translation, the translator discovers the equivalent of the SL. In this case cover-up is translated into tameng. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.4 Idioms from Special Situation and Categories</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: A nice hot bath, Ashley thought. She walk into the bathroom and turn dead white. On her bathroom mirror, someone has scrawled in bright red lipstick YOU WILL DIE (Sheldon, 1999: 101).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Mandi air panas, pikir Ashley. Ia berjalan masuk kamar mandi, dan langsung pucat pasi. Di cermin kamar mandinya ada yang telah menulis besar-besar dengan lipstik merah cerah KAU AKAN MATI (Srisanti, 2009: 122).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The expression is belonging to idioms with special categories of color (white). From the comparison between the idiom in SL and its equivalent, it can be seen how the translator discover the equivalent of the TL text. If it translated literary, the word dead means mati and white means putih. It would be putih mati. But it is not common in Indonesian. Dead white is translated into pucat pasi, which is in English means deathly pale.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms of Comparison</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: When the session was over, Keith Rosson walked in Sam Blake’s office and handed him the polygraph test “clean as a whistle. There’s a less than percent chance that she’s lying. You have got the wrong perso.” (Sheldon, 1999: 100)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Setelah sesi itu selesai, Keith Rosson masuk ke kantor Same Blake dan menyerahakan hasil tes poligraf. “Bersih total. Kemungkinan dia bohong kurang dari satu persen. Kau menangkap orang yang salah.” (Srisanti, 2009: 121).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Clean as a whistle translated literary would be: bersih seperti peluit, but the comparison between the idiom in SL and its equivalent, it can be seen how the translator discover the equivalent of the SL text. Clean as a whistle means very clean. That similar with the idea of the writer in SL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbal Idioms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: David and Ashley watched as the jurors filed in and took their seats in the jury box. Ashley was stone face. David found that he was perspiring. (Sheldon, 1999: 269).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: David dan Ashley memandang para juri yang berjalan masuk dan duduk di kursi mereka di kotak juri. wajah Ashley beku tanpa ekspresi. David sendiri berkeringat dingin. (Srisanti, 2009: 312)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translator discovers the equivalence of the SL text that was stone face is translated into beku tanpa ekspresi. This translation can derived the same response from the source text into the TL text. If the translator just translated into Ashley adalah muka batu. It sounds awkward. It seems that Ashley has face like stone, hard and ugly. There is Ashley beku tanpa ekspresi as the proper translation of the Ashley was stone face. Stone face means without expressions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idioms with Different Forms and Structures</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: And Toni would sing it again and again, under her breath. That had been long ago, but the memory of defying her mother still gave her a glow.(Sheldon, 1999: 17).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Dan Toni akan terus menyanyikannya, dengan berbisik. Kejadian itu sudah lama sekali, tetapi kalau ingat bagaimana ia membuat ibunya jengkel, ia masih berseri-seri. (Srisanti, 2009: 27).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This expression belongs to idiom in regular form with unclear meaning. In Indonesian, under means di bawah and breath means nafas. If it translated Toni akan terus menyanyikannya, di bawah nafasnya, it would be meaningless and make the reader confused about the real meaning. Under the breath by dictionary means to say something quietly so as not to be heard (Hornby, 1995: 136), which in Indonesian means berbisik. Therefore the translator translated it into: Toni akan terus menyanyikannya, dengan berbisik.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation Procedures were Implemented in Transferring the Idiomatic</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Expressions Tell Me Your Dreams and Their Translation in Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu Based on Vinay and Darbelnet (2000), there were 7 translation technique: Direct Translation as Source Language Orientation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Borrowing</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Borrowing means a word takes directly from another language, e.g., the English word has been incorporated directly into Bahasa Indonesia. Analysis: SL: “I don’t know anything about that. Maybe you’ve been framed. Maybe some fiend got hold of it.” “objection! It’s argumentative.” (Sheldon, 1999: 258)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Saya tidak tahu-menahu soal itu. Mungin anda dijebak. Mungkin ada setan yang mengambilnya” “keberatan!Itu argumentative.”(Srisanti, 2009: 300)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this example, fiend means a murderer, but they called fiend because she killed three men in horrible way. It translated into setan, setan in Indonesia means a devil ghost. The translator used fiend to imagine how cruel she is. The translation procedure used in this idiomatic expression is culture borrowing. In every culture, there are different terms of devil but they have the same meaning </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2 Calque</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Calque is a special kind of borrowing whereby a language borrows an expression from of another, but then translates literally each of its elements. Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: “Toni, I want to help you”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“No, you don’t, Dockie baby. You want to lay me” (Sheldon, 1999: 298)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Toni, aku ingin membantumu.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Tidak, kau tidak ingin membantu, Dockie baby. Kau Cuma ingin menuduriku (Srisanti, 2009, 340)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dockie means nick name of doctor. Dockie baby is a call for fool doctor who trying talk with the patient. The words Dockie baby in SL translated into TL become Dockie baby. The translator used calque as a translation procedure. Because there is kind of borrowing and translated literally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal translation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Literal, or word for word, translation is the direct transfer of a SL text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate TL text in the which the translator’s task is limited to observing the adherence to the linguistic servitudes of the TL. It is most common when translating between two languages of the same family or close to each other (English and Bahasa Indonesia). Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: Shove it where the sun don’t shine. (Sheldon, 1999: 285)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Simpan di tempat matahari tidak bersinar (Srisanti, 2009: 331)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oblique Translation as Target Language Orientation</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transposition</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Transposition is replacing one word class with another without changing the meaning of the message and adjustment or shift in the composition of categories and units lingual word. Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: “I’ll have the papers drawn up. When you sign, we’ll require another sixty thousand dollars. Your bank can work out a schedule of monthly payments on twenty or thirty-year mortgage.” (Sheldon, 1999: 121).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Saya akan menyiapkan surat-suratnya. Pada saat anda menandatanganinya, kami mengharap anda membayar 60.000 dolar lagi. Bank atau anda bisa mengatur cicilan bulanan selama dua atau tiga puluh tahun untuk sisanya.” (Srisanti, 2009: 143).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the sentence above. It belongs to transposition. There is a change from phrase into word. Drawn up is a phrase and menyiapkan is a word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Modulation is a variation of the form of the message, obtained by a change in the point of view. This change can be justified when, although a literal, or even transposed, translation result in a grammatically correct utterance, it is considered unsuitable, unidiomatic in, Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: David stood there looking at her, and the room was swimming. He wants to tell</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">her to go fuck herself. (Sheldon, 1999: 242)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: David hanya berdiri memandangnya, ruangan serasa berputar. Ia ingin</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">mempersetankannya.(Srisanti, 2009: 283)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This example belongs to modulation. The word swimming means berenang in Indonesian, but it translated in TL become berputar. There is a change in point of view. It is awkward if translated literary ruangan serasa berenang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.2.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Equivalence</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">One and the same situation can be rendered by two texts using completely different stylistic and structural methods. In such case we are dealing with the method which produces equivalence text. Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: “That was very nice, Toni. I’m Gilbert Keller.” “I know who you are,” Toni said. “I’m glad to meet you. Did you ever take singing lessons? I’ll bet you did. “Sod off.” (Sheldon, 1999: 298)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Bagus sekali Toni. Aku Gilbert Keller.” “Aku tahu kau siapa.” Kata Toni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Aku senang bertemu denganmu. Pernahkah ada yang bilang bahwa waktu menyanyi suaramu indah sekali?” “Gombal.” (Srisanti, 2009: 345)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This expression belongs to equivalence procedure. The same situation can be rendered by two texts using completely different stylistic and structural methods. Sod used as a term of pity, sympathy or expressing anger. In SL text there is sod off and in TL text become gombal, which is mean expressing annoyance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.2.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Adaption is to replace a SL cultural element with one from TL, to be pure gibberish which has no name in any language. In such case translators have to create a new situation that can be considered as being equivalent. Analysis:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">SL: I’ve already had calls from half a dozen top criminal defense lawyers. They all want to represent her.” He leaned forward in his chair. (Sheldon, 1999: 136).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: “Aku sudah menerima telepon dari enam pengacara pidana top. Mereka semua ingin membelanya.”Ia membungkuk di kursinya. (Srisanti, 2009: 32).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This expression belongs to adaption. In SL text half a dozen is usually used to express something, goods, donuts but in Indonesian language as TL become enam pengacara. It is based on the culture that used in each country.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis, it can conclude, there are seven types of idiomatic expression found in Sheldon’s novel “Tell Me Your Dreams” and in their translation “Ceritakan Mimpi-Mimpimu” by Srisanti. The translators have to keep the aims of the text in the source language and the need for creating the equivalences arises from the situation in SL, they have to look for the solution. In the process of translating idiomatic expressions from the SL into TL text, there were found two kinds of translation procedures. The first one is direct translation as source language orientation, such as; borrowing, calque, and literal translation. The second one is oblique translation as target language orientation, such as; transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, L. Mildred. 1998. Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to CrossLanguage Equivalence. New York: University Press of America, inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina, L. and Albir, A. H. 2002. Translation Technique. Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. Dalam Meta, vol. XL VII, no. 4. Hal. 499-512.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">http://www. erudite. Org</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter. 1991. About Translation. Great Britain: Longdunn Press. Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vinay, J. P. and Darbelnet, J. 2000. A Methodology for Translation. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Venuti, L, editor. The Translation Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">10</span></p>