---
layout: full_article
title: "Simple Prepositional Phrases in The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)"
author: "Ni Made Binantari, I Made Rajeg"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 18.2 Pebruari 2017: 135-143</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Simple Prepositional Phrases in The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Made Binantari<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Wandia<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Arts- Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:nimadebinantari@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"> nimadebinantari@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font1"> <sup>2</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:imaderajeg@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> imaderajeg@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font1"> <sup>3</sup>[email: </span><a href="mailto:wandia57@yahoo.com.au"><span class="font1">wandia57@yahoo.com.au</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul “Frasa Preposisional Sederhana di The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA). Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan fungsi sintaksis dan menganalisa makna preposisi sederhana dari frasa preposisional sederhana in, on, dan at yang diikuti oleh penentu (determiner) “the”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">COCA digunakan sebagai sumber data pada </span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, terutama teks fiksi untuk membatasi dan menganalisis data secara tepat. metode dokumentasi diterapkan dalam melakukan penelitian ini seperti, membuat akun mengakses website, mengetik rumus untuk mencari preposisi pada kolom pencarian, memilih jenis teks, memilih frekuensi data, dan memasukkan data kedalam Microsoft Word pada program komputer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang telah terkumpul dianalisa secara deskriptif dan kwalitatif. Penelitian ini menggunakan teori utama dari Quirk, dkk. Selain itu, ada teori pendukung yang diusulkan oleh Hewings. Fungsi sintaksis dan makna frase preposisional sederhana In, On, dan At ditentukan dengan menggunakan teori utama Quirk, dkk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisa menunjukkan bahwa frasa preposisional sederhana In, On, dan At mana diikuti oleh penentu &quot;the&quot; paling sering terjadi berfungsi sebagai kata keterangan, terutama adjunct. Namun, frasa preposisi sederhana “At” paling sering terjadi sebagai komplementasi dari kata kerja dan kata sifat. Selain itu, makna preposisi sederhana dianalisa dalam hal hubungan spasial, waktu, penyebab atau spektrum tujuan, dan sarana atau spektrum agentif. Dalam hal ini, frasa preposisional sederhana In, On, dan At paling sering digunakan untuk menunjukkan tempat dan waktu dalam kalimat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: preposisi, corpus, fungsi, dan makna</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some lexical items that can be classified based on some categories in English, such as noun, verb, adjective, preposition, etc. A preposition is one of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the sentence elements which functions to indicate certain relation among other words in one sentence and makes the sentence complete and understandable. The prepositional phrase consists of a preposition followed by a prepositional complement which functions to indicate time, position, space, location, etc. There are simple and complex prepositions. Simple prepositions only consist of one word. The prepositional phrase is referred to as preposition followed by a prepositional complement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Quirk, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et a</span><span class="font1">l (1985:673), a preposition emphasizes the relation between two entities, one being represented by the prepositional complement. In this case, time and place are easier to be identified, however in terms of labels; preposition in systematic meaning is difficult to be described. Quirk, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al </span><span class="font1">(1985:659) state that there are several points of similarity between prepositions and other word classes and constructions in English grammar, in particular conjunctions and adverbs, as well as participles and adjectives. Both prepositions and conjunctions have a relating or connecting function. For instance, the use of “when” and “of” in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the day when she arrived</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the day of her arrival</span><span class="font1">, the use of “when” in the first sentence is functioning as a conjunction, however, the use of “of” in the second sentence is functioning as the preposition. In certain cases, the same items can function both as prepositions and conjunctions, e.g. after, as, before, since, and until. The criterion between the two-word classes can be distinguished by the phrases which follow them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The use of prepositions is very high either in spoken and written to make the sentence complete. Preposition has very crucial and distinct rule in English grammar. People cannot speak or write in English properly without prepositions which make sentences related to each other and more understandable. The analysis is exemplified to find the syntactic functions and meaning of simple prepositional phrases with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1">. These prepositions are highly used both in spoken and written. The reason for choosing corpus texts as the object of analysis is that they usually consist of thousands or millions of words and are not made up of the linguist’s or a native speaker’s invented examples but on authentic or naturally</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">occurring spoken and written language. Corpus linguistics purposes that reliable language analysis is more feasible with corpora collected in the field, natural contexts, and minimal experimental-interference. “The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)” is the largest freely-available corpus of English and the only large and balanced corpus of American English. It contains more than 520 million words of text (20 million words each year 1990-2015) and it is equally divided among spoken, fiction, popular magazines, newspapers, and academic texts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background, the problems of this study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What syntactic functions of simple prepositional phrases are found in The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meanings do simple prepositional phrases express in the structures?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the formulation of problems above, this study is investigated in order to meet the following purposes:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the syntactic functions of simple prepositional phrases found in The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the expressed meanings of simple prepositional phrases in the structures.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) on</span><a href="http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/</span><span class="font1">.</span></a><span class="font1"> It was chosen as a data source because it is the largest freely-available corpus of English, and the only large and balanced corpus of American English. It is probably the most widely-used corpus of English</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">which contains more than 520 million words of text (20 million words each year 1990-2015) and it is equally divided among spoken, fiction, popular magazines, newspapers, and academic texts. The corpus is concerned with actual language use so that it can show the authentic or naturally occurring use of simple prepositional phrases with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> both in spoken and written language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Documentation method was applied in conducting this study such as, creating an account to log in to the website, typing the patterns of prepositions on searching column, choosing the type of text, choosing the data frequency, and inputting the data into microsoft word in a computer program. The data of this study were descriptively and qualitatively analyzed based on the main theory of Quirk, et.al. The syntactic functions and aspect of meanings of simple prepositional phrases with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> were analyzed qualitatively.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three syntactic functions of simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at </span><span class="font1">followed by determiner “the” found in COCA; they are post modifier in a noun phrase, adverbial, and complementation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Post Modifier in a Noun phrase</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Types of noun that follow the simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> to be simple prepositional phrases as postmodifier in the sentences can be various such as concrete noun of place, concrete noun of thing, countable common noun of thing, collective noun, concrete noun of part of body, abstract noun, and proper noun of time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-1) Seething, Logan called a uniformed sergeant </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the station </span><span class="font1">to trace the number.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-2) I'm about to go after the eggplant when a movement </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the woods </span><span class="font1">catches my eye.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-1), the simple prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the station</span><span class="font1">. It gives specific information about the noun </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">sergeant</span><span class="font1">. The function of simple prepositional phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“at the station” </span><span class="font1">is telling that a uniformed sergeant which is being called by Logan is the one who works at the station.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-2), the simple prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the woods</span><span class="font1">. It gives specific information about the noun </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">movement</span><span class="font1">. The function of the simple prepositional phrase “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the woods” </span><span class="font1">as post modifier is telling that the movement is taking place in the woods.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbial</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in, on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> function as the adverbial in sentences can be followed by several kinds of noun after the determiner “the” to be simple prepositional phrases such as abstract noun and concrete noun of place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(5-3) There isn't anything open around here at a quarter to six </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the morning</span><span class="font1">, and it's not like he could go home.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(5-4) </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">In the room</span><span class="font1">, the air went thick and heavy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-3), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the morning</span><span class="font1">. It denotes adjunct of time which expresses the time when there is not anything open around a certain of place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-4), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the room</span><span class="font1">. It denotes adjunct of place which expresses where the condition of the air is changed to be thick and heavy. The meaning of the sentence is constant altough the position of the prepositional phrase is changed. It can be placed at the middle after subject (“the air”) or the end of the clause or sentence, without changing the meaning of the sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Complementation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Complementation can be divided into complementation of verb and adjective. Simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in, on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> functioning as the complementation in sentences can be followed by several kinds of noun after the determiner “the” to be simple prepositional phrases such as concrete noun of place, abstract noun, collective noun, countable common noun of thing, countable common noun of people, concrete noun of part of body, proper noun of name, and uncountable common noun of thing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-5) &quot;&nbsp;Okay, &quot;&nbsp;he said, then nodded </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the men </span><span class="font1">and came over and got back in the car with us.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-6) I thought she'd be happy </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the university </span><span class="font1">because it isn't like Gold Flume.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-5), the simple prepositional phrase is the complementation of verb. The prepositional phrase which shows the complementation of verb is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the men</span><span class="font1">. It is closely related to the preceded verb, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nodded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-6), the simple prepositional phrase is the complementation of adjective. The prepositional phrase which shows the complementation of adjective is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the university</span><span class="font1">. It is closely related to the preceded adjective, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">happy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are four meanings of simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> followed by the determiner “the” expressed in COCA; they are simple prepositions denoting spatial relation, simple prepositions denoting time, denoting the cause/purpose spectrum, and denoting the means/agentive spectrum.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Prepositions Denoting Spatial Relations</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The preposition denoting spatial relation usually realizes adverbial of place. Simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in, on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> which denote spatial relation in sentences can be followed by several kinds of noun after the determiner “the” such as concrete noun of place, concrete noun of things, concrete noun of part of body, and proper noun of name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(5-7) &nbsp;Martins Zelmenis (1965) studied the Latvian language and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">literature </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the University </span><span class="font1">of Latvia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-7), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the university</span><span class="font1">. It expresses the place where Martin Zelmenis studies the Latin language. The preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at </span><span class="font1">denotes dimension type 0 denoting point and including positive position.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Prepositions Denoting Time</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Prepositions denoting time usually indicate adverbial of time. Simple prepositions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in, on</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> followed by the determiner “the” to be simple prepositional phrases which indicate adverbial of time in sentences can be followed by abstract noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(5-8) &nbsp;Later </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the week </span><span class="font1">I was after-dinner speaker at the meeting of the alumni</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">association of Montgomery Bell Academy, my old high school.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In sentence (5-8), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in the week</span><span class="font1">. It expresses when he/she would be a after-dinner speaker at the meeting of the alumni association of Montgomery Bell Academy. Preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">in </span><span class="font1">denotes time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Cause/ Purpose Spectrum</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The cause or purpose spectrum, the prepositions express either the material cause or the psychological cause (motive) for a happening. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">At,</span><span class="font1"> in combinations such as a</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">im,</span><span class="font1"> where the prepositional phrase is complementary to the verb can express INTENDED GOAL or TARGET. Countable common noun of things and countable common noun of people mostly follow the simple preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> to denote cause or purpose spectrum.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-9) The big man frowned </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the person </span><span class="font1">in the window.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-9), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the person in the window</span><span class="font1">. It means the person that is being frowned by the big man. The preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> denotes intended target.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Means/Agentive Spectrum</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Preposition a</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">t</span><span class="font1"> functions as semi-agent and stimulus. The concrete noun of thing and collective noun of people mostly follow the simple preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5-10) Roy pauses before leaning into the cruiser and squints up at the bluebird sky.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In example (5-10), the prepositional phrase is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">at the bluebird sky</span><span class="font1">. It means the bluebird sky makes Roy pause and squint up before leaning into the cruiser. The preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> denotes agentive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be drawn as conclusion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) provides many data containing simple prepositional phrases in, on, and at. The corpus can show the authentic or naturally occurring use of simple prepositional phrases with on, in, and at both in spoken and written language. In this case, the corpus can show the simple prepositional phrases in, on, and at used specifically in fiction texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the syntactic functions, simple prepositional phrases in, on and at functioning as adverbial frequently occur, especially adjunct. However, simple prepositional phrase </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">at</span><span class="font1"> most frequently occurs as the complementation of verb and adjective.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition, there are four simple prepositional meanings which can be found in COCA. They are prepositions denoting spatial relation, denoting time, denoting the cause of purpose spectrum, and the means or agentive spectrum. In this case, the prepositions denoting place and time most frequently occur in simple prepositional phrases in sentences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Bennet, Gena R. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Using Corpora in the Language Learning Classroom: Corpus Linguistics for Teachers</span><span class="font1">. Michigan ELT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hancock B., Windridge K., and Ockleford E. An Introduction to Qualitative</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Research. The NIHR RDS EM / YH, 2007</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hewings, Martin. 2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Advanced Grammar in Use: A self-study reference and practice book for advanced learners of English</span><span class="font1">. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quirk, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font1">.1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Comprehensive Grammar of The English Language</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">New York: Longman Group Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">143</span></p>