---
layout: full_article
title: "THE MEANING OF IDIOMS IN JOHN MAYER’S CONTINUUM ALBUM"
author: "Ida Ayu Citra Puspita Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">THE MEANING OF IDIOMS IN JOHN MAYER’S CONTINUUM ALBUM</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ida Ayu Citra Puspita Dewi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Studi ini di fokuskan pada analisis dari lirik-lirik lagu di album Continuum dari penyanyi John Mayer. Tujuan dari studi ini di bagi menjadi dua pertama studi ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi idiom yang ada pada lirik lirik lagu. Kedua, studi ini bertujuan untuk menjelaskan arti dari idiom yang ada pada lirik-lirik lagu di album Continuum dari penyanyi John Mayer. Metode yang digunakan untuk memilih data pada studi ini adalah metode dokumentasi. Studi ini menganalisi secara kualitatif berdasarkan teori idiom dari Palmer (1976) dan teori makna kata dari Leech (1974).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisis dalam studi ini menunjukan bahwa lirik lirik lagu di album Continuum mengandung Idiom, diantaranya Phrasal verb, Prepositional verb, partial idiom dan Makna kata diantaranya konotatif, afektif dan reflektif. Fitur-fitur idiom dan makna kata tersebut digunakan oleh penulis lagu dengan tujuan untuk menghibur pendengar dari lagu lagu tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keyword : Lirik lagu, idiom, makna kata.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">A song is one of the ways in which people to express their feelings; a song seems interesting to be analyzed since it has various combination of vocabulary and unique set of wording which has its own function. It sometimes contains some</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">idioms. Idiomatic expression is very close to our daily life without realizing it. The language of the song is built in a specific way; therefore, it becomes different from any language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A song is one of the best forms of entertainment to be enjoyed. As one of media in expressing feelings, a song seems interesting to be analyzed since it is one of the best forms of entertainment to be enjoyed. Moreover, the language of the song is built in specific way, so it becomes different from any language. We can get knowledge through interpreting the words in song lyrics while we have more time to listen and explore the deepest meaning in the song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the background illustrated previously, two research questions are the focus of current study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of idioms found in John Mayer: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Continuum</span><span class="font1"> album?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meanings of idioms and how the meaning reflect the message in John Mayer: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Continuum</span><span class="font1"> album?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To determine the types of idioms in the song lyrics of John Mayer: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Continuum</span><span class="font1"> album.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning of idioms found in the song lyric of John</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mayer: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Continuum</span><span class="font1"> album</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were directly taken from John Mayer: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Continuum</span><span class="font1"> album, Continuum has 12 songs. From the 12 songs in the John Mayer’s Continuum album the idioms were found in 9 songs. The 9 selected songs were Waiting on the World to Change, I Don’t Trust Myself (With Loving you), Belief, Gravity, The Heart of Life, Vultures, Stop this Train, Slow Dancing in a Burning Room and Dreaming With a Broken Heart. In conducting this study, documentation methods was applied in collecting the data Based on theory of Idiom proposed by palmer (1976; 98) and theory of meaning proposed by Leech (1974).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This part deals with the result and the discussion of the data. The data analysis is divided into two parts; analysis of Idioms and the analysis of its meanings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Idiom</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Phrasal Verb</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The common type of idiom in english is phrasal verb. Phrasal verb usually called the combination of the verbs and adverb ( Palmer,1976). The meaning of these combination cannot be predicted fron the individual verb and adverbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(a.)To </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rise above</span><span class="font1"> and beat it’ (The song </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Waiting on the World to Change </span><span class="font1">stanza 2, line 8). The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rise above</span><span class="font1"> is a phrasal verb where the verb </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(rise</span><span class="font1">) followed by an adverb (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">above</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Prepositional Verb</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Prepositional verb is the squence of verb and preposition or verb, adverb and preposition (Palmer,1979).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(b.)“They say we </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stand for</span><span class="font1"> nothing” (The song </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Waiting on the World to Change, </span><span class="font1">stanza 1, line 3).The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stand for</span><span class="font1"> is a prepositional verb where the verb is (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stand</span><span class="font1">) and the preposition is (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Partial Idiom</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Partial idiom is another type of idiom exist. Partial idiom is where one of the words has its usual meaning and the other has meaning that is peculiar to particular sequence (Palmer,1976:99).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(c.)“I will beg my way into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">your garden</span><span class="font1">” (The </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">song I don’t trust myself (with loving you) </span><span class="font1">stanza 3, line 9). The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">your garden</span><span class="font1"> is a partial idiom, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">your</span><span class="font1"> has its usual meaning and the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">garden</span><span class="font1"> has the meaning that is particular. In this song Mayer wants to tell about a girl that he met when his career began to rise. He didn’t believe her “love”. Mayer believed that she had an ulterior motive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Connotative meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Leech (1974) claims that connotative meaning is “the communicative value an expression has by virtue of what it refers to, over and above its purely</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">conceptual content; it is something that goes beyond mere referent of a word and hints at its attribute in the real world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The words </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rise above</span><span class="font1"> have </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">connotative meanings</span><span class="font1">, contains the communicative value of an expression according to the meaning referred to, &quot;We just feel like we don ' t have the means To rise above and beat it &quot;, the songwriter did not mean to do anything.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Affective meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Affective meaning is a sort of meaning which can reflect the personal feelings .of the speakers, including his attitude to the listener, or his attitude to something he is talking about.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Idiom </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">beautiful armor</span><span class="font1"> also has </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">affective meaning</span><span class="font1">, the meaning of which reflect the personal emotions of the author, including his attitude towards the listener, or attitude towards something he says</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reflected meaning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Reflected meaning is the meaning which arises in cases of multiple conceptual meaning, when one sense of a word forms part of our response to another sense.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The words </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stand for</span><span class="font1"> mean that support or fight for something. It is categorized as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">reflective meaning</span><span class="font1">, the meaning arises in the case of multiple conceptual meaning, if a sense of a word used, it is automatically bring up the majority of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">people’s sense to another meaning. This meaning often understood as suggestions</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Concerning the meaning, an idiom is an expression that the whole meaning cannot be easily discovered by the meaning of the words composing it. The theme of the song is the reflected by the meaning of idioms. Since the meaning of idiom has a strong relation with the theme of the song, as the consequences the meaning of the idiom should be analyzed first to find the theme and the message of the song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From 7 types of meaning proposed by Leech (1974) only 3 meaning were used to analyze the meaning of the idioms. Those meaning are, Connotative meaning, Affective meaning and Reflected meaning. Connotative meaning is when the idiom has a communicative value of the third expression, besides the idioms also had a different meaning from the meaning of the word combinations. Affective meaning is the meaning of which reflect the personal emotions of the author, including his attitude towards the listener, or attitude towards something he says and Reflected meaning is the meaning arises in the case of multiple conceptual meaning, if a sense of a word used, it is automatically bring up the majority of people’s sense to another meaning. This meaning often understood as suggestions. The phrase stand for is used to states that people said he and his friends do not mean anything</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic.</span><span class="font1"> Great Britain: Hazel Watson &amp;&nbsp;Vine Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Palmer, F.R. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic: A New Outline.</span><span class="font1"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>