---
layout: full_article
title: "CODE SWITCHING IN INDONESIAN SONG LYRICS BY FEMALE SINGERS"
author: "Ni Raista Sri Lestari"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>CODE SWITCHING IN INDONESIAN SONG LYRICS BY</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>FEMALE SINGERS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Ni Raista Sri Lestari</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non- Regular Program of English Departement Faculty of Letters and Culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul”Code Switching in Indonesian Song Lyrics by Female Singers”, penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi jenis dan fungsi untuk alih kode yang ditemukan di beberapa lirik lagu Indonesia oleh penyanyi wanita Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diambil dari lirik lagu Indonesia. Metode yang digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data adalah metode dokumentasi dan dengan teknik mencatat. Jenis data alih kode dianalisis dengan mengelompokkan dan memilih kalimat berdasarkan sumber data dan kemudian data yang dikumpulkan secara kualitatif dan deskriptif dianalisis sesuai dengan teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa komposer cenderung untuk beralih bahasa dari Indonesia ke dalam bahasa Inggris melalui lirik lagu. Jenis alih kode yang terjadi pada data meliputi tag switching, inter-sentential switching, dan intra-sentential switching. Data menunjukkan bahwa pengalihan terjadi di awal, di tengah dan diakhir kalimat. Dalam hal fungsi alih kode, hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa fungsi data alih kode adalah: fungsi metalinguistik dan fungsi puisi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Alih kode, tipe, fungsi, lagu.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesian pop song grows rapidly. In the song lyrics especially by female singers, the phenomenon of code switching mostly occurs. Code switching is used in the song lyrics to make the song more interesting to the listener. The Indonesian female singers such as Rossa, Agnes Monica, Melly Goeslaw, Bunga Citra Lestari, Cinta Laura, Citra Skolastika and etc are the most popular female singers nowadays.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Code is a language or a variety of language. The variety of language in Indonesia includes code mixing and switching. The phenomenon of mixing and switching languages can be found in many things, for example, in newspaper, film, novel, song, etc (based from Itaul, Husna, 2010). The use of code switching in the song makes a kind of phenomenon. The phenomenon is the occurrence of bilingualism. The bilingualism itself also encourages the use of code switching between singers. Code switching becomes a habit in the song lyrics even it also happens in many fields of this modern world.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background above, there are some problems, which can be analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of code switching found in the Indonesian song lyrics by female singers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of code switching found in the Indonesian song lyrics by female singers?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This present study was intended:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of code switching found in Indonesian song lyrics by female singers.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the functions of code switching found in Indonesian song lyrics by female singers.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study are Indonesian song lyrics especially by female singers that switched to English. The data were cited from internet. The list of song lyrics are Let’s Talk about Love by Melly Goeslaw (2013), Muda by Agnes Monica (2013) Everybody Knew by Citra Skolastika (2011), Kemenangan by Regina Idol (2012), Cinta atau Uang by Cinta Laura (2011), Luilicious by Bunga Citra Lestari (2010), Aku Kangen Aku Rindu by Alexa Key (2010), Hey, Ladies by Rossa (2011), Shoot me by Cinta Laura (2011), Coz I love you by Agnes Monica (2011), Beautiful by Cherrybelle (2011), Dilema by Cherrybelle (2011), Guardian angel by Cinta Laura (2011), Single happy by Ayu Ting-ting (2012), Say no by Tasya Kamila (2012), In love with you by Aurelia Devi (2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in collecting data was documentation method. Documentation is usually conducted when the research aims to collect data about things, like notes, transcriptions, books, newspaper, magazine, and articles. Collecting data is the process by which the data are collected based on the needs of the study. In this study the data were collected by using the following step: firstly, the data were taken from internet; secondly, note taking and marking the Indonesian English code switching in the data; and the final step was taking notes of the Indonesian English code switching found in the selected Indonesian song lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were analyzed using qualitative, the data based on number of Indonesian English code switching which occurred in Indonesian songs, using descriptive method, that is the data were explained based on the theory of code switching. There are some steps in which the data were analyzed , they are: Classifying, Analyzing, Choosing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. Analysis of Code Switching found in Indonesian song lyrics by female singers</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>The Analysis of tag switching</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1 . “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hey, ladies!</span><span class="font2"> jangan mau di bilang lemah” (Rossa, hey ladies)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“hey, ladies”</span><span class="font2"> refer to tag switching because in this sentence there is an insertion of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“hey”</span><span class="font2"> which make this part also provide Tag switching. Tag switching is used when there is an insertion of a tag and exclamation word in one language into utterance which is entirely in the other language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2 .” </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Don't cry, don't be shy</span><span class="font2"> kamu cantik apa adanya” (Cherrybelle, beautiful)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Don't cry, don't be shy</span><span class="font2">” is a form of exclamation which make this part also provide Tag switching. Tag switching itself is involved when there is an insertion of a tag and exclamation word in one language into utterance which is entirely in the other language.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>The Analysis of Inter-sentential switching</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">1”Kita memang terlahir untuk menang, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">some will win, some will lose” </span><span class="font2">(Regina, kemenangan)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The process of switching from Indonesian into English analyzed as Inter-sentential code switching because the process involves a switch a clause or sentence boundary, where each clause or sentence is in one language or another.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2” </span><span class="font1">Akhirnya ku temukan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">you’re my guardian angel”</span><span class="font1"> (Cinta laura, guardian angel)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The process of switching from Indonesian into English were analyzed as inter-sentential code switching, because the process involves a switch of clause or sentence boundary, where each clause or sentence is in one language or another.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>The Analysis of Intra-sentential switching</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1 .” Lebih baik lebih </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">happy</span><span class="font2"> saat ini ku sendiri” (Ayu ting-ting, single</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">happy)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to the lyric, the process of switching from Indonesian into English is the process of switch occurs in the middle of sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2 .” Namun </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ladies</span><span class="font2"> tetaplah harus waspada” (Rossa, hey ladies)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the lyric, the process of switching from Indonesian into English is the process which occurs in the middle of sentence.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>The Function why Code Switching took place in the Indonesian Song Lyrics by Female Singers</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The Function of Code Switching in this study was analyzed applying the theory of “Language Contact and Bilingualism” (1987), by Apple and Muysken. According to them there are two functions for using code switching, they are: Metalinguistic function, and Poetic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, three types of code switching were used in the “Indonesian song lyrics by female singers”. They are: Tag switching, Inter-sentential code switching, and Intra-sentential code switching. Tag switching is involved when there is an insertion of a tag and exclamation word in one language into an utterance which is entirely in the other language. Inter-sentential code switching is involved because of the process occurred in a clause or sentence. The last is Intra-sentential code switching. Intra-sentential code switching is involved because the process occurred within a sentence in the middle of sentence boundary and in a single utterance. From the analysis of types of code switching in this study, inter-sentential switching is the most frequent in use.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the six functions of the use of code switching, only two functions were used in this study, they are: metalinguistic and poetic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Apple, R and Muysken, P. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Contact and Bilingualism . L</span><span class="font2">ondon: Edward Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Grosjean, Francois. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two Languages , an Introduction to Bilingualism,</span><span class="font2"> London: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hornby, A.S. 2010. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of current English eighth edition. Great Clarendon Street, Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Husna,Itaul.2010. Code Mixing and Code switching in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ketika Cinta Bertasbih I novel</span><span class="font2">. Study program of English, University of Brawijaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Liaqat Iqbal . 2011 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Linguistic Features of Code Switching: A Study of Urdu /English Bilingual Teachers’s Classroom Interactions”</span><span class="font2"> International Journal of Humanities and Social Science vol.1 No 14; October 2011.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nencyana. 2009</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Indonesian-English Code Switching Used in Internet Blogger’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Regina. 2009</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Code Switching in Infotainment I International Gossip</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Romaine, S. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism</span><span class="font2">. Massachusets: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Suci . 2009.</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching Used by the Music Announcers in the Radio of BC FM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardaugh, R. 1986. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonym. 2011. Available at</span><a href="http://lirik.kapanlagi.com/"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://lirik.kapanlagi.com</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">cited on June 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonym. 2011. Available at</span><a href="http://liriklaguliriklagu.blogspot.com/"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://liriklaguliriklagu.blogspot.com</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">cited on June 2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anonym. 2013. Available at</span><a href="http://wordreference.com/"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://wordreference.com</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">cited on June 2014</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">