---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF CODE SWITCHING ON FACEBOOK COMMENTS"
author: "Oka Perdana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE ANALYSIS OF CODE SWITCHING ON FACEBOOK COMMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Putu Oka Perdana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department Non --- Regular Program, Faculty of Letters and Culture,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Judul makalah ini yang berjudul &quot;Analisis Code Switching di Komentar-Komentar Facebook&quot;. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi dan memeriksa alih kode di dalam komentar-komentar facebook, komentar ini dilakukan oleh para anggota grup facebook Universitas Airlangga. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini berdasarkan pada teori Poplack (Dalam Romaine, 1995) yang membagi jenis alih kode dalam tag switching, inter sentential switching dan intra sentential switching. Dan untuk alasan code switching, berdasarkan teori dari Grosjean (1982). Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan membaca setiap komentar pada grup sastra Inggris Universitas Airlangga. Untuk mendukung penelitian ini, hasil pertanyaan dari anggota sastra Inggris grup Facebook Universitas Airlangga, yang digunakan untuk mengamati alasan untuk kode switching. Temuan dari penelitian ini menunjukkan ada tiga jenis alih kode yang ditemukan dalam novel ini, mereka adalah: . tag switching, inter sentential switching dan intra sentential switching. Code switching yang paling dominan ditemukan dalam grup facebook ini adalah intra sentential switching, sedangkan yang paling sedikit adalah tag switching. Untuk alasan dalam grup facebook ini hanya ditemukan 5 dari 10 jenis alasan, yaitu: </span><span class="font2">Filling a linguistics need for lexical item, set phrase, discourse marker or sentence filler; Continuing the last language used (triggering), Specifying speaker involment, Marking and emphasizing group identity (solidarity), and Qualifying a message: amplifying or emphasize.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata Kunci: Code Switching, Komentar-Komentar di Facebook, Tope-Tipe dari Code Switching, Alasan-Alasan dari Code Switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Code switching can actually happen only in the language of a bilingual. Bilingualism is the term for speaking one or more languages (Scotton, 2006: 2). In line with that explanation, the students of English Department can be considered bilingual because they have the ability to speak English since they enter the department. The language situation in Indonesia is considered</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">higher than the local languages and English is considered higher in prestige and social status than </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font2">Therefore, English Department Students are likely to code switches in their communication with others. The reason why choosing English Literature facebook group of Airlangga University rather than Udayana University, because is there were some problems while searching the data from English Literature of Udayana University. English literature facebook group of Airlangga University was an open group, so it was easier to see all the comments of the members of the facebook group every time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background above some problems can be formulated, as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of code switching are used by the English Department facebook group of Airlangga University found in Facebook comments?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the reasons of using code switching by the members of the English Department Facebook group of Airlangga University?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem above,this study has two aims,they are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the type of code switching, used in the facebook group of English Department of Airlangga University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the reasons of the members the facebook group used of the Englsh Department of Airlangga University code switching.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">The Types of Code Switching</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark9"></a>•</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tag Switching</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tag switching occurs when a tag from different language is inserted into an utterance in other languages. Tag switching involves an exclamation a tag, or a parenthetical in another language. A tag is a word or phrase that is added to a sentence for emphasis. The examples below have fulfilled the requirement of being tag switching:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hi, guys</span><span class="font2">. Ini ada acara nya Suara Surabaya Kelana Kota, keliling Surabaya Gratis mengunjungi Objek wisata di Surabaya dr tgl 13-19 Mei 2013 naik bis. Yang berminat langsung datang ke Grandcity untuk daftar di tempat pameran Surabaya Destination Award 2013. Bis berangkat jam 11 Siang. Silakan yang berminat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The type of code switching used in the sentence above is classified into tag switching. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hi, guys</span><span class="font2">, the expression of greeting or hello to all members of the facebook group. The members of facebook group used these words, because they sound more attractive and popular.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark11"></a>•</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intra Sentential Switching</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A switch called intra sentential switching when a switch occurs within a sentence or clause boundary. This type of code switching may appear in the beginning, in the middle, and at the end of a sentence. The example of this code switching can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Iya, tak </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">upload</span><span class="font2"> fotomu ya?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The type of code switching in the data above is considered as intra sentential switching. The members of the facebook group have switched the language from Indonesian into English.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark13"></a>•</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inter Sentential Switching</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Inter-sentential Switching involves a switch at a clause or sentence boundary, where each clause or sentence is in one language or another. Inter-Sentential Switching can be thought as requiring greater fluency in both languages than tag switching since</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">major portions of utterance must conform to the rules of both languages. The examples of this switching can be seen as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">For those who want to challenge yourselves dan interested </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">di</span><span class="font2"> dunia perbankan. Mangga dicoba program khusus dari BTPN -- OMDP (bukan marketing).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The type of code switching from the data above is categorized into inter-sentential switching because the member of the facebook group switches the code from Indonesian into English or vice versa between sentences.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The Analysis of Reason for Code Switching</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">According to Grosjean (1982: 149-152), there are ten reasons in using code switching in the facebook group of the English Department Airlangga University. Four of those ten reasons are applicable here. Those are: filling a linguistic need for lexical item, setting phrase, discourse marker or sentence filler; continuing the last language used; emphasizing group identity (solidarity) and qualify a message: amplifying or emphasize.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Filling a linguistic need for lexical item, set phrase, discourse marker or sentence filler</span><span class="font2">.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">For first reason, the members of the facebook group, seem to difficult to find the appropriate words, phrase, or sentences in Indonesian so it is better express these words, phrase, or sentences in English. For instance:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Assalammualaikum Warrahmatullah... ini tugas British Studies. sebelumnya, maaf atas keterlambatannya, karena </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">email </span><span class="font2">baru masuk hari Rabu, dan saya baru bisa </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">upload </span><span class="font2">hari ini karena jaringan bermasalah terus sejak Rabu. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Deadline </span><span class="font2">tugas ini diundur menjadi hari selasa, 2 april 2013.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">N.B: untuk yang belum mendapatkan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">file </span><span class="font2">filmnya, silakan hubungi saya di</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">085793819004. Ada juga beberapa ppt, yang mau ngambil silakan hubungi saya. terima kasih. (30 March 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The member of the group facebook used English words, because, the member of facebook used the English words in order to make the reader easily accept these words than Indonesian words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Continuing the last language used (triggering)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">HAI KAWAN-KAWAN.... yuk berbagi dengan saudara kita..hal termudah adalah dengan mendukung komunitas kami yaitu komunitas pemerhati anak jalanan dan marjinal dalam program apresiasi komunitas Telkomsel.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>please help me to share this: OPEN THE LINK AND CLICK THE LOVE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BUTTON</span><span class="font2">” </span><a href="http://18lebih.com/2013/05/save-street-child-surabaya/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://18lebih.com/2013/05/save-street-child-surabaya/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can be indicated that the switch into English for </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">please help me to share this. </span><span class="font2">Triggered a continuation in English into sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">OPEN THE LINK AND CLICK THE LOVE BUTTON. </span><span class="font2">Some members said they triggered a continuation in English after speaking English sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Specify speaker involment</span></h1></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Save Aru !!</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">“Tau ga? hutan di kepulauan aru punya luas total 643ribu hektar, dan gilanya saat ini 500ribu hektarnya sudah dibabat habis oleh orang2 yang tidak bertanggung jawab! Kabarnya, gabungan 28 perusahaan kantongi izin Menteri Kehutanan @Zul_Hasan, terutama untuk pembabatan itu, padahal penduduk lokal dari 117 desa menolak perkebunan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Karena itu tolong kesediaan kalian untuk tandatangani dan sebarkan petisi .”</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.change.org/id/petisi/pak-sbyudhoyono-pak-zul-hasan-batalkan-izin-penebangan-hutan-kepulauan-aru%23share"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.change.org/id/petisi/pak-sbyudhoyono-pak-zul-hasan-batalkan-izin-penebangan-hutan-kepulauan-aru#share</span></a><span class="font2"> (21 October 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Here, the members of the facebook group spoke about Save Aru. The English sentence symbolize detached statement while Indonesian symbolized personal involvement about giving someone information with information words. This interpretation is generalized by Gumperz to other code switching situations (in Grosjean 1982: 152). Gumperz says that the majority language, “they code”, is associated with more formal, stiffer and less personal out-group relations, whereas the majority language, the “we code”, becomes associated with in-group and informal activities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marking and emphasizing group identity (solidarity)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Another reason that isapplicable here is to mark and emphasize group identity (solidarity). For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Assalammualaikum warrahmatullah... selamat pagi di akhir pekan:) adakah di sini yang menjadi sekretaris di kepanitiaan PKL kelas Anthropolinguistics tahun kemarin? atau setidaknya memegang proposal PKLnya? kalo ada, tolong hubungi saya di 085793819004. terima kasih, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">EDSA is our HOME </span><span class="font2">(16 September 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The members of facebook group always closes the comment with English sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">EDSA is our HOME. </span><span class="font2">It is station call identity. They have to say it to emphasize that they are the members of EDSA group.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Qualifying a message: amplify or emphasize</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Trip to bali</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">850rb/orang minim kberangkatan 6 orang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In all those code switching examples the members of the facebook group want to stress the part of this sentence in order to make sure that the readers get the meaning of the code switching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the previous chapter, code switching used by the member of Facebook group Airlangga university was discussed. The types of code switching analyzed are based on Poplack’s theory and the reasons in using code switching was analyzed based on Grosjean’s theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The members of Facebook group of Airlangga University, use all types of code switching classified by Poplack. They are tag switching, inter-sentential switching, and also intra-sentential switching. Tag switching or a switch at a tag, parenthesis or exclamation which are included as part of tag switching, are entirely different languages. Intra sentential switching involved a switch of word or phrase. It occurs in the beginning, middle and the end of of a sentence. Inter sentential switching or a switch at a clause or sentence boundary. The type of code switching that mostly occurs in the data is intra sentential switching, while the less occurrence is tag switching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From ten reasons of code switching stated by Grosjean, five of them are applicable here. Those are: Filling a linguistic need for lexical item, setting phrase, discourse marker or sentence filler; continuing the last language used (triggering), specifying the speakers involment, marking and emphasizing group identity (solidarity), and qualifying a message: amplify or emphasizing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Appel, Rene and Musyaken, p. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Contact and Bilingualism</span><span class="font2">. London: Hodder and Stoughton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiasa, I Gede. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching and Code Mixing</span><span class="font2">. Widya Pustaka No: I Oktober. Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crystal D. 2006. Language and Internet. Cambride University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crystal, D 1987 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language, An Introduction to Socialinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Erawati, Kadek Sri. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Code Switching Found in Putranta’s First Page </span><span class="font2">(Skripsi). Denpasar. Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fairclough, N. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Critical Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fishman, Joshua A. 1972. The sociology in language. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In Language in Sociocultural Change</span><span class="font2">, ed. Anwar S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Grosjean, Francoise. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two Languages</span><span class="font2">. London: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gumperz, John J. and Chaves, Eduardo Hernandez. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism, bidialectism, and classroom interaction. In Language in Social Groups,</span><span class="font2"> ed. Anwar S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mukene, Clemenciana. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Discourse Analysis of the Use of Code Switching in the Film Yellow Card.</span><span class="font2"> Department of Linguistics, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Putra, Rai Agus Mega. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Code Switching Used in Article of Music Magazine</span><span class="font2"> (Skripsi). Denpasar. Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Radite, Fenny Radite. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Code Switching in Written Text Based on Articles in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Printed Media</span><span class="font2"> (Skripsi). Denpasar. Fakultas Sastra Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Romaine, Suzanne. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism, Second Edition</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saville, M and R. Troike. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Ethnography of Communication</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Basil Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Scotton, C 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Social Function of Code Switching Bilingual strategis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Basil Blackwell</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.facebook.com/groups/35957006787/?ref=ts&amp;fref=ts"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.facebook.com/groups/35957006787/?ref=ts&amp;fref=ts</span></a><span class="font2">.</span></p>