---
layout: full_article
title: "LEXICAL COHESION IN SONG LYRIC PERRY’S FIREWORK"
author: "Aga Sebastian"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LEXICAL COHESION IN SONG</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LYRIC PERRY’S FIREWORK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">AGA SEBASTIAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NON-REGULAR PROGRAM, FACULTY OF LETTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Bahasa kiasan dalam lyric lagu firework perry”. Topik terpilih karena bahasa kiasan yg digunakan dalam banyak cerita dan bnayak lagu dan kemudian terpilih lagu karena lagu yg berisi dengan banyak bahasa kiasan. Data penelitian ini diambil dari download di internet. Dan kemudian membaca serta menelaah lirik lagu yang dipilihdengan focus mengidentisifikasilagu tersebut. Setelah itu mengklasifikasikan bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan dalam lirik. Data yang terkumpul dianalisis dengan menggunakan teori Knickerbocker untuk menemukan jenis bahasa kiasan tersebut, apakah itu ironi, hiperbola atau personifikasi dan setelah itu, dan yang terakhir, mencoba menafsirkan maksud dari penulis didasarkan pada teori Leech.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : lirik lagu, katy perry, figurative</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Figurative language is sometimes called methaporical language or simply methapor because Greek ancestor “metaphoric” means to carry meaning beyond its literal meaning (Knickerbocker, 1963 : 637). In classical theories of language, metaphor is seen as a matter of language not thought. Metaphors is linked only to literature in the past. Metaphorical expressions were assumed to be mutually exclusive with the realm of ordinary everyday language: everyday language has no metaphor (Lakoff, 1993 : 202). Figurative language is dependent on the situation of communication and context in which a word is used and this seems to be characteristic of language in general. Many such comparisons, of figures speech, in which something is pictured or imaged in terms of something else is already familiar to us, and this is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">really so familiar that it is taken for granted in daily life. In this paper language operates in a context in a situation and is called a text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And in this case, Perry’s song “Firework” received positive reviews from music critics, with some noticing its catchy melody and danceable beat and comparing it to songs by English band Coldplay. The song was commercially successful, reaching the top spot on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Billboard</span><span class="font1"> Hot 100 and the top five on 20 charts around the world. This lyrics are very popular, as it used a lot of more beautiful words and deep meaning in it than the song by Ronan Keating (When You Say Nothing at All) that just has deep meaning but its lyrics do not have figurative language. By learning more about figurative language in song lyrics, hopefully we will understand what the song’s writer actually wanted to convey in that songs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background state above, the problem of the study was “What kinds of lexical cohesion found in the song lyrics ?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background and problems stated above, the aim of te study was “To identify the lexical cohesion in the song lyrics</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The methodology is intended to give an idea of how to carry out a research. Surdayanto (1993:10) claims that “methodology is the way of having to do something; technique is the way of carrying out the methodology. In this section there are three points covered, firstly data source, method and technique of collecting data, and also method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data used in this study all were directly taken from the primary sources, in this case Perry’s song which contain a lot of figurative language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The methods applied in collecting the data was the observation method. the data (lyrics) were collected from internet with the web address </span><a href="http://www.google.com"><span class="font1">www.google.com</span></a><span class="font1"> downloaded the data and save in computer. the subsequent approaches, of course, to read as well as to observe the lyrics of the chosen songs attentively with the major focus on identifying the figure speech expressions inside that song, classifying the lyrics or the words found in the song to classification the figurative language in the song lyrics themselves, so were found how many figurative languages were used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed qualitatively. The lyrics were read carefully to find figurative language in the lyrics. try to classify the figurative language found, whether it is irony, hyperbola, or a personification, etc. find lexical cohesion in that lyric and were classified the word whether they include repetition, synonymy, collocation, etc. try to interpret the intent of the writer of the song eas interpreted based on the theory of Leech (1974: 923).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Lexical Cohesion Found in The Text</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Before do analysis, the text of this will be presented as follows :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Firework”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Do you ever feel like a plastic bag</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Drifting through the wind</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wanting to start again</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Do you ever feel, feel so paper thin</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Like a house of cards</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">One blow from caving in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Do you ever feel already buried deep</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Six feet under scream</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But no one seems to hear a thing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Do you know that there’s still a chance for you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause there’s a spark in you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(*)You just gotta ignite the light and let it shine</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Just own the night</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Like the forth of July</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause baby you’re firework</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Come on show’em what your worth</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Make’em go “oh, oh, oh!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As you shoot across the sky</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Baby you’re a firework</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Come on let your colors burst</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Make’em go “oh,oh,oh!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">You’re gonna leave ‘em falling down</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">You don’t have to feel like a waste of space</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">You’re original, cannot be replaced</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If you only knew what the future holds</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After a hurricane comes a rainbow</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maybe you’re reason why all the door are closed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">So you can open one that leads you to the perfect road</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Like a lighting bolt, your heart will blow</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And when it’s time, you will know</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Back to (*)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Boom, boom, boom</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Even brighter that the moon, moon, moon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It’s always been inside of you, you, you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And now it’s time to let it through</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause baby you’re firework</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Come on show ‘em what your worth</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Make ‘em go “oh,oh,oh!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As you shoot across the sky</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Baby you’re a firework</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Come on let your colors burst</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Make ‘em go “oh, oh, oh!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">You’re gonna leave ‘em goin “oh, oh,oh”!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Boom, boom, boom</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Even brighter that the moon, moon, moon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Boom, boom, boom</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Even brighter that the moon, moon, moon</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">By reading the text presented above, not all kinds of lexical cohesion were found in it. Therefore, only the occurring types of lexical cohesion were analyzed here.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Reiteration</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">As already explained previously reiteration is a form of lexical cohesion which has such subcategories as repetition, synonym, superordinate and the use of general word to refer back to a lexical item in preceding text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Repetition is one kind of reiteration that shows the same lexical item that is repeated in the text, and commonly functions as reference. In the text analyzed here, repetition occurs with the highest frequency. There are many words repeated and this automatically gives cohesive effects to the text that carries them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The repetition in this text is repeated in different frequency and in different parts of the text. The complete lists of repetition can be seen as below :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feel (L-1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Feel (L-4 ; L-6)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synonym</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Synonim is a kind of reiteration which deals with the sameness of meaning of words in the text, and near synonym when the occurrence of two lexical items in the text have nearly the same meaning. Synonym also found in the text analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The following shows the synonym that are found in the text :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shine (L-16)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brighter (L-33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Those both words refer to the same idea and similar referent, that of those words belong to the same class, that is, a adjective in the text “and let it shine” and in “even brighter than the moon”. The word “shine” (L-16) refers to the word “brighter” (L-33) that shows the relation of synonym.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superordinate</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Superordinate is a kind of reiteration that explains a word in its general class. According to the text that already presented, it was also found kinds of superordinate as presented below d. General Word</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">General word which is commonly used with cohesive force, explain about a class of noun which refers to human beings, animate or inanimate in a wide of reference.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example below shows the kind of general word found in the text that already presented above :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buried deep (L-7)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Six feet under (L-8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the example above, the phrase “buried deep” in number 1 is considered general word. The phrase “buried deep” in the text above refers to “six feet under”. It means that the phrase refers to the lexical item forward. Here “buried deep” refers to “six feet under” that occurs in the next sentence. In the phrase “buried deep”, the word “deep” it means that is buried under six feet.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the previous analyses, it can be concluded that there are some lexical cohesion found in Perry’s song: reiteration and collocation. Kinds of reiteration found in the song are repetition, synonym, superordinate and general word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From kinds of figures of speech used in the song, there are four kinds of figures of speech found in the Perry’ s song “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Firework”</span><span class="font1"> they are : simile, for example : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">do you ever feel like a plastic bag</span><span class="font1">; hyperbole, for example : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">like a lightning bolt, your heart will blow</span><span class="font1">; metaphor, for example : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">you don’t have to feel like a waste of space; </span><span class="font1">and paradox, for example : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cause there’s a spark in you</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K &amp;&nbsp;Hasan, R. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font1">. New York. Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K &amp;&nbsp;Hasan, R. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context, and Text Aspect of Language in Social-Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font1">. Victoria : Deakin University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K &amp;&nbsp;Hasan, R. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Spoken and Written Language</span><span class="font1">. Victoria : Deakin University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Klarer, Mario. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Literary Studies</span><span class="font1">. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L &amp;&nbsp;H. Willard Reninger. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York. Chicago. San Francisco. Toronto : Holt, Rinehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lakoff, George. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metaphor &amp;&nbsp;Thought</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, G.N. 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font1">. Auxland : Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Minarsih, Ni Kadek. 2007. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Cohesion and Coherence of the Article in Girlfriends Magazine</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Morner, Kathleen &amp;&nbsp;Ralph Rausch. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font1">. USA : NTC Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Smith, Sylbille. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Inside Poetry</span><span class="font1">. Victoria : Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode &amp;&nbsp;Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguitis</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta : Duta Wahana University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutarini, Ni Wayan. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Figurative Language in William Blake’s “The Tiger”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Welleck, Rene &amp;&nbsp;Austin Warren. 1948. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font1">. New York : Harvest Book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiguna, I.G.A. Putra. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of the Poetic Devices in Green Day song Lyric “Boulevard of Broken Dream”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.google.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.google.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yudistira. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesive Devices in Political Articles in Different Printed Media</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">9</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">