---
layout: full_article
title: "THE IMPLICATION OF SYMBOLIC VIOLENCE CULTURE TO INTROVERTED STUDENTS OF BALI UNIVERSITIES ON THE EDUCATIONAL PROCESS"
author: "Ni Putu Desi Wulandari, I Ketut Ardhana, I Made Pageh, Ni Luh Arjani"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-70599 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-70599"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-70599"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">February 2021 Vol. 14, Number 1, Page 13-19</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">THE IMPLICATION OF SYMBOLIC VIOLENCE CULTURE TO INTROVERTED STUDENTS OF BALI UNIVERSITIES ON THE EDUCATIONAL PROCESS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Putu Desi Wulandari<sup>1</sup>, I Ketut Ardhana<sup>2</sup>, I Made Pageh<sup>3</sup>, Ni Luh Arjani<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>Teacher Training and Education Institute of Saraswati, Tabanan, <sup>2</sup>Cultural Studies Study Program, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University, <sup>3</sup>Ganesha Singaraja University of Education, <sup>4</sup>Cultural Studies Study Program, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Email: <sup>1</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">f</span><a href="mailto:reshaple89@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">reshaple89@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2phejepsdrlipi@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>phejepsdrlipi@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>3</sup></span><a href="mailto:madepagehundiksha@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">madepagehundiksha@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:4luh_arjani@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>4</sup>luh_arjani@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;27-05-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;19-12-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;28-02-2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This article is aimed at describing the implications of symbolic violence towards introvert students in English education departments of universities in Bali on the educational process. There were three universities to be decided as the setting of this research; (1) Mahasaraswati University Denpasar, (2) Ganesha University of Education Singaraja and (3) IKIP Saraswati Tabanan. The subject of this study was the introvert students and distinctive lecturers of those three English education departments. The result of this study reveals that the implication on process can be perceived through class’ behavioral management, classroom learning management and classroom physical space management. Those kinds of managements were applied reversely from the critical pedagogy and emancipatory learning idealism that leads to symbolic violence, especially to the introvert students. The application was not considering the personality uniqueness of introverted students and created a one-size-fits-all idealism by adopting extroverted idealism and force introverted students to fit in it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key words: symbolic violence, introvert, English education, critical pedagogy</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There is a specific influential stereotype which is developed in the education environment of Indonesia, mainly in Bali that gives the impression that the intelligent students are those who are verbally active in the class activities. In the university level of language study programs, this stereotype is in line with the application of verbal activities which somehow considered to be applied more effectively for any certain reasons. The reasons included, (1) verbal activities is more effective in practicing students’ linguistic competence</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">and (2) verbal activities make it easier for lectures to examine students’ competence both in their language competence and academic competence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The root of stereotypes and its application of the higher education that lead to this stereotype is the existence of the extrovert ideals in the society. The community that embrace extroverted idealism could be associated with people who are adhere to the Reactive model of culture (opened, communicative, emotional and prefer to prioritize action than any contemplation), and Multi-active (communal, having a high type of communication in a hierarchical context). This is also occurred in Bali which is categorized in the areas that has a combination of reactive and multi-reactive cultural models as stated by Lewis (1996:29)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding to its ideal projection, educational institutions play an important role in building the moral and characteristic education of human resources in order to succeed the community progress. In other words, the implementation of education must always lead their students to the critical awareness, democracy and also optimizes all the potential inside the students. If the educational institutions maintain the stigma of introversion as a personality disorder or disease that must be dealt with through the educational process, then the educational institution will eventually become a place of symbolic violence against introverted students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A culture of symbolic violence can have a latent implication and become very detrimental to introverted students who are being the victims of such symbolic violence. Referring to Merriam Webster’s dictionary, the term implication has the definition of “the effect that an action or decision will have on something else in the future” this means that a direct effect of actions and decisions has a further effect in the future. In the correlation with the result of this study, the formulated implications are the continued impact of the culture of the symbolic violence on introverted students in the long period of time. While the learning process, the implications that occur due to the symbolic violence can be categorized into three, namely (1) input implications, (2) process implications and (3) output implications. This article is intended to focus on discussing the process of implications that might be occurred on the learning process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The subject of this study is students and lecturers in the English education program at the universities based on Bali, such as (1) Mahasaraswati University, (2) Ganesha University of Education, and (3) IKIP Saraswati. Students and lecturers in those universities’ English</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">education program are chosen by consideration of that they are the main actors in the pedagogy process in the English education program at universities in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research uses a critical uses a critical qualitative approach. The data are analyzed qualitatively (able to explore the depth of a problem) with the theoretical analysis and critical concepts. Based on these explanation, this study has the interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary characteristics. The disciplines that integrated in this study consist of the social science, education and psychology. The synergy of these three sciences is expected to be able to sustain the analysis of the problems examined in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To clearly analyze the implication on the learning process, the discussion should be focused one the three components of class management. The first is physical space, the second is instruction management and the third is behavioral management. Regarding to the behavioral management component that was applied to the three research locations, the researchers found that the process had not been carried out critically and emancipative. The description is described below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Behavioral Management</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Behavioral management that found in this research is an unwritten standard. These standards were found by the observations section and answers from questionnaire which most of that was the behavioral standard. Behavioral standards are standards of what students must do and what should not do in class (Fisher, 2003: 75). These standards are conveyed verbally or from the attitude of the lecturer towards students. The standard is clearly defining the expectations of lecturers towards students. At its highest point, a behavioral standard is able to transform into norms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">By implementing a standard with extrovert ideals, both introverted and extroverted students will grow into a judgmental individuals because they get used a binary value of appropriate and not appropriate and thus, extroverted students would easily judge those students who are unable to accommodate the value. With the tendency of their personality that focus inside themselves (inward), introverted students will tend to blame themselves in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">the such judgmental situation as explained above. There will always be the words, like “I'm wrong ...”, “I should have be ...”, “I'm bad ...”, “I'm stupid ...”, “I was never good enough in class”, “why am I like this?”. The study environment that always gives bad assessment for introverted students added with the harassment that occurs makes introverted students judge themselves constantly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What are the negative effects of such mental system? The answer is mental disorder. Hayman (2010: 605) stated that “Mental disorders are a mental condition that affects cognition, emotion, and behavioral control and substantially interfere both with the ability of children to learn and with the ability of adults to function in their families, at work, and in the broader society”. Thus, the act of not respecting the introverted student’s unique personality, either in the form of instructions that are not appropriate with their personality features or acts of harassment which has done intentionally or unintentionally, especially in the pedagogy process in the class can cause mental exhaustion for these students and if its not handled immediately, it will very likely lead to mental disorder.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classroom Learning Management</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">One important procedure of class management is to carry out the class controls. Class control is enforced for the formation of positive relationships between teachers and students also between students. Class control can be in the form of regulations (as stated in class contracts) or standards imposed by teachers in the class, written one or not (Fisher, 2003: 28).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In observation and interview sessions conducted by the researcher, it can be found several findings related to the discussion. The first is that there is a lecture contract in a course of study program in the Universities of research location which is applied in a non-dialogical way and its very binding and detrimental to introverted students. Second, there are unwritten standards which are obeyed to by all students but seems unfair to introverted students. It causes long-term implications for the arose of “total despair” in introverted students towards the lecture process. The lecture process becomes an unnatural environment from the perspective of introverted students. Unnatural word in this case means that the hectic classroom atmosphere and loaded with internal stimulation does not support the cognitive, social and emotional development of introverted students (Leung, 2015: 21). In this “forced” and “unfair” situation, the most initial thing as a self-defense step for introverted students is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">trying to fulfill the rules in the class contract because they want to get a good final grade at the end of the semester. But over the time, introverted students feel like they pursuing nothingness that is impossible to fulfill optimally. On that time, introverted students begin to feel surrender and discouraged and let the consequences happen as they are. The pattern is permanently conditioned in the minds of introverted students so that the feeling of despair arises when they attend the other courses even when lectures have just begun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The second implication is in the domain of assessment. Assessment forms that implemented in the real class are applied in a one-size fits-all pattern based on the default system applied. In differentiated teaching, assessment patterns are carried out in various and comprehensive ways. There are two types of assessment of differentiated teaching. The first is pre-assessment. At this stage teacher acts as a diagnosis. Teacher must know beforehand the types of uniqueness of students being taught, both personality, learning readiness, learning styles, socio-economic backgrounds and other potentials (Koeze, 2007: 8). Preassessment provides a general description of the uniqueness of students so then teacher able to design approaches, methods, techniques and strategies that are appropriate for each student. Then in the next assessment both daily, midterm and the end of the semester carried out thoroughly, not only in one aspect. Teacher must know each student and their uniqueness. After that, analyze the strengths and weaknesses of each student. With this pattern, each student will have a final score that is balanced.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Classroom Physical Space Management</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The last domain that cannot be separated from class management is the physical space of the class. The assumption of “Position Determines Achievement” is very consistent with this discussion. Mc Leod (2003: 3) stated that in order to achieve effective learning, physical time and space must be well considered, one of the physical spaces that must be considered is the student positioning in seating arrangements. Through several class observations carried out by the researcher, it was found that the personal space of students is not too noticed by the lecturer. In several activities, the position of one student to another student chair is very tight. Personal space is very important to maintain concentration of learning, especially for introverted students. Strong stimulation from friends sitting on their right and left can inhibit their thought process, concentration and learning performance of introverted students (Cain, 2012: 72).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Another thing that must be considered by teacher is to give students freedom to choose their seats. Forcing their own desire of teachers so that students sit in certain positions can be categorized as symbolic violence, especially in some verbal and interpersonal activities. Usually it is done by instilling an understanding that students must know each other or students who sit in front are students who have positive behavior. Lack of concentration naturally affects the learning achievements of introverted students and then has implications for their understanding of the lecture material and also their grades.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The implications of learning process regarding of the problem of this study were perceived through class’ behavioral management, classroom learning management and classroom physical space management. Those kinds of managements were applied against the critical pedagogy and emancipatory learning idealism that leads to symbolic violence, especially to the introvert students. By implementing a behavioral standard with extroverted ideals in the classroom, both introverted and extroverted students will grow into a judgmental individual because they get used a binary value of appropriate and not appropriate and thus, extroverted students would easily judge those students who are unable to accommodate the value. Bullying to introvert students would be the implication of this process. Mental disorder is the follow up implication of this process. By implementing a one-size-fits-all methods of learning by adopting extroverted idealism and force introverted students to fit in it, it implied to the mental exhaustion and low final grades of introverted students. Last but not least, by implementing a classroom space that is not suitable for introverted students would imply their rate of learning concentration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cain, Susan. 2012. The Power of Introverts in A World that Can’t Stop Talking. New York: Crown Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fisher, Jan. 2003. Elements of Classroom Management Managing Time and Space, Student Behavior, and Instructional Strategies. Virginia USA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development Alexandria</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hayman, Steven. 2010. The Diagnosis of Mental Disorder: The Problem of Reification. Massachusets: Harvard University Press</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Koeze, Patricia. 2007. Differentiated instruction: The effect on student achievement in an elementary school. Eastern Michigan. University of Eastern Michigan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mc. Leod, Charles. 2003. The Key Elements of Classroom Management: Managing Time and Space, Student Behavior, and Instructional Strategies. Virginia: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development Alexandria</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leung, Winnie Frances. 2015. Supporting Introversion and Extroversion Learning Styles in Elementary Classrooms. Toronto: University of Toronto</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lewis, Richard. 1996. When Cultures Collide. Helsinski: WS Bookwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">19</span></p>