---
layout: full_article
title: "Verbal and Visual Messages in English Printed Car Advertisement"
author: "I Nyoman Arthawan Ariiawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Verbal and Visual Messages in English Printed Car Advertisement</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Arthawan Arriawan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">English Department Non – Reguler Program Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini berjudul “ Verbal and Visual messages in English printed car advertisements &quot;&nbsp;. Pembahasan dalam penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis pesan verbal dan visual dalam setiap iklan mobil dan mengetahui pesan yang disampaikan di setiap iklan mobil. Lebih spesifik , hal itu dimaksudkan untuk menganalisis makna dan fungsi tanda verbal dan visual untuk membantu pembaca memahami pesan iklan mobil yang dicetak . Metode yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah metode dokumentasi . Hal pertama yang dilakukan adalah mencari majalah internasional yang berisi iklan mobil dan kemudian memilih iklan mobil yang berbeda yang menunjukkan struktur yang berbeda dan karakteristik tanda-tanda verbal dan visual dan teori makna dengan Leech. Ia mengatakan bahwa secara umum iklan (a dicetak iklan ) terdiri atas komponen standar seperti berikut : judul , ilustrasi , body copy , baris tanda tangan ( logo ) , rincian berdiri , dan mengklasifikasikan artinya menjadi tujuh jenis , dan menyatakan lima fungsi bahasa dan teori warna oleh Wierzbicka katanya asosiasi warna dibagi enam warna yaitu putih dan hitam , hijau, biru , merah, kuning, coklat. Melalui analisis , itu menunjukkan bahwa pesan verbal dan visual memiliki hubungan untuk membuat iklan yang baik , berdasarkan penjelasan , kita bisa mendapatkan beberapa poin tentang iklan seperti: iklan harus memiliki tanda verbal dan visual untuk menarik perhatian pembaca , sebuah iklan yang baik harus dipilih dalam menggunakan kata-kata untuk informasi yang disampaikan dan pesan kepada para pembaca sehingga mereka bisa menjadi mengerti.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Advertisement is common word heard every day in our lives. Advertisements as a media of information. The ultimate objective of advertising is catching consumers' attention to think and feel certain things about a company, its products as well as their services, and influence their purchase behavior. There are two important signs that an advertisement must have namely verbal and visual signs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The language in the advertisement text is different from the language we use in our everyday lives. It is usually informal; the sentences are short and simple, and contain interactive words. It is because of the advertising language function, to send a message from</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the advertiser to the costumer to do something. This phenomenon makes printed advertisement interesting to be analyzed because of its creative set of wordings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the background given above, there are two problems required to be discussed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the verbal and visual signs used in each English Printed Car Advertisement?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meaning and function exist in each English Printed Car Advertisemen</span><span class="font0">t?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the verbal and visual messages resulting from the verbal and visual signs in each English Printed Car Advertisement.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning and function that exist in each English Printed Car Advertisement.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study was conducted through three steps; they are determination of data source, data collection and how the data are analyzed. Therefore, the following aspect covers three sections, namely data source, data collection, and data analysis</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Verbal and Visual Messages Presented in Advertisement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Verbal Messages</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The components of advertisement based on concept of advertising proposed by Leech and the Verbal message of advertisement plate.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Discussion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Saussure states that every sign consists of a signifier and a signified. The signifier and signified in verbal signs of advertisement can be seen through the explanation below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The headline of the advertisement in picture 1 is a signifier itself. The sentence &quot;&nbsp;Suck it up &quot;&nbsp;signifies A statement about functions and capabilities of the product to filter incoming air.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The statement on body copy is: Want some easy, cost effective power gains? Here's the equation: Larger amounts of cold air in = more power out. The solution? Fit high energy intake on your ride. Those sentences explain briefly the ability, specialty and the characteristics of the product being advertised that are has some advantages and a solution if your vehicle has problem.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signature Line (Logo) &quot;High Energy Induction&quot;, refers to the brand name of the product and the state where the product was produced.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The text &quot;For your nearest Dealer Call 03 9460 6566 or Email </span><a href="mailto:sales@highenegy.com.au"><span class="font1">sales@highenegy.com.au</span></a><span class="font1">&quot; in the Standing Details signifies the website address of the manufacturer.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Visual Messages</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Saussure defines the linguistic signs as a two side psychological entity: they are</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">concept (signified) and image (signifier). The two side psychological entity of visual signs of the advertisement in advertisement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Discussion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The image of the silver car in factory with black background and cover carburetor and the image of the product are the main attraction in this advertiser. The image of the silver car in the factory looks light in the darkness. They use a black background so it looks the power and elegance. Cover carburetor Represent the product in reality on the various types of carburetor product was being advertised. This made the cover of car with the red color looks so passion and red is generally used as a symbol of danger or warning. And the logo of High Energy with the yellow color looks most energizing, because yellow is often considered the brightest and more energize.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>The Meaning and Function Analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The explanation about meaning and function can be seen through the explanation below:</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>The headline Analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In the headline, the advertiser usually introduces the products in general, it is done in order to persuade the readers as an introduction of the product. The first sentence of the headline in the first advertisement is in the form of the product slogan &quot;Suck it up&quot;. The headline of this advertisement reflects the conceptual meaning because to demonstrate the quality of this product to make it look more elegant than the other products, and has the function and information about these products so that consumers want to use this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The headline placed at the centre top of page and written with red color, this style was used by advertiser in order to make the sentence in the advertisement easily caught by the reader.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>The body copy analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In the body copy, the advertiser usually informs the readers about the description of the product. Every sentence in the body copy in the advertisement has their own meanings and function. They are described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Want some easy, cost effective power gains? Here's the equation&quot;. This sentence reflects thematic meaning and directive function. Because the advertiser wants to communicate and organize the message of this advertisement to the readers.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Larger amounts of Cold Air In = More Power Out&quot;. This sentence reflects conceptual meaning and informational function. Because the advertiser gives information this air quality outgoing and incoming, has the same power.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The solution? Fit a High Energy Intake on your ride&quot;. This sentence reflects thematic meaning and directive function. Because the advertiser wants to organize the message and orient it to words the readers.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>The signature line (Logo) Analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The signature line of this advertisement is in the form of the brand name of the product &quot;High Energy Induction&quot;. This reflects conceptual meaning and informational function because it shows the name of the brand / company in this advertisement. The signature line of this advertisement contains informational function because the advertiser introduced by the name of the product to the reader. With that logo the advertiser wants the readers to get and buy this product.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>The standing Detail Analysis</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The standing detail of this advertisement &quot;&nbsp;For your nearest dealer call 03 9460 6566</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">or Email </span><a href="mailto:sales@highenergy.com.au"><span class="font1">sales@highenergy.com.au</span></a><span class="font1"> &quot;&nbsp;reflects conceptual meaning and informational function because the advertiser wants to inform to the readers if they want to see more information about this product they can visit their website.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark27"></a>. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">6. Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Advertisers typically make ads look attractive because advertisers want to make the reader interested in buying the product. The verbal sign is sent through the polite words and easily understood by the reader. Therefore, the reader is interested in purchasing. Besides, Visual sign is very important in advertising. Because the image is one part of the ad that may interests readers. Besides, the picture can help advertisers convince the reader to buy the product. Generally, printed advertisement has Verbal and Visual sign which have meaning. Because both Verbal and Visual sign has signifier and signified concept in each printed advertisement support each other and thus produce mean. Every product has different advantages according to the product being advertised but has same purpose. Visually, these advertisements use background exciting cover and aim to clarify the verbal signs. Besides, visual signs aimed to increase the attractiveness of advertising through pictures. Advertising has multiple functions and meanings to make the reader understand what is conveyed by the advertisement. There are seven meanings used in this research such as: Affective meaning, Conceptual meaning, Connotative meaning, Collective meaning, Reflected meaning, Thematic meaning, Stylistic meaning. And five functions such as: Informational function, Expressive function, Aesthetic function, Directive function, and Phatic function which every meaning and function have relation to conveyed messages to the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>7. Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Andriani, Fina. 2011. &quot;Verbal and Visual Messages in English Printed Women Cosmetic Advertisements&quot;. An Undergraduate paper. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Astrawan, Beny Kartika. &quot;The analysis of Verbal and Visual Sign in Jack Danniel's Whiskey Advertisement in Penthouse Magazine&quot;. An Undergraduate paper. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chandler, Daniel. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotica Para Principiantes (Semiotic for Beginner)</span><span class="font1"> http:/www. aber. acu. uk/documents/S4B/semiotic. html</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Clare, Alexander. 1998. &quot;A Semiotic Analysis of Magazine Advertisements for Men's Fragrances&quot;. The Journal of Semiotic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer, Gilian. 1982. Advertising as communication. England: Clays Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kurniawan, I Wayan. 2012. &quot;Verbal and Visual Messages Reflected on Music Video of Green Day&quot;. An Undergraduate paper. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. 1972. English in Advertising. A Linguistic Study of Advertising. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. SEMANTICS Prime and Universals. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>