---
layout: full_article
title: "THE DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN “TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD” SCREENPLAY BY HORTON FOOTE"
author: "A. A. Istri Agung Bintang Suryaningsih"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN “TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD” SCREENPLAY BY HORTON FOOTE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">A.A. ISTRI A BINTANG SURYANINGSIH</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi yang berjudul &quot;&nbsp;The Directive Illocutionary Acts in ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ Screenplay by Horton Foote &quot;&nbsp;bertujuan untuk mendapatkan jenis directive illocutionary acts yang ditemukan dalam naskah , dan directive illocutionary acts dari ujaran juga bisa mendukung munculnya respon dari para pendengar . Data penelitian ini diambil dari naskah yang berjudul &quot;&nbsp;To Kill a Mockingbird &quot;&nbsp;oleh Horton Foote ( 1962) . Naskah ini dipilih untuk menjadi sumber data karena dialognya mengandung banyak illocutionary acts, terutama directive illocutionary acts. Teori utama yang digunakan untuk mengklasifikasikan directive illocutionary acts adalah teori pragmatik yang di usulkan oleh Leech (1983).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini hanya di fokuskan pada directive illocutionary acts. Ada empat jenis directive illocutionary acts berdasarkan pendapat Leech, mereka adalah : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tell, ask, advise, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">invite. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil dari penelitian ini yaitu ada 9 data yang diambil untuk tipe directive illocutionary acts. Ciri-ciri directive illocutionary acts adalah: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tell </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mengungkapkan maksud kepada pendengar untuk melakukan sesuatu, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ask </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mengungkapkan keinginan pembicara berharap kepada pendengar untuk melakukan sesuatu, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">advise </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mengungkapkan keinginan pembicara untuk merekomendasikan sesuatu untuk pendengar, dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">invite </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mengungkapkan keinginan pembicara untuk memberikan undangan sesuatu untuk pendengar. Juga ada 9 data untuk analisis respon dari para pendengar. Maksud pembicara dalam mengucapkan keinginan adalah untuk mendapatkan respon yang sesuai dari pendengar. Dalam memberikan respon, pendengar harus mampu menafsirkan dengan baik maksud dari pembicara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : directive illocutionary acts, types of directive, responses of the hearers</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">People share their intentions and desire to those they are addressing using language in a communication. Illocutionary act focuses on the subject matter in this study. This study is only concerned with </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">directive illocutionary acts</span><span class="font2"> and the types of it as the point of this study were analyzed. This analysis is also connected to illustration the responses of the hearer when the speaker utters directive illocutionary acts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of directive illocutionary acts are found in the To Kill a Mockingbird screenplay?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the responses of the hearer when the speaker utters directive illocutionary acts in the To Kill a Mockingbird screenplay?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of directive illocutionary acts found in the To Kill a Mockingbird screenplay so that utterance can direct someone to do something.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the responses of the hearer when the speaker utters directive illocutionary acts in the To Kill a Mockingbird screenplay.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The library research uses documentation method to be applied to the data source. The documentation method was applied through reading the screenplay to find out the data to be analyzed according to the problems formulated previously. This study included three prominent steps for the explanation of research method aimed at gaining the valid result of the analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from the dialogues of a screenplay entitled To Kill a Mockingbird by Horton Foote (February 8, 1962). This screenplay has 146 pages in English language. To Kill a Mockingbird is a 1962 American drama film which is adapted from Harper Lee’s novel of the same title, it is directed by Robert Mulligan, and starred by Gregory Peck (as Atticus), Mary Badham (as Scout), Philip Alford (as Jem), Robert Duvall (as Boo Radley), and Brock Peters (as Tom Robinson). The To Kill a Mockingbird has an interesting story that takes viewers to the roots of human behavior, childhood innocence and experience. This screenplay was chosen to be the source of data because it has rich scenical situations indicating directive illocutionary acts performed exclusively in the screenplay. The To Kill a Mockingbird was chosen as the data source because it is totally performed in the form of dialogues or conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The process involved some important activities, such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;First, the movie was downloaded using video download manager.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Second, the screenplay was downloaded in the form of PDF and it was read attentively.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Third, the utterances or conversations indicating the types of directive illocutionary acts were jotted down using electronic notes.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fourth, the data were classified based on their types.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After collecting the data from the conversations in the screenplay, next the research was continued by analyzing the data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The data were analyzed descriptively and qualitatively.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The dialogues that indicate directive illocutionary acts were jotted down.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The classified data were analyzed following Leech’s theory.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;THE DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS IN “TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD” SCREENPLAY BY HORTON FOOTE</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The main analysis pointed to some important theories about directive illocutionary acts is proposed by Leech (1983). Based on Leech’s book (1983:205-206), illocutionary acts are devided into five general categories (Assertive, Directive, Commissive, Expressive and Rogative). Leech theory was applied to the analysis of data, it was aimed at identifying the types of Directive illocutionary acts. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Tell, ask, advise, </span><span class="font2">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">invite </span><span class="font2">are the main parts of directive illocutionary acts. This analysis is also connected to illustration of the responses of the hearer when the speaker utters directive illocutionary acts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study has nine data of the types of directive illocutionary acts, and nine data of responses of the heares. Below is a sample of analysis of one of the nine data of directive illocutionary acts and the response of the hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directive Illocutionary Acts of “Ask”</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>DATA 4 (Page: 11-12)</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">STEPHANIE : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Well, you’d better believe him, Mr. Dill Harris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">JEM &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">STEPHANIE : &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Well, I was standing in my yard one day when his mama</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">come running out and yelling, “He’s killing us all.”Turned Out Boo was sitting in the living room cutting up the paper for his scrapbook and when his daddy come by, he reached over with his scissors and stabbed him in his leg, pulled them out, and went on back cutting the paper.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The dialogue in data 4 is conducted by two people, they are Jem and Stephanie. The dialogue suggests that, Jem acts as the speaker and Stephanie as the hearer. Jem as the speaker because his utterance is a kind directive illocutionary acts of “ask”. In the dialogue, Jem uses imperative form in communication when he utters, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa</span><span class="font2">”. Jem has a close relationship with Stephanie, because Stephanie is his neighbor. The conversation occurs because someone must know about why Boo’s papa died, and Jem tells about that to Stephanie. Based on the theory of Leech about the directive illocutionary acts, the sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa</span><span class="font2">” it belongs to </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ask </span><span class="font2">form, in which </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ask </span><span class="font2">expresses that the speaker’s desire to wish the hearer (H) to do something (X). In uttering expression (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">e)</span><span class="font2">, speaker (S) wishes the hearer (H) to do something (X). Jem, as the speaker, directs Stephanie as the hearer to do something based on his desire. Jem’s utterance belongs to request form, in which request is the part of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">directive illocutionary act “ask”</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The desire that makes Stephanie as the hearer do something.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The wish that Stephanie as the hearer on that dialogue does something because of Jem’s desire in the dialogue.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It means that Jem wants Stephanie to do something based on his desire. Jem requests Stephanie to tell someone about the time when Boo Radley killed his papa. As a result, Stephanie does an action, in this case she should tell the story clearly. Based on Leech’s book “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">” in 1983 (1983: 216-217), the semantic analysis of directive illocutionary acts used to get the types of the utterance in Jem’s desire is as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;X follows the speech act.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It means that something of Jem’s desire has followed the speech act, Jem utters, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa</span><span class="font2">” his utterance belongs to request form, in which request is the part of ask in directive illocutionary acts based on Leech’s perspective (1983).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H involved in X.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Stephanie, as the hearer, has been involved in something that Jem’s desire wants Stephanie to do. It means that Stephanie must tell someone about the story of the time when Boo killed his papa by uttering “Well, I was standing in my yard one day when his mama come running out and yelling, “He’s killing us all.”Turned Out Boo was sitting in the living room……”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If X follows the speech act, it is conditional.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance of Jem has followed the speech act and it is conditional.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 Response to the Hearer to the Directive Illocutionary Acts “Ask”</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>DATA 13</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">JEM &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">STEPHANIE &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Well, I was standing in my yard one day when his</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mama come running out and yelling, “He’s killing us all.”Turned Out Boo was sitting in the living room cutting up the paper for his scrapbook and when his daddy come by, he reached over with his scissors and stabbed him in his leg, pulled them out, and went on back cutting the paper. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(Response)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 13 shows that there are two participants in the conversation. Stephanie as the hearer and Jem as the speaker when he utters, “Tell him about the time Boo tried to kill his papa”. Stephanie should understand the intention of Jem’s utterance. She gives the response to Jem’s utterance after listening to him by uttering, “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Well, I was standing in my yard one day when his mama come running out and yelling”, “He’s killing us all.” Turned Out Boo was sitting in the living room cutting up the paper for his scrapbook and when his daddy come by, he reached over with his scissors and stabbed him in his leg, pulled them out, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">went on back cutting the paper</span><span class="font2">”. Stephanie’s answer indicates that she has understood what is intended by Jem. She knows that the speaker wants her to tell someone about the time that Boo killed his papa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis in chapter three, it can be concluded that there are four types of directive illocutionary acts. The types of directive illocutionary acts that were found include: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tell, ask, advise, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">invite</span><span class="font2">. Nine data indicating directive acts were found in the screenplay entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To Kill a Mockingbird</span><span class="font2">. The classification types of directives illocutionary acts were based on the theory of Leech “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics”</span><span class="font2"> (1983). Each of them has its own characteristics differing one type of directive acts from the others. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tell</span><span class="font2"> expresses the intention that the hearer to do something, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ask</span><span class="font2"> expresses the speaker’s desire to wish the hearer to do something, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">advise</span><span class="font2"> expresses that the speaker’s desire to recommend something to the hearer, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">invite</span><span class="font2"> expresses the speaker’s desire to give an invitation of something to the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Looking from the responses of the hearers to the speakers, it can be described that the intention of the hearers’ responses toward the speakers’ utterances in performing directive acts. There are nine data indicating responses of the hearers. In giving the responses, the hearers are able to interpret the speakers’ intentions and they fully understand it. They can also give the appropriate response in accordance with the speaker’s desire.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Bach, Kent and Robert M. Harnish. 1979. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Taxonomy of Communicative Illocutionary Act</span><span class="font2">. London : The MIT Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey N. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Longham Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Foote, Horton. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Screenplay: “</span><span class="font2">To Kill a Mockingbird”. February 8, 1962 (1-146).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available from: </span><a href="http://www.screenplaydb.com"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.screenplaydb.com</span></a></p>