---
layout: full_article
title: "AN INDONESIAN-ENGLISH CODE SWITCHING USED BY ANNOUNCERS AT MENARA FM RADIO STATION"
author: "Anak Agung Bagus Dharmawan, Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati, Ni made Ayu Widiastuti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 16.3 September 2016: 1-6</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">AN INDONESIAN-ENGLISH CODE SWITCHING USED BY ANNOUNCERS AT MENARA FM RADIO STATION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anak Agung Bagus Dharmawan<sup>1*</sup>, Luh Ketut Mas Indrawati<sup>2</sup>, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti<sup>3 [123]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:bagusdharmawan09@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">bagusdharmawan09@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:mas.indrawati@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">mas.indrawati@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font2">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayufsb@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ayufsb@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">* </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Judul dari tulisan in adalah “An Indinesian-English Code Switching Used by Announcers at Menara FM Radio Station. Dalam makalah pembahasan hanya difokuskan kepada alih kode yang sering digunakan oleh penyiar sebagai efek dari kebutuhan bilingual dalam kehidupan modern ini. Studi ini terbatas pada beberapa poin: jenis-jenis alih kode bahasa inggris dan alasan penggunaan alih kode bahasa inggris. Semua data diperoleh dari beberapa program yang dimiliki oleh Menara Fm radio berupa data tertulis dan data lisan. Data lisan direkam dan ditulis, lalu digunakan untuk jenis- jenis alih kode bahasa inggris dan data tertulis didapat melalui kuisioner dikirim ke penyiar lalu digunakan untuk alasan penggunaan alih kode bahasa inggris.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis dimulai dengan mengidentifikasi jenis alih kode berdasarkan teori dari Poplack(1980) dan untuk alasan penggunaan alih kode bahasa Inggris diidentifikasi dengan menggunakan teori dari Savile-Troike (1986) dan Hoffman (1981). Berdasarkan analisis di peroleh bahwa ada 3 jenis alih kode yang digunakan Tag Switching, Inter Sentential Switching dan Intra Sentential Switching dan untuk alasan penggunaan alih kode bahasa Inggris ditemukan delapan dari sepuluh alasan yang telah dikirim ke penyiar, yaitu: Berbicara mengenai topic tertentu, Mengutip orang lain, Peduli terhadap sesuatu, Interjeksi(kata penghubung), Pengulangan kata untuk klarifikasi, Menunjukan identitas kelompok, untuk melembutkan atau memperkuat permintaan dan karena kebutuhan leksikal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Bilingual, Alih Kode, Tag Switching, Inter-sentential switching, Intra-sentential switching</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Communication today has grown up into high level from the old one to modern and through sophisticated technology, making it easier to communicate with someone far from us and new ways of communication evolved such as register, slang, jargon, code switching/mixing. Information is spread very fast through television, internet and radio. Radio is the fastest media to develop the information by the broadcaster and fulfill the people’s need for current information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Radio broadcasting in Indonesia has developed in regard to its quantity and quality. Since foreigners came to Indonesia, people have been able to speak English and this has interfered with the Indonesian language. No exception with the Indonesian radio announcers, they have also been influenced by English in delivering the radio program. They have their way of showing their English skill, that is, through code switching and it becomes a habit in the broadcasting area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Code switching is a term in linguistics which refers to the use of more than one languages in conversation, it often happens to the people who live in a multilingual or bilingual community because they have tend to switch the code when they communicate with each other. In this era, many language contact phenomena can occur through reading, watching movies in a foreign language, listening to the music or the radio with another language, and so on (Thomason, 2001: 146). The brightest example of that is the way in which one language is influenced by other languages through sacred texts and spread of religions such as Christianity (spread of Latin and Greek), Buddhism (the Pali language), Islam (Arabic), and so on. English language makes the phenomenon of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">bilingualism. The bilingualism encourages announcers and broadcasters to switch codes. Bilingualism can be defined as the ability of someone to speak two languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This topic is interesting to be analyzed due to the phenomenon of code switching in radio often used by the announcers so that it can influence the development of the English language as as a means of communication and it has become an important part of everybody in the world. Based on the phenomenon of code switching in radio by the announcers as the data, there are two problems that can be formulated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of code-switching are demonstrated by the announcers in Menara FM radio station?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the probable reasons of the announcer to switch the code?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of code-switching often used by the announcers.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To figure out and analyze the reasons of code-switching by the announcers.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scope of Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To limit the scope of discussion, the focus is only on the Indonesian-English code switching that is often used by the announcers in Menara FM radio station program. The scope of the present study includes:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The types of Indonesian-English code switching.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The reasons of code switching.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method used in this study is the qualitative method. Method is a way, technique, or process of doing some research. Research method is used to give a clear cut idea on what the researcher is carrying out with his study. This section on research method covers three points of discussion: Data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part contains the result and the discussion of the data about the types of code switching and the reasons of the use of code switching. Tag switching, inter-sentential switching and intra-sentential switching; these are the three types that are used to analyze the types of code switching in Menara radio and as to the reasons there are 10 reasons </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Talking about particular topic, Quoting somebody else, Being emphatic about something, interjection, Repetition used for clarification, Intention of clarifying the speech content for interlocutor, Expressing group identity, To soften or strengthen request or command, Because of lexical need and to exclude other people when a comment is intended for only limited audience.)</span><span class="font2"> used by the announcers when they deliver the program. In this paper, the researcher found 46 data of the code switching types and 7 types of reasons which are mostly used by the announcers. The data are as follows: 9 utterances of tag switching and 9 interjections (sentence filler or sentence connector), 13 inter sentential switching utterances, 4 used to soften or strengthen request or command, 5 being emphatic about something, 2 talking about particular topic, 1 repetition used for clarification and 1 expressing group identity. For the intra sentential switching, there are 24 utterances which contain 7 talking about particular</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">topic, 5 used to soften or strengthen request or command, 7 quoting somebody else, 2 being emphatic of something and 3 because of real lexical needs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After doing the analysis, the researcher draws some conclusions about the research. Through this thesis, the researcher found that nowadays code switching is normally used in Menara Fm Radio Program. There are 3 types which occur in Menara Fm Radio; they are tag switching, inter-sentential switching and intra-sentential switching. The use of code switching can be described as follows: Tag switching occurs when the utterance involves the interaction of an exclamation, a tag or parenthetical is one language into an utterance which is otherwise enrirely in the other language and it occurs in the beginning of the sentence. Inter-sentential switching usually occurs in any parts of sentence; it involves a switch at a clause or sentence boundary and different from the another sentence; Intra-sentential switching involves a shift in language in the middle of the sentence, usually performed without pause, interruption or hesitation, the same as the inter-sentential switching, it occurs in any parts of the sentence. The second problem is the reasons for the announcer to switch the code while they were on air; the writer sent ten reasons based on the theory from Hofmann and Savile-Troikke to the announcers and they chose eight reasons instead; the ten reasons are as follows </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">: Talking about a particular topic, quoting somebody else, being emphatic about something, interjection (inserting sentence fillers or sentence connectors), repetition used for clarification, to soften or strengthen request or command, because of the need for real lexical items, expressing group identity</span><span class="font2">, intention of clarifying the speech content for the interlocutor, to exclude other people when a</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">comment is intended for only limited audience. The reasons mostly chosen by the announcers are typed in bold and there are 46 utterances recorded; they are 9 interjections (sentence filler or sentence connector), 4 to soften or strengthen request or command, 6 being emphatic about something, 10 talking about particular topic, 1 repetition used for clarification and 1 expressing group identity. 5 used to soften or strengthen request or command, 7 quoting somebody else and 3 because of the need for real lexical items.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>8. Bibliography</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">A.S Hornby. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford ADVANCED LEARNER’S Dictionary</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: New York</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Appel, Rene and Peter Musyken. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Ethnography of Communication,</span><span class="font2"> United Kingdom: Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Appel, Rene and Peter Musyken. 1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Contact and Bilingualism</span><span class="font2">. Amsterdam University Press: Edward Arnold</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">De Gruyter, Mounton 1988 Code Switching: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anthropological and Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font2">, New York: Berlin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Di Pietro 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Life with Two Languages</span><span class="font2">. “An Introduction to Bilingualism”. Cambridge: Harvard University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">6</span></p>