---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TRANSLATION OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN THE POETRY 'THE MORNING AFTER'"
author: "Chris Ning Tyas"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TRANSLATION OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN THE POETRY &quot;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE MORNING AFTER&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chris Ning Tyas</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">0918351090</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Non-regular Program English Department Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul The Translation of Figurative Language In The Poetry &quot;The Morning After&quot;. Tujuan dalam penelitian ini adalah untuk menemukan jenis bahasa kiasan dan mencari bagaimana bahasa kiasan itu diterjemahkan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data diambil dari buku puisi berjudul &quot;The Morning After&quot; buku ini terdiri dari 132 halaman dan memiliki 31 puisi, yang mana masing-masing puisi tidulis oleh penulis yang berbeda. Metoda dan teknik pengambilan data terdiri dari dua tahap. Pertama, membaca setiap puisi secara keseluruhan, lalu puisi dipilih berdasarkan idi dari puisi yang paling banyak memiliki jenis bahasa kiasan. Kedua, mencari jenis terjemahannya. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori dari Larson (1998), yang mengklasifikasikan jenis terjemahan menjadi 4 jenis, yaitu: terjemahan literal, terjemahan liteteral modified, terjemahan idiomatik, dan terjemahan free unduly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Jenis bahasa kiasan yang ditemukan dalam analisis ini adalah simile, metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, euphemism, idioms. Bahasa kiasan yang paling banyak ditemukan dalam penelitian ini adalah hiperbola. Sedangkan untuk Jenis terjemahannya, ditemukan empat jenis terjemahan, yaitu: terjemahan liteteral modified,terjemahan literal terjemahan idiomatik, dan terjemahan free unduly. Terjemahan literal adalah yang paling banyak ditemukan dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">: puisi, bahasa kiasan, terjemahan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Figurative language is used to extend what the opinion or feeling of somebody, in spoken or written. On the other hand, figurative language plays an important part in our daily communicate, because figurative languages are usually applied in our daily communicate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Figurative language could have multiple meaning depending on who is speaking and who is listening. Characteristics of translation are used to transfer written or spoken source language texts to equivalent written or spoken target language text. Language users try to improve his abilities to describe the translation of figurative language from SL into TL correctly. Therefore, the effort to translate figurative language must continue to achieve a good understanding of the meaning of literary works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Translation is basically a change of form referring to the actual words, phrases, clauses, sentences, and paragraphs, which are spoken or written, referred to as the surface structure of a language (Larson, l998:3). According Hornby (2006:1573) translation is the process of the changing something that is written or spoken into another language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Every person who is interested in translation tries to translate SL into TL effectively to achieve a good understanding of the meaning, especially of literary works. Poetry is one of them, poetry is a collection of poems (Hornby, 2006:1118). Poetry consists of a lot of figurative expression.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, there are two problems formulated in this study, the problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of figurative expression appear in the poetry entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Morning After</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the figurative expressions are translated from the source language into the target language?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This writing has two aims, as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify kinds of figurative language appearing in the poetry, which is based on the theory of figurative language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the strategies of translation from source language into target language.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data was taken by using observation method. Quoted as the source of data are poetry entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tanah Bali, Denpasar, Selamat Jalan I Gusti Nyoman Lemmpad, Doa and Sakit</span><span class="font1"> .The data source carefully read to identify kind of figurative language as well as how source language is translated into target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After all the data were collected, they were identified using the theories of figurative language and theories of translation by Larson (1998). The process of analyzing the data in this study was done in several steps, including: first, lines or phrases were chosen randomly, and kinds of figurative language were identified. Second, the line or the phrase was analyzed based on the theory of translation by Larson (1998), and indicating the strategies in applied translate figurative language from Indonesian as source language into English as target language were indicated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metonymy expression and literal translation</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;Mungkin tanah bali tak punya peta leluhur di matamu. (By Oka Rusmini, 2000:13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;Possibility the land of Bali has no ancestral map in your eyes. (By Oka Rusmini,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">2000:12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The figurative expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Mungkin tanah bali tak punya peta leluhiur di matamu&quot;</span><span class="font1"> is translated into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Possibility the land of Bali has no ancestral map in your eyes&quot;</span><span class="font1">. It is identified as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">metonymy</span><span class="font1">, because it needs to analyze the involving association. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;ancestral map&quot;</span><span class="font1"> has special meaning. It does not mean the map was made by the ancestor, but refers to the rules that are believed by the ancestor. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Ancestral map&quot;</span><span class="font1"> talks about how you can respect someone older. The sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Possibility the land of Bali has no ancestral map in your eyes&quot;</span><span class="font1"> means that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">author wants to show the feeling of the author's anger to someone who does not respect the role of her ancestor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translation is indicated as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">literal translation</span><span class="font1">. It can be seen that the target language is such as following the form of source language. The sentence above is acceptable both in source language or target language, but it not given a good sense in target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Live metaphor and literal translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: Denpasar adalah gasing yang senatiasa berputar. (By Mas Ruscitawati, 2000:5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Denpasar is a top that is constantly spinning. (By Mas Ruscitawati, 2000:4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Example (1) above is taken from the first line of the last stanza of the poetry entitled &quot;Denpasar&quot;. It is identified as a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">live metaphor</span><span class="font1">, because it needs to be analyzed carefully. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;gasing&quot;</span><span class="font1"> literally means a traditional game done by throwing a pointy object and when the object is thrown to the ground, it can rotate. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gasing</span><span class="font1"> is used to the describe life in Denpasar, as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;gasing&quot;,</span><span class="font1"> always rotates or spins same as the life in Denpasar. The metaphoric sentence </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar adalah gasing yang senantiasa berputar</span><span class="font1"> or </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar is a top that is constantly spinning</span><span class="font1"> means that life will go on such as spanning of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gasing</span><span class="font1"> with movement and strength. Example (1) is a metaphoric expression using the same of point of similarity to the topic. The point of similarity between &quot;Denpasar&quot; and &quot;gasing&quot; is the life in Denpasar which moves like a </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gasing</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The target language presents </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">literal translation</span><span class="font1">. It was chosen as the sentence from the target language ;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar is a top that is constantly spinning</span><span class="font1"> follows the form of the source language; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar adalah gasing yang senantiasa berputar</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole expression and modified literal translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: &nbsp;&nbsp;Kubuatkan ayunan lengkungan cahaya di kaki langit. (By Frans Nadjira, 2000:29)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: &nbsp;&nbsp;I made a swing from a bow of light from the horizon. (By Frans Nadjira, 2000:28)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word &quot;horizon&quot; means the furthest that you can see; where the sky seems to meet the land or the sea; the limit of your desire, knowledge or interests (Hornby, 2006:721). Once again </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">hyperbole expression </span><span class="font1">appears in the sentence. As we know &quot;swing&quot; means a seat for swinging on; hung from the above on ropes or chair (Hornby, 2006:1497). It is an overstatements, nobody could make a swing with bow of light on a horizon. May be the actual meaning that the author wants to his friend to get a better life in heaven.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The words &quot;&nbsp;lengkung cahaya&quot; is translated into &quot;&nbsp;a bow of light&quot;. It is acceptable in the target language and has close relationship to the source language. We could conclude that the sentence &quot;&nbsp;kubuatkan ayunan lengkungan cahaya di kaki langit&quot; which was translated into &quot;&nbsp;I made a swing from a bow of light from the horizon&quot; is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">modified literal translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synecdoche expression and idiomatic translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">SL: Atau hidup tak pernah mengajari keindahan. (By Oka Rusmini, 2000:13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TL: Nor does life ever teach beauty. (By Oka Rusmini, 2000:12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The example above is identified as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">synecdoche</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beauty</span><span class="font1"> is the quality of being pleasing to the sense or to the mind (Hornby, 2006:116-117). In this sentence beauty refers to something that makes someone have pleasing sense. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;beauty&quot;</span><span class="font1"> means good behavior for human being, such as care, courtesy, respect, and mutual help.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The source language in the sentence above is translated into target language using </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">idiomatic translation</span><span class="font1">. The translation from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;atau hidup tak pernah mengajari keindahan&quot;</span><span class="font1"> into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;&nbsp;nor does life ever teach beauty&quot;</span><span class="font1"> show the effort of translator that give a good sense to the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study analyzed and discussed the five poems founded in the poetry book </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Morning After.</span><span class="font1"> The five poems mentioned above are: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tanah Bali</span><span class="font1"> by Oka Rusmini, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar</span><span class="font1"> by Mas</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ruscitadewi, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Selamat Jalan I Gusti Nyoman Lempad</span><span class="font1"> by Frans Nadjira, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Doa</span><span class="font1"> by Ketut Yuliarsa, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sakit</span><span class="font1"> by Ketut Yuliarsa. After the whole for the analysis from the translation of figurative expression in the poetry </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Morning After,</span><span class="font1"> it can be concluded that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">First, seven types of figurative language founded in this discussion, those are: simile, metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, euphemism, idioms, and hyperbole. The most figurative language that founded is hyperbole. Irony is not found in this discussion. In some example in the discussion, it has been found that some lines of poetry can express more than one type of figurative expressions. For example, in line five in poetry entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Doa&quot;</span><span class="font1">, expresses two figurative expressions; simile and synecdoche.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second, this study also analyzes and discusses kinds of translation based on theory by Larson (1998). There were four types of translation: literal translation, modified literal translation, idiomatic translation, and unduly free translation. All four types of translation are found it this data. All of those four types of translation are used in the poetry book. The most dominant translation types used is literal translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark13"></a>7.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, AS. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, M.L. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lanham: Littlefield Publish.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, Peter. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font1">. New York: Prentice Hall.</span></p>