---
layout: full_article
title: "DEEP STRUCTURE OF LANGUAGE IN LEVEL OF WORDS AND PHRASES IN DIGITAL ARTICLES OF NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC  MAGAZINE"
author: "I Wayan Pardika"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">DEEP STRUCTURE OF LANGUAGE IN LEVEL OF WORDS AND PHRASES IN DIGITAL ARTICLES OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I Wayan Pardika</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam penterjemahan bahasa dari bahasa sumber ke bahasa sasaran, ada dua pendekatan penting yang harus diperhatikan oleh penterjemah. Pertama adalah pendekatan berdasarkan struktur di permukaan bahasa seperti grammar dan lesikal (surface structure) dan struktur di dalam bahasa (deep structure/semantic).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata dan frasa memiliki struktur semantic yang disebut unit konsep (concept unit) yang terdiri dari kumpulan komponen – komponen makna dari kata dan frasa itu sendiri. Unit yang disebut konsep ini ddapat dibagi menjadi empat kelas utama yaitu:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thing concept</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event concept</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Attribute concept</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Relation concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Menganalisis sebuah konsep dari kata dan frasa akan membantu penterjemah untuk menerjemahkan text dari bahasa sumber ke bahasa sasaran dengan lebih tepat, dengan menentukan teknik apa yang terbaik untuk digunakan untuk menyampaikan konsep dri sebuah kata atau frasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: struktur semantik, penterjemahan, unit konsep</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In translation, there are two important approaches applied. According to Nida and taber in the book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory and Practice of Translation,</span><span class="font1"> Translation process is defined as producing the closest and most natural equivalence of Source Language (SL) to the Receptor Language/Target Language (RL). There also two terms in translation proposed by Nida and Taber; the first in meaning (deep structure) and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">second in style or form (surface structure) (Nida and Taber, 1982: 12). Based on this statement, we know there are two important approach of translation; the first based on meaning and second based on form.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson (1984) also gives clear definition about these approaches in translation; there is the way to analyze at form and meaning as surface structure (grammatical, lexical, and phonological) and deep structure (semantics) of language</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font1">Semantic structure is more nearly universal than grammatical structure. In translation, both Source Language (SL) and Target Language (TL) contain deep structures and meaning components. (Larson, 1984: 29)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In translation, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">concept unit</span><span class="font1"> is considered of part in the deep structure which occurs in the level of words and phrases, the unit contain with meaning of word or phrase. Word or phrase semantically contain with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">meaning component</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The meaning component</span><span class="font1"> of word or phrase is grouped into one unit called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the concept</span><span class="font1">, when concept is grouped together into one unit which is called as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">propositions,</span><span class="font1"> then propositions grouped into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">propositional cluster</span><span class="font1">, then propositional cluster into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">semantics paragraphs</span><span class="font1">, semantics paragraphs into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">episode</span><span class="font1">, episodes into </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">episodes clusters</span><span class="font1">, and these units unite into form </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">larger unit of the discourse</span><span class="font1">. (Larson, 1984: 31).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the surface structure, the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">concept unit</span><span class="font1"> is mostly represented by word, morpheme, idiomatic expression, tone, or by word order. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Concept unit</span><span class="font1"> can be identified in a given language on principle contrasts and comparison within the system of that language. (Barnwell, 1980). Barnwell also proposed that there are four types of concept unit, as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thing Concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the deep structure of words and phrases, this class presents all things or objects, which exist in the universe, or which exist in any imaginary world. For</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">examples: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">house, tree, man, dog, fire, air, angel, soul, unicorn, fairy, dragon mostly nouns or pronouns</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Event Concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This class presents all actions, processes and happenings, including all movements and also mental processes. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">For example: run, jump, fall, break, write, melt, freeze, know, think, and rejoice, mostly as verbs</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Attribute Concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This class presents qualities or quantities or degree of Things, or of Events, or of other Attributes. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">For example: red, white, long, cold, quickly, suddenly, twice, two, very, too, mostly as adjectives, adverbs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Relation Concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the relational concept, the class presents all sets of meaningful relationship between Things, Events and Attributes. Relations may be signaled by a word (a preposition or a conjunction), or by a morpheme. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">For examples of Relations: in, on, under, behind direction: towards, present, future, past logical relations: because, if, in order that, etc. conjunction, preposition, particles, enclitics, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">To identify the concept, in the analysis to determine the words that is referring primarily as a Thing, Events, Attributes, and Relation in level of Concept unit, the Central Concept of the words must identified. First step to find the concept by analyze the semantic features of the lexical items is find out the explicit meaning of the lexical items.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background of the study, there are two important approaches in translation, fist in based on form and second is based on the meaning. In the study of language, the term meaning in the study is considered to the deep structure of language. The concept </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">unit</span><span class="font1"> is considering as the deep structure of languages which</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">occur in level of words and phrase. Based on the background, the problem is what is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">concept unit</span><span class="font1"> and how the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">concept unit</span><span class="font1"> identified and classified in languages in level of word and phrase?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems of the study, the aims of this research is to explain about the deep structure of language in level of word or phrase which is called as the concept unit. In the process of translating word or phrase, the concept has important role. From analyzing the concept in the deep structure, the translator can recognize and classify which concept are shared between the source language (English) and target language (Bahasa Indonesia,) and which concepts in source language are unknown in the target language culture. Know and understand the concept will help to find which techniques are good to make an adjustment of the word or phrase between two languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methodology</span></h1></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1 Data Source.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source is the digital articles of the online National Geographic Magazine. The digital version is chosen because it is easier to get since to get the printed edition must be ordered from the overseas. The Magazine is available in its traditional printed edition on paper and digital edition, which is available online at is </span><a href="http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/"><span class="font1">http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/</span></a><span class="font1">, and for Bahasa Indonesia version is available at </span><a href="http://nationalgeographic.co.id/"><span class="font1">http://nationalgeographic.co.id/</span></a><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2 Data Collection</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In collecting data, since the topic of the study is about concept unit that occurs in the level of words and phrases, some words and phrases collected and then the Indonesian version of the articles was checked to find the Indonesian translation presented in the English version of the articles. Finally, the data categorized based on the source language data and the target language data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3 Data analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data analyzed by using qualitative method. In this step, the collected data were categorized by the source language and the target language. Then, by the theory of Semantic Hierarchy, the data analyzed to find out the concept unit in the data. After that, the data checked for the role of translation equivalence occurs in the process of translating concept units from the source language to the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deep Structure Analysis in Level of Words and Phrases in Digital Articles of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">National Geographic Magazine</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1 Thing concept.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Thing concept is one of the concept classes which explain about all things or objects, which exist in the universe, or in any imaginary world. However, in analyze the concept of the word can be more complex since one word or phrase is constructed with more than one concept units. From several component of concept constructed in the concept unit, one of the components is must be the central concept. The analysis should be as follow:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“… , when </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Europeans</span><span class="font1"> swarmed into the New World to dominate an almost empty wilderness”. (Mann and Hecht, line 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this collected data, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Europeans</span><span class="font1"> analyzed by several steps. The first step the referential meaning of the word was analyzed. Because the word sometimes has multiple senses depending on the context, the concept is depending on the grammatical context in the surface structure. In the grammatical context, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">European</span><span class="font1"> can be as noun or can be as adjective depending the how the word is used in the passage. Determining the grammatical class in the surface structure is the clue for the translator to find the concept unit or concept cluster in the deep structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According the grammatical context, the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">European</span><span class="font1"> is consider as noun in the surface structure. The word is subject which followed by predicate </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">swarmed</span><span class="font1"> in the sentence. Since the word consider as noun in surface structure, the word is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">determined as thing concept in the deep structure. By the referential meaning and the context, the explicit concept of the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">European(s)</span><span class="font1"> is “a person from Europe.” There are two different components constructed into the concept, the concepts of “a person” which consider as thing concept because the concept is talk about an object, and the concept of “come from Europe” is consider as event concept because it explains about an action, process or happening</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.”</span><span class="font1"> The analysis should be as the table below:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Central (thing concept)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Additional (event concept)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">“a person (or group of people)”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“come from Europe”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This concept cluster also contains with several components of concept (event-thing)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">From the table above, the thing concept is the central concept and then restricted or specified by the event concept. Thing concept as the central concept talks about “a person or a group of people,” and the event concept “come from Europe” is explain more concisely or restrict the concept of the central concept. The additional event concept distinguishes the meaning of the central concept from other that may take form of an Asian, Austronesian, or Edwardian, etc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2 Event concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The event concept includes all actions, processes, and happenings, including all movements and mental processes (Barnwell, 1980). This class is mostly present by verb and adverb in the surface structure. The analysis of the event concept is as follow:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“…, African slaves escaped the harsh conditions of the European plantation and mining operation and headed for the interior, into lands </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">controlled </span><span class="font1">by Indians”. (Mann and Hecht, line 14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">controlled</span><span class="font1"> is clearly implies that the word consider as verb in the surface structure. There are relationship between the surface structure and the deep structure as the clue in determining the concept class of the word (Barnwell; 1980); if</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">words are verbs in surface structure, it will consider as event concept in the deep structure. However, even the word is clear as event, it is still important to analyze the concept for constructing the meaning in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to the context of passage, the explicit concept of word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">controlled</span><span class="font1"> is “limit or managing something carefully”. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">controlled</span><span class="font1"> contain several components; the concept unit of the word is contain an action presented by “limit” or “manage” which is consider as Event concept and the second or additional concept is explain about quality of the event concept presented by concept of “carefully”. The analysis presented by table below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Central (event concept)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Additional (attribute concept)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“limit” or “manage”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">“Carefully”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">From the table above, “limit” or “manage” are consider as the central concept. The second concept or additional concept is the thing concept that implied by concept of “carefully” served to restrict the central concept.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3 Attribute concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The third class in semantic classes is attribute concept. Attribute concept is different with thing concept or even concept. The attribute concept explains about quality, quantity, or degree of things, or of events, or of other attributes (Barnwell, 1980). To analyze the attribute concept in the data, the analysis presented as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“…, a robot or a manned submersible has swept over Titanic’s </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">gloomy </span><span class="font1">facets, pinged a sonar beam in its direction, taken some images—and left” (Sides, line 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the presented data above, there is a compound word of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gloomy</span><span class="font1">. In the surface structure, the word gloomy consider as adjective to describe the noun </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">facets </span><span class="font1">in the data source. This implies that the word in the deep structure is an attribute concept and there is no skewing of classification between semantic and grammatical</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">class occur. As mentioned above, the attribute concept is concept to explain the quality of thing concept.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the grammatical context, the word serves as adjective to describe the quality of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">facets</span><span class="font1">. By the context, the explicit concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gloomy</span><span class="font1"> is “nearly dark” The explicit concept presents the concept units that constructed become one concept. There are several concept structured in the in the concept of word gloomy, there are the concept of “nearly or almost” which is represent an attribute concept that explain about the quality of object and there are the concept of “dark” which is consider as the thing concept in the concept. The table below presents the analysis of the central concept:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Central (attribute concept)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Additional (thing concept)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">“nearly or almost”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“dark”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word also contain with several concept (thing-attribute)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The central concept of word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">gloomy</span><span class="font1"> is the attribute concept of “nearly or almost”. The meaning from central concept is specified by additional component of thing concept is a thing concept of “dark”. After restating the concept, the central concept is followed by thing concept as additional component. This attribute concept is explaining about the quality of the word facets in the passage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4 Relational concept</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Relation concept is the fourth class in semantic class of concept unit and different with thing, event, and attribute concept, which have referential meaning (Barnwell, 1980). The relation concept is expression of the meaningful relationship between thing, event, and attribute or between larger semantics unit. In this research, relations concept is signaled by a word such as a preposition or a conjunction. To analyze the attribute concept in the data, the analysis presented below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“…, we pass through Boise city, following the storm </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">toward</span><span class="font1"> Guymon”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Johnson, line 19)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The relation concept has no referential meaning when they stand-alone, they have meaning when they used in the passage and very depending with the context. The next example is the preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">toward</span><span class="font1"> analyzed. In the deep structure, the word consider relation concept. The word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">toward</span><span class="font1"> in the passage is the expression of relationship between two concepts or more. Consider to the context of the passage, the word toward related to the concept “in the direction.” This concept also implies an action “move.” By the analysis of the passage, the preposition builds the relationship between two different concepts. The first is the thing concept of “a storm” and other thing concept of “Guymon.” The analysis should be as follow;</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">thing-event concept</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">relation-event concept “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">toward”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">thing concept</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“a storm”</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">in the direction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">“Guymon”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">From the analysis above, the relation concept become the important feature to present what is the relationship between the concept of “trailer” and the concept of “cameras.” The relation concept in the example above implied the relationship the concept cluster of “trailer” with the concept cluster of “high-speed cameras” and “electronic gear.” The meaning of the example above is “the cameras and electronic gear is parts of 16-foot trailer.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In languages, the concepts units are recognizable units in deep structure that contain meaning components. Depending on the grammatical class in the surface structure, the concepts are classified into four semantic classes which all of these occur and analyzed in the data source. Those types of concept can be represents as follows: Thing concept, Event concept, Attribute concept, and Relation concept.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the process of translating word or phrase, the concept has important role. From the concept, the translator can recognize and classify which concept are shared</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">between the source language (English) and target language (Bahasa Indonesia,) and which concepts in source language are unknown in the target language culture. Know and understand the concept will help to find which techniques are good to make an adjustment of the word or phrase between two languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Catford, J. C. 1965. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Theory of Translation, an Essay in Applied Linguistics,</span><span class="font1"> New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Johnson, George. 2012. “Chasing Lighting” Available on: </span><a href="http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/08/chasing-lightning/johnson-text"><span class="font1">http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/08/chasing-lightning/johnson-text</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1984. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation, a Guide to Across Language Equivalence,</span><span class="font1"> New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mann, Charles C &amp;&nbsp;Susanna Hecht. 2012. “Brazil’s Maroon People; Where Slaves Rules” Available from: </span><a href="http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/04/maroon-people/mann-hecht-text"><span class="font1">http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/04/maroon-people/mann-hecht-text</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nida, A. Eugene &amp;&nbsp;C. R. Taber. 1982. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language structure and translation. </span><span class="font1">California: Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rozaq, Abdul. 2006. “The Translation Equivalence of Preposition </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">for”.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar: Faculty of Letters, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sides, Hampton. 2012. “The Titanic: Unseen Titanic” Available from: </span><a href="http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/04/titanic/sides-text"><span class="font1">http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2012/04/titanic/sides-text</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Venuti, Lawrence. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The translation studies reader,</span><span class="font1"> London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>