---
layout: full_article
title: "FEMALE TOURISM WORKERS AND THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC"
author: "Ni Made Santi Diwyarthi, A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara, A.A. Bagus Wirawan, I Nyoman Sirtha"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-77610 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-77610"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-77610"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">August 2021 Vol. 14, Number 3, Page 7-13</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">FEMALE TOURISM WORKERS AND THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Made Santi Diwyarthi<sup>1</sup>, A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara<sup>2</sup>, A.A. Bagus Wirawan<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nyoman Sirtha<sup>4</sup></span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali Tourism Polytechnic, <sup>2,3,4</sup>Cultural Studies Study Program, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Email: </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:santidiwyarthi@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">santidiwyarthi@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2anom_kumbara@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>anom_kumbara@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font1">, <sup>3</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">b</span><a href="mailto:gs.wirawan@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">gs.wirawan@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="mailto:4nyoman-sirtha@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>4</sup>nyoman-sirtha@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;18-01-2020</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;29-06-2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;31-08-2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Women are vulnerable to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. This happened because the pandemic situation made companies generally cut the number of female workers for the first time for reasons of efficiency. This research reveals female tourism workers and the Covid-19 pandemic. The research method used is qualitative, with purposive sampling. The results of the study prove that the Covid-19 pandemic is destroying the business world globally, with the impact of 4500 female tourism workers in Nusa Dua (85%), with a loss of 9 trillion rupiah per month. This situation requires workers who are generally the first to be unpaid live.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: women workers, tourism, pandemic, covid-19</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Covid-19 pandemic situation that broke out at the end of 2019 has destroyed the development of world tourism. Tourism is like suspended animation without any development. The Jakarta Post (14 July 2020) explained that 5.9 trillion of revenue from the tourism sector in Indonesia had disappeared due to the outbreak of this virus. This of course requires serious attention and serious handling of the next steps, both from the government, businessmen, and the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tourism as an industry is growing by involving various components, both natural resources, communities, governments, service providers, and the tourists themselves. The developments that occur require an order of handling with new norms that no longer adhere to the concept of mass tourism, where tourist arrivals are expected on a large scale without thinking about the consequences or impacts on the environment and natural surroundings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on data from the International Labor Organization (ILO), the average woman who works in hotels and restaurants reaches 49% (UNWTO, 2011). The largest proportion is located in Latin America and the Caribbean with 58.5% and 55.4% respectively. Most of them occupy positions in the positions of service workers and cashiers or other financial/administrative personnel (clerks), which are 59% and 44.7%, respectively. The average number of women holding positions as entrepreneurs or hotel or restaurant owners is 21.95% and 36.08%, respectively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The involvement of women in tourism can reduce gender inequality in development. Some general facts about women in tourism are outlined by UNWTO (2011), as follows: 1. Women make up a large proportion of the formal tourism workforce.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Women are represented at the service and administrative level, but under-represented at the professional level.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Women in tourism typically earn 10% to 15% less than men in the workforce.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The tourism sector makes women as business owners/employers, which is almost twice that of other sectors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One in five tourism ministers worldwide is a woman.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Women who work in the tourism sector become self-employed/independent with a much higher proportion than in other sectors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A large amount of unpaid work is being done by women in the family tourism business</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The above description illustrates that the involvement of women workers in various fields of work, including the tourism industry, plays an important role in the development and development of a country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Women Informal Sector Workers</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the Manpower Act (UU) no. 13/2003, informal workers refer to people who work without an employment relationship, which means there is no agreement that regulates the elements of work, wages and power. The Ministry of Manpower and Transmigration generally defines the informal sector as all unregistered commercial and noncommercial businesses (or economic activities), which do not have a formal organizational structure and generally have the following characteristics: family owned, small-scale activities, dense works, using adapted technology and relying on local resources.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The 17th International Conference on Labor Statistics (in BPS, 2013) defines informal sector workers as 'employees whose employment relationships are not covered by legislation or in practice, not subject to labor, tax, income, social protection laws or certain entitlements to certain job security (notice of prior dismissal, poor pay, annual pay or sick leave, etc.)”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In calculating informal workers, BPS takes a special approach in determining the population working in the formal/informal sector, namely based on employment status in the main job and type of work/position (BPS, 2013). According to their status, workers are categorized into seven: 1) self-employed; 2) trying to be assisted by temporary workers/unpaid workers; 3) Trying to be assisted by permanent workers/paid workers; 4) workers/Employees/employees; 5) Freelancing in Agriculture; 6) Non-agricultural workers; 7) Family/unpaid workers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In March 2020, when the WHO declared Covid-19 a pandemic, with a worldwide spread, Indonesia was no exception. The Large-Scale Social Restrictions taken by the Indonesian government have had an economic and social impact, which is inevitable in the form of layoffs (Termination of Employment).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Within four months of the outbreak of the Covid-19 virus, social impacts occurred everywhere quickly. The traffic, which was busy at first, was suddenly quiet. Tourist attractions that were originally crowded, become deserted without tourists, people no longer carry out activities outside the home. Corona virus is spreading rapidly in 213 countries. As of April 19, 2020, WHO released data exposed to this virus as many as 2,245,872 people, with a death toll of 152,707 people worldwide. 20 countries do lock down (isolation) and sanctions for violators. This virus is a threat to 7.7 billion people in the world (data based on world demographics released by worlddometers.info, March 2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Research by the United Nations shows that 81% of the world's workforce, or the 3.3 billion people who previously had jobs, was partially closed due to the outbreak. The International Labor Organization (ILO) estimates that 25 million people worldwide have lost their jobs or the equivalent of USD 3.4 trillion. The ILO also asks heads of state and heads of government to make maximum efforts to restore the social and economic life of the people for years to come during and after the Covid-19 pandemic, especially women, because women are predicted to be the most affected by the pandemic. Before the Covid-19 pandemic</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">took place, the ILO had recorded that there were 190 million working age people in the world who were out of work. Research shows the four sectors most affected by the pandemic, and accounting for 37.5% of global employment, covering the food and accommodation sector, namely 144 million workers, retail and wholesale, 482 million workers, service and administration as many as 157 million workers, manufacturing as many as 463 million workers. This shows that the informal sector has always been the most affected, both in the economic crisis and in the pandemic, with the largest number, namely 2 billion people, or the equivalent of 61% of workers worldwide.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data from the Indonesian National Development Planning Agency for 2018 shows that there are three main sectors in the labor sector in Indonesia, including the service sector, 56.59%, the agricultural sector 28.79%, and manufacturing 14.62%. World Bank research also shows that relatively few women in Indonesia work in the formal sector. Only half of Indonesian women of working age are employed in formal jobs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Research by Judith Cukier (1996) explains that the development of pTourism in Bali also offers employment and business opportunities for women. Job opportunities for women can be formal or informal. It was recorded that in 1974 as many as 17% of the total hotel workers were female workers and this figure rose to 27% in 1991. Likewise in the craft sector, the number of female workers from 19,700 people in 1971 increased to 93,000 women workers in 1974. 1990. This explains that there is a significant increase in the number of female workers working in tourism in Bali from year to year.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar City Tourism Office data in 2018 showed that there were a total of 516,642 workers, spread across the informal, formal and non-formal sectors. With details of 309,986 males, and 206,656 females. The data can be further divided into a total of 4,238 workers in star hotels, 3,161 male workers, and 1,077 female workers. A total of 2,606 employees work at the budget hotel, with 1,730 men and 876 women. A total of 357 workers in the tourist lodge, with 231 men and 126 women. And 4,357 workers in various restaurants.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cokorda Oka Artha Ardana explained that the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on Bali tourism was a loss of 9.7 trillion per month by various parties, both entrepreneurs, workers and the community (regional.kompas.com, 13 May 2020). Many tourism sector workers, including women who work in other sectors, such as culinary, plantation, or farming, are also exploring other creative economy ideas. The closure of tourist destinations and hotels in the Nusa Dua tourism area has resulted in the temporary closure of thousands of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">hotel and travel agency employees. Either in the form of unpaid leave for a week in a month, two weeks, or several months while waiting for this Covid-19 pandemic situation to pass. This includes almost 100 female masseurs who are usually on the beach offering massage services for tourists,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Efforts made by the government include encouraging government employees to conduct official trips aimed at driving the economy in various regions. Efforts to drive domestic tourism is indeed not comparable to the expectations and the number of foreign tourists. However, it is expected to be able to motivate various efforts made by the central and regional governments, synergizing with service and goods business actors, along with other community members.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ari Juliano Gema, an expert staff at the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy, explained that although local tourists cannot meet the occupancy rate of up to 80-100% as expected by hoteliers, this hard effort keeps the economy moving throughout the country, in collaboration with SOEs and the private sector. various other regulations. The Minister of Tourism and Creative Economy explained that the government was delaying the provision of incentives for tourists, preparing funds of IDR 298.5 billion to bring foreign tourists to Indonesia due to the declining number due to the corona virus outbreak abroad. The funds consist of Rp 98.5 billion for airlines and travel agencies, Rp 103 billion for tourism promotion, Rp 25 billion for tourism activities, and Rp 72 billion for influencers (BBC Indonesia.com, 3 May 2020)</span><a href="https://www.bbc.com/indonesia/indonesia-51764525"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.bbc.com/indonesia/indonesia-51764525</span></a><span class="font1">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Various efforts have been made by the government, both central and regional, one of which is by applying local wisdom as an effort to deal with the pandemic situation, including in Bali. For example, mecaru, tawur agung, as a symbol of cleansing the earth from all forms of disease and danger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bali has experienced several disruptions in the development of the tourism sector, such as in 2002 during the SARS outbreak, the Bali Bombings in 2002 and 2005, the Mount Agung eruption in 2017, and the crisis due to the Covid-19 pandemic was called the worst crisis (Wayan Tini, Komang Wahyuni, BBC). .com, May 3, 2020). The Covid-19 pandemic has caused the average hotel occupancy rate in Bali to decline by up to 70%, almost no tourists visit the beaches in Nusa Dua, which are usually filled with up to 1,500-2,000 tourists per day. The World Travel and Tourism Council (Gloria Guevara, BBC.com, 8 March 2020), explains that 50 million people have lost their jobs in the tourism sector alone due to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">coronavirus pandemic. The chairman of the Indonesian Travel Agent Association (Astindo) Elly Hutabarat, explained that the pandemic had hit businesses in the fields of flights, hotels and travel agencies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Covid-19 pandemic has destroyed world tourism, millions of accommodation and travel service businesses have been forced to stop operating. Thousands of women tourism workers in Bali cannot work, switch to other fields of work, and increase the high unemployment rate. The government made various efforts to overcome this, including by involving other parties, also between institutions, both central and regional, as well as other community members.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Adi Pratama, Wayan. 2020. Manajemen Organisasi dalam Dunia Industri Pariwisata. Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As’ad, Mohamad. 2001. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bennis, W. (1989), On Becoming a Leader, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Budiyanto, Hermawan. 2011. Administrasi Bisnis dan Manajemen. Jurnal Unpand.ac.id.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cukier, Judith. 1996. Tourism Employment in Bali: Trends and Implication. UK: International Thompson Business Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dunsire, A (1973), Administration: The Word and the Science, Oxford: Martin Robertson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Handoko, T. Hani. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Jakarta:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hamermesh, Daniel, S. 2004. Economics is Everywhere. McGraw-Hill</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hariandja, Marihot Tua Efendi, (2005), Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hodgkinson, C (1978), Toward a Philosophy of Administration, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Malayu S.P. Hasibuan. 2003. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Edisi Revisi. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mangkunegara, Anwar Prabu. 2005. Evaluasi Kinerja SDM. Bandung: Refika Aditama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Martoyo. Susilo. 2003. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Edisi Empat. Yogyakarta: BPFE</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mintzberg, H., Ahlstrand, B. dan Lampel, J (1998), Strategy Safary: A Guided Tour Through Wilds of Strategic Management, New York: The Three Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moekijat. 2001. Manajemen Tenaga Kerja dan Hubungan Kerja. Bandung: Alumni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nanus, B. (1992), Visionary Leadership, San Fransisco, Calif: Jossey-Bass.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pengadaan, Pengembangan, Pengkompensasian, dan Peningkatan Produktivitas Pegawai, Cetakan ketiga, PT Grasindo, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Santi Diwyarthi, Ni Desak Made. 2020. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Denpasar: Politeknik Pariwisata Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sjahfri, Mangku Prawira. 2002. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Stratejik. Jakarta: Ghalia Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sondang P. Siagian. 2009. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutrisno, Edy. 2017. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Jakarta: Kencana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wursanto. 2001. Dasar-dasar Ilmu Organisasi. Jogjakarta: Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">13</span></p>