---
layout: full_article
title: "LEADERSHIP IN HIGHER EDUCATION:  ACADEMIC LEADER OR MANAGER?"
author: "Agung Widhi Kurniawan, Zarah Puspitaningtyas"
categories: bse
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/bse/full-6153 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/bse/id-6153"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/bse/full-6153"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN 1410-4628</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>LEADERSHIP IN HIGHER EDUCATION:</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ACADEMIC LEADER OR MANAGER?</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Agung Widhi Kurniawan<sup>1 </sup>Zarah Puspitaningtyas<sup>2 </sup></span><span class="font0">Universitas Negeri Makassar<sup>1 </sup>Universitas Jember<sup>2 </sup>e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:agung234wk@yahoo.com"><span class="font0"> agung234wk@yahoo.com<sup>1</sup></span></a><span class="font0"><sup> </sup>e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:zara_4yu@yahoo.com"><span class="font0"> zara_4yu@yahoo.com<sup>2</sup></span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract: Leadership in Higher Education: &nbsp;Academic Leader or Manager? </span><span class="font0">Higher</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">education or college is an institution that gave birth to the intellectual resources expected to contribute in the human resources quality improving. All activities should be directed for the excellent academic performance. Management, especially university leaders, must start it from an awareness of the entire academic community. Awareness of university leaders should be depart from the philosophical, that not only manage the college-oriented economic capital (profit oriented), but also have socio-oriented capital. The question is what type of leadership that is appropriate to apply to higher education institutions in Indonesia? Leaders who have the spirit of academic leader or manager? Academic leaders must have the spirit of academic excellence, and is selected from the academics who have adequate leadership, communication, and interpersonal skills.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font0">leadership, higher education, academic leader, manager</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak: Kepemimpinan dalam Perguruan Tinggi: Pemimpin Akademis atau Manager? </span><span class="font0">Perguruan Tinggi adalah institusi yang melahirkan sumber intelektual yang diharapkan berkontribusi dalam perbaikan kualitas sumber daya manusia. Semua aktivitas seharusnya ditujukan pada kinerja akademis yang bagus. Manajemen, khususnya pemimpin universitas, harus memulainya dari kepedulian pada keseluruhan komunitas akademis. Kepedulian Pemimpin Universitas seharusnya berangkat dari filosofi, tidak hanya mengatur universitas dengan berorientasi pada </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">economic capital</span><span class="font0">, tapi juga pada </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">socio capital.</span><span class="font0"> Pertanyaannya adalah apa tipe kepemimpinan yang sesuai diterapkan pada institusi perguruan tinggi di Indonesia. Pemimpin yang memiliki semangat kepemimpinan akademis atau manajer? Pemimpin akademis harus memiliki semangat akademis dan diseleksi dari kalangan akademis yang memiliki kemampuan kepemimpinan, komunikasi, interpersonal yang cukup.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font0">kepemimpinan, perguruan tinggi, pemimpin akademis, manajer</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The higher education or college is an institution that gave birth to the intellectual resources that are expected to contribute to improving the quality of human resources. The expected output of a process of learning in a college is competitive intellectual products. It required input, among others: students, lecturer, funding, and curriculum quality as the initial capital. Good input must be through a learning process in order to obtain the better the output that can provide satisfaction for the stakeholders (Murrell, 2003; Azahari, 2005; Menon, 2005; Sutikto, 2007; Trinanda, 2007; Trivellas and Dargenidou, 2009; Sav, 2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Management colleges are supposedly able to manage the organization effectively,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">efficiently, sustainable and accountable so that the universities in Indonesia to be innovative academic institutions (Sarwedi, 2007; Trinanda, 2007; Wibowo, 2007). Therefore, all activities should be directed to the excellent academic performance. But so far, the number of college graduates on a national scale that assessed the quality of academic accountable to the public, is relatively small. This is one of the fundamental issues in higher education management practices in Indonesia. In the end, it is not wrong if society considers that the majority of college graduates incapable of performing its mission as being educated, has a science, and has a value that identifies as the educated. Moreover, the low value of religion and ethics, has also exacerbated public assessment</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">of college graduates. As is known, several students from various universities in Indonesia engaged in a &quot;brawl&quot;, an action that does not reflect the identity of the educated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">College leaders must respond wisely on various oblique views addressed to graduate college. Higher education institutions need to find the determinant factors that cause why the majority of college graduates is very low quality. Did not someone say college graduates when they have been good to meet academic standards? However, why is college graduates does not reflect the academic standards? Why they have not been able to fulfill its mission as a community renewal agency?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Many factors cause. There is a view of his lack of good input, limited funds, and even some who think the government does not favor regulation to increase the academic quality of college graduates. These factors do affect the output of universities in producing qualified human resources. However, of all these factors exist, the determinant factor indicating trend of poor quality of college graduates actually lies in the management of higher education itself. Namely, the ability to manage the college is an integral and comprehensive by optimizing the allocation and utilization of resources of each college (Murrell, 2003; Spendlove, 2007; Trinanda, 2007; Sav, 2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is quite reasonable. Therefore, the availability of adequate facilities only, does not guarantee the ability to organize and optimize the availability of resources (including human resources have not mastered certain skills into competence in teaching and learning activities). This is the reason, that the university management as the basis for structuring and improvement aimed at producing qualified graduates with academic qualifications that can be accountable to the public (Murrell, 2003; Trinanda, 2007; Sav, 2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Management of higher education must start from an awareness of the entire academic community, especially for university leaders. That is, every policy taken solely to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">improve the quality of academic (Osseo-Asare et al., 2007; Spendlove, 2007; Trinanda, 2007; Trivellas and Dargenidou, 2009; Amzat and Ali, 2011; Siddique et al., 2011). Awareness of university leaders should depart from the philosophical, that not only manage the college-oriented economic capital (profit oriented), but also have sociooriented capital. Namely, target-oriented management charactarer building.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The question is what type of leadership that is appropriate to apply to higher education institutions in Indonesia, so as to adapt in a sustainable manner in the era of globalization? This paper intends to provide a comprehensive analysis of leadership in higher education. The discussion will begin with managerial concepts in college.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>LITERATURE REVIEW</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Managerial Concepts In College</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">University management is currently faced with the dynamics of the external environment the college is strongly influenced by the market economy. In contrast, the role and position of the universities also affect the market dynamics, particularly in relation to human resource development. The problems faced by university management, can be eliminated if all the elements and the entire academic community have the commitment, consensus, and the completion of situations that support for change (Khomsan, 2002; Handoyo et al., 2004; Kurnia, 2006; Maisyaroh and Anggraini, 2007; Wibowo, 2007; Amzat and Ali, 2011).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Commitment create an awareness managerial that managing universities tend to be based on a concept, namely: (1) activation, (2) verification, investigation, and (3) succession. Managerial concept is important to be developed into a juridical-formal commitment by higher education institutions in order to have a standard in any implementation process of managing an organization that his term is an intellectual product (Trinanda, 2007). The third explanation of managerial concepts are presented in Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Table 1. Managerial Concepts In College</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">No. &nbsp;Managerial Concepts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Explanation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">Activation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">commitment of stakeholders in identifying, planning and construction of the concept of communication that builds institutions to the entire academic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">a. Mutual-intense</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">communication concept was developed on an ongoing basis based on the technical-operational activities of institutional activities</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">b. Mutual-empirical</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">communication concept developed by stakeholders to the academic community by promoting the concept of a causal process</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">c. Mutual-empatic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">communication concept that emphasizes the aspects of institutions concern to civitas academica</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">d. Mutual-economic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">concept developed by the institutions to describe any activity, when it passed through the culture and climate of competition to achieve a good life, the economic paradigm that these institution still exist need to get positive response from the entire academic</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">Verification-investigation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;managerial stage where the college planning process,</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">to obtain a realistic and strategic resource management. Lecturer's competency standards shall be in accordance with the intrinsic value of these lecturers, namely: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">a. Cognitive</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">consists of knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">b. Affective</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">based on the assessment of attitudes, behaviors, emotions, specialization became educators and direct observation of interactions in the activity of teaching and learning activities</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">c. Psychomotor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">based on the concept of learning and mastery of the conditions and situation of the teaching-learning</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">Succession</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">stage where universities are able to take an objective choices for the benefit of the target learners. Any decisions made by higher education institutions, should have the academic substance of the decision.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Source: Trinanda (2007)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The third managerial concepts is done identify themselves with the goals of the by referring to the level of professionalism organization, willing to sacrifice for the and approach to get qualified human organization, willingness to contribute resources. Development of managerial effectively to the overall activity of institutes, concepts depart from the proposition that as well as the willingness to comply with implement these concepts is a necessity. and involvement in to perform tasks in Academic development needs must begin accordance with applicable rules at the with the perception, imagery, consciousness, institution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and the same knowledge. Individual Mutual trust must be developed and commitment to the organization/ institution nurtured among individuals and among is required. individuals with higher education leaders.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Organizational commitment (Hardi, Similarly, the small units are decentralized 2007) describes the emotional connection (eg, a group of expertise). If the trust is not and loyalty to the institution indicated the able to be implanted, there will be conditions individual through personal behavior that where the higher competence of individuals</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">resulted in lower a college's intellectual capital. Shared values are compiled together should be a reliable basis for reaching his goals. Culture of trust based on shared values will encourage the creation of networks and strategic alliances are synergistic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">These values must be owned by the university leaders. So, how does the type of leader who is expected to run the proper leadership at the college? Leaders who have the spirit of academic leader or manager?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>RESULT AND ANALYSIS</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Academic Leader Or Manager?</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Leading universities may present a unique challenge. Because of the organizational complexity of the university, its multiple goals and its traditional values, the nature of leadership in higher education is often contested. Keep up the existence of college life in the community activities of society, nation and state. In other words, universities should be an elementary way for the community in its efforts to make the elite, that is, groups of people who influence, and a strong driving force as well as a leader in the middle of a community –whether political, economic, social, cultural, and so-. Therefore, needed a leader who has a balance between what is known and what is done. A leader who is able to provide academic response, which has thought of academia and bureaucracy learning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Sherwood, 1996; Slamet, 2006; Osseo-Asare et al., 2007; Spendlove, 2007; Trinanda, 2007; Siddique et al., 2011).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leader vs. manager? The theory of leadership describing how an effective leader should act, and a leader prototype or mental image of what characteristics of effective leader should have. The basic purpose was to achieve personal and work related goals by motivating employees individually and in groups. Leadership is the capacity to discern and develop one's resources, whether human or material. Leadership is the ability to move people in a direction they are fundamentally uncomfortable going. Leader have many of the traits of a great manager, ie inspire and motivate. However, leaders take it all a step further. Leaders are enthusiastic, optimistic, and articulate when talking about plans, hopes, and successes. Just because a person becomes a manager, he is not automatically a leader. Management is something that can be learned. But being a leader is something that should be accepted. This involves a respect and obedience from those who led (Sharma, 1997; Murrell, 2003; Ozeroff and Hull, 2003; Diamond, 2007; Vadeveloo et al., 2009; Bodla andNawaz, 2010; Seiden, 2010; Amzat and Ali, 2011). Differences leader and manager can be seen from each task (Table 2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Tabel 2. The Job Of A Leader And Manager</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The job of a leader</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The job of a manager</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Create and communicate the company vision</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Oversee the subordinates that they are in charge of</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Establish overall goals related to the vision</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Plan and implement interim objectives that lead toward overall goals delegated by the company leadership</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Set a direction for the company and influence all employees to move in that direction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Support subordinates as they implement delegated plans and objectives (provide direction, training, encouragement and feedback as needed)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Source: Milios (1999)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Academic leader vs. Manager? Academic leader chosen among academics based on their academic capacity. Meanwhile, the manager appointed by a managerial capacity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Not all academic leaders have the necessary managerial capacity. Instead, managers also need a campus academic reputation enough to be accepted and respected.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Characteristics of the different colleges of business entities. The main difference lies in the transmitter of the products or services that deal directly with customers. College dean in charge of the leader, chairman of courses and lecturers all of whom are colleagues as well as peer group. Therefore, oriented leadership style strengths considered less effective than-oriented style of leadership expertise. The effective leadership and management of universities is a crucial issue for policy makers, leaders themselves, and for all of civitas academica. All of civitas academica a source of strength and power of implementation of the program thinking. Appropriate leadership style of leadership that would legitimize the civitas academica will voluntarily support the program leader (Kelley, 2002; Osseo-Asare et al., 2007; Spendlove, 2007; Amzat and Ali, 2011; Siddique et al., 2011). Authoritarian managers considered less appropriate to be applied to college. In contrast, critical collegiality applied to college. A leader should be respected, not feared.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Organizational learning and knowledge management in higher education requires leaders who can bring renewal by creating conditions that facilitate the emergence of creative spontaneity to create something new, so it can build and maintain networks of communication to connect the system with a self-leader. The main purpose of the concept of knowledge management is knowledge transfer. Necessary to bring the spontaneity of a communications network that is active with many feedback loops. Openness will bring new ideas and spontaneity, so organizations need to be open to new ideas and new knowledge through a learning culture that facilitates dialogue and appreciate every thought and innovation (Murrell, 2003; Djajadiningrat, 2005; Amzat and Ali, 2011).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Therefore, the college requires academic leader, the leader who can guide and stimulate civitas openly academica to issue creative ideas through an approach that stimulates active participation and create a positive competitive atmosphere so that the creation of innovative processes can be performed on an ongoing basis. Academic leaders must have a vision for the future and can predict and understand the changes of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the idea of spontaneity and integrate into the design of the organization. Not all ideas and spontaneity can continue to make real changes. Therefore, the freedom to experiment suggested, the error can be tolerated, and appreciated the learning value of success.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Collective power is done through a process of emergence of new structures are always changing power relations through the appearance of spontaneity in the community. Leaders who facilitate the appearance of spontaneity to use his power to give power to another, thus allowing the spread of power or leadership. This does not mean creating a collective leadership with some individuals holding the reins of leadership, but the presence of various leaders who stepped forward when necessary to facilitate the creation of spontaneous emergence stages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Academic leaders must give priority to academic excellence. Even if not all members of the college has ambitions of academic excellence, but it is a reasonable academic leader who has demonstrated academic achievement. Both in terms of scientific research as well as educators. If it is not an academic leader who persevere in academic excellence, how he could have a strong commitment to make the campus into the scientific community who appreciate the scientific achievements rigour?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The success of an academic leader is measured by the effectiveness. Pearce and Conger (2004) argued that organizational effectiveness is influenced by two factors: internal and external factors. Internal factors, consisting of: (1) human resources and relations, (2) efficiency and reliability, and (3) application and innovation. Meanwhile, external factors also known as situational factors, namely the influence of internal factors in achieving high effectiveness. External factors, consisting of: political, economic, legal, social, cultural, technological, and demographic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">However, the requirement of a specified type of leadership is situational. In certain situations, it is necessary to network and formal feedback loop. And, in other situations it is necessary to a robust framework with the goals and setting a definite time in organizing activities. Experienced leaders will be able to evaluate</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the situation, if necessary be able to take command, but flexible enough to loosen and remove it. This skill allows the various lines of action in a flexible but definite (Djajadiningrat, 2005).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Academic leaders must be able to build communication networks that are able to create thinking, shared meaning, shared knowledge, behavior rules, boundaries and identities of individuals. Academic leaders must understand that the interaction between formal structure and informal structure of an innovation process to accommodate these individuals into the formal structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Academic leaders should also be able to create a culture of learning through various activities, such as through the expertise, inter-group skills, through the creation of networks and strategic alliances, resulting in the development and growth of knowledge. In addition, the implementation of performance management will also need an objective, fair, transparent, and to motivate individual achievement against the teaching staff and appropriate incentive systems.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Quality and competence of the right leader to be the basis for mutual trust and foster a culture of learning. At the beginning of the process, in which mutual trust and learning culture is not established, it takes a visionary and transformational leaders. That is, leaders who have a strong vision and able to transform the culture of mutual trust and learning to all the individuals as well as one system agreed. At the time of mutual trust and learning culture began to grow, in turn, required the synergistic leadership. That is, leaders who are able to synergize ideas, ideas, innovation, and creativity in the individual units that are smaller and decentralized in a whole container of togetherness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">If mutual trust and a culture of learning has been steady and well-established, then the next step is required of a leader who spirited &quot;Tut Wuri Handayani&quot;. Namely, a leader capable of continuously guiding and maintaining the sustainability of the organization, and be able to increase value added through the creation of knowledge and technology to benefit the people of Indonesia (Djajadiningrat, 2005).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When the academic leader capable of managing knowledge and intellectual capital with organizational learning, it is proper if</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the entire academic community have a sense of optimism towards the realization of ideals college. Because, other than as an educational institution, research, and community service, colleges still have the intellectual capital that can constantly be developed, still has credibility, and still have extensive networks. Common desire for change management in universities can be done, if the leader to be open and transparent process, involving many parties, and accommodate a variety of academic interests. Without such attitudes will be difficult to change management in college.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The college requires academic leader. Academic leaders must have the spirit of academic excellence, and is selected from the academics who have leadership ability skills, communication skills and interpersonal skills are adequate. Academic leaders are not &quot;individual player&quot; is difficult to work with others. Academic leaders are expected to increase scientific knowledge for all civitas academica and eventually became enlightenment for the people and nation of Indonesia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Amzat IH, Ali AK,. 2011. The Relationship between the Leadership Styles of Heads of Departments and Academic Staff's Self-Efficacy in a selected Malaysian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Islamic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interdisciplinary Journal Of Contemporary Research In Business</span><span class="font1">, 3 (1), pp. 940-964.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Azahari A, 2005. Isu Strategis, Peluang, dan Tantangan Pendidikan Tinggi di Indonesia. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Seminar Nasional Manajemen Perguruan Tinggi</span><span class="font1">. Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bodla and Nawaz. 2010. Comparative Study of Full Range Leadership Model among Faculty Members in Public and Private Sector Higher Education Institutes and Universities. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Business and Management</span><span class="font1">, 5 (4), pp. 208-214.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Diamond M, 2007. Are You A Manager or A Leader ?. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reeves Journal</span><span class="font1">, 87 (2), pg. 66.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Djajadiningrat. 2005. Mengelola Pengetahuan dan Modal Intelektual dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pembelajaran Organisasi: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suatu</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gagasan untuk Institut Teknologi Bandung. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Orasi Ilmiah pada Sidang Terbuka ITB Peringatan Dies Natalis Institut Teknologi Bandung ke 46</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Handoyo S, Suhariadi F, Suryanto, 2004. Pembelajaran Organisasi Institusi Pendidikan Tinggi: Program Kompetitif Sebagai Faktor Pendorong. Jurnal Penelitian Dinamika Sosial, 5 (3), pp. 229-238.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hardi U, 2007. Sinergitas antara Badan Pengurus Yayasan dengan Manajemen Perguruan Tinggi Swasta untuk Meningkatkan Kinerja dan Kepercayaan Masyarakat. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiloka: Manajemen Kinerja dalam Meningkatkan Akuntabilitas Pengelolaan PTS pada Kopertis Wilayah IV</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Http://www. kopertis4.or.id.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kelley R, 2002. The Power of Followership. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Currency Doubleday</span><span class="font1">. Toronto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Khomsan A, 2002. Menggugah Komitmen Dosen PT BHMN. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Harian KOMPAS</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kurnia G, 2006. Kualitas, Citra, Daya Tarik, dan Keberlanjutan: Membangun Unpad Menuju Academic Excellence dengan Kebersamaan. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pemilihan Calon Rektor Unpad Periode 2006-2009</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Universitas Padjajaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maisyaroh, Anggraini. 2007. Kompetisi dan Strategi dalam Membangun Perguruan Tinggi pada Era Globalisasi. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Articles of Business Information Systems</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Menon ME, 2005. Student’s Views Regarding Their Participation In &nbsp;University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Governance: Implication For Distributed Leadership In Higher &nbsp;Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tertiary Education and Management</span><span class="font1">, 11, pp. 167–182</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Milios R, 1999. Are You A Leader Or A Manager ... And Which Should You Be?.</span><a href="http://www.ritamilios.com/"><span class="font1"> Http://www.ritamilios.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Murrell PH, 2003. Research Centers At The University of Memphis: Center For The Study of Higher Education, College Of Education. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Business Perspectives,</span><span class="font1"> 15 (2), pg. 34.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Osseo-Asare AE, Longbottom D, Chourides P, 2007. Managerial Leadership for Total Quality Improvement in UK Higher Education. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The TQM Magazine</span><span class="font1">, 19 (6), pp. 541-560.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ozeroff M, Hull S, 2003. From Manager to Leaders. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Leadership Excellence</span><span class="font1">, 20 (12), pg. 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pearce CL, Conger JA, 2004. Shared Leadership: Reframing the Hows and Whys of Leadership. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">SAGE Publications</span><span class="font1">. London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sav GT, 2010. Managing Public Higher Education Restructuring Understanding College And University Cost Structures. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Managenent</span><span class="font1">, 15 (2), pp. 1-23.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sarwedi, 2007. Unej Menuju Smart University. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Program Kerja Bakal Calon Rektor UNEJ 2007-2011</span><span class="font1">. Jember: Universitas Jember.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Seiden B, 2010. Are You A Leader Or Manager? Company Owners And Executives Need To Understand The Differences.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.bestmanagementarticles.com/"><span class="font1">Http://www.bestmanagementarticles.c</span></a><span class="font1"> </span><a href="http://www.bestmanagementarticles.com/"><span class="font1">om</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sharma A, 1997. Leadership: The Manager v. The Leader. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Industrial Engineer</span><span class="font1">, 29 (9), pg. 34.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sherwood FP, 1996. An Academician’s Response: The Thinking, Learning Bureaucracy. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Public Administration Review</span><span class="font1">, 56 (2), pg. 154.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Siddique A, Aslam HD, Khan M, Fatima U, 2011. Impact of Academic Leadership on Faculty’s Motivation, and Organizational Effectiveness in Higher Education System. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Business and &nbsp;Social</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Science</span><span class="font1">, 2 (8), pp. 184-191.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Slamet M, 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen Sumberdaya Dosen di Perguruan Tinggi: Kecerdasan Emotional di Tempat Kerja</span><span class="font1">. Institut Pertanian Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Spendlove M, 2007. Competencies For Effective Leadership In Higher Education. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Educational Management</span><span class="font1">, 21 (5), pp. 407-417.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutikto T, 2007. Menuju Universitas Jember Yang Unggul Dan Bercitra Internasional: Quality First for Global Recognition. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Program Kerja Bakal Calon Rektor UNEJ 2007-2011</span><span class="font1">. Jember: Universitas Jember.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Trinanda A, 2007. Memahami Kompleksitas Manajemen Pendidikan di Perguruan Tinggi. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Care Education Community</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Trivellas PT, Dargenidou D, 2009. Leadership and Service Quality in Higher Education: &nbsp;&nbsp;The case of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Technological Educational Institute of Larissa. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Quality and Service Sciences</span><span class="font1">, 1 (3), pp. 294-310.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vadeveloo T, Ngah NS, Jusoff K, 2009. The Effectiveness Of Leadership Behavior Among Academician Of University Teknologi MARA Terengganu. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Management Science and Engineering</span><span class="font1">, 3 (3), pp. 1-8.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wibowo R, 2007. Merealisasikan Universitas Jember Yang Unggul Dan Bermartabat: Pokok-pokok Pemikiran Program Pengembangan Universitas Jember 2007-2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Program Kerja Bakal Calon Rektor UNEJ 2007-2011</span><span class="font1">. Jember: Universitas Jember.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">BULETIN STUDI EKONOMI, </span><span class="font1">Volume 18, No. 1, Februari 2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">8</span></p>