---
layout: full_article
title: "Pidginized English Spoken by Art Market Vendors in Ubud"
author: "A. A. Gede Raka Mahendra, I Nengah Sudipa, A.A. Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 1-9</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Pidginized English Spoken by Art Market Vendors in Ubud</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">A. A. Gede Raka Mahendra<sup>1*</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, A.A. Sagung Shanti Sari Dewi<sup>3 123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Arts - Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:agungmahendra123@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> agungmahendra123@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> <sup>2</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> nengahsudipa@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> <sup>3</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:jungshanti@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> jungshanti@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> <sup>*</sup></span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini diberi judul &quot;&nbsp;Bahasa pidgin sebagian besar memusat pada analisa bahasa pasaran yang ditemukan di Pasar Seni Ubud. Keduanya adalah analisa faktor yang mendukung pengembangan Bahasa pidgin pada Bahasa Inggris. Sumber data ini telah diambil dari percakapan antara penjual dan pelanggan di Pasar Seni Ubud. Karena alasan itu, sangat banyak ada format Bahasa Inggris yang baru percakapan oleh penjual ditemukan di Pasar Seni Ubud. Data ini kemudian telah diharapkan untuk menjadi perwakilan. Data yang dikumpulkan dianalisa menggunakan metoda kwalitatif, deskriptif yang sejalan menggunakan teori belajar ini. Skripsi ini menggunakan percakapan sebagai sumber data. Teori ini menerapkan studi, sebagian besar didasarkan pada teori fungsi bahasa yang diusulkan oleh Mulhausler, dan teori bahasa pasaran yang diusulkan oleh Weinreich.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Format pidginize Bahasa Inggris yang ditemukan di Pasar Seni Ubud, yang mana dibandingkan ke Bahasa Inggris resmi dari segi pandangan bersifat tata bahasa dan dapat dibedakan ke dalam tiga format. Ada membentuk format positif, bentuk tanya dan format negatif. Hal itu disebabkan oleh beberapa kondisi seperti, Degree of difference, Stability of form, Breadth of function, Speaker’s own rating. Sebagai hasilnya, mereka berkomunikasi dengan orang asing dengan menggunakan bukan Bahasa Inggris yang resmi yang mana pada umumnya secara gramatikal salah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci; Pidgin, Pedagang, Pembeli, Bentuk dari Pidgin</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">English is become very important language for Balinese since it is used to have direct contact to the tourist. The use of English in Balinese people during their activities makes them easier to escort the tourist making business in the tourism industry, for example: the art shop attendants, vendors, free lance guide, etc. The art shop attendants should be able to speak English in order to do communication with the foreigners. The use of English is made both in the formal and informal sector. The formal sector is usually used by the people who can speak English well, for examples: in the offices, schools, banks, etc, but at the informal sector,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">the English is usually used in the tourism industry, for example: the English language used by art shop attendants in Ubud as a medium of selling activities.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the Pidginized English forms found in conversations between vendors and foreigners in Ubud market?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors that influencing the use of Pidginized English in conversations between vendors and foreigners in Ubud market?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the Pidginized English forms found in conversations between vendors and foreigners in Ubud market.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To investigate the detail description of the factors contributing to the use of this language variety in Ubud Market.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three points on the research method including: the data source, method and technique of collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data of this research was taken from spoken language of art market vendors in Ubud. The spoken languages were in the form of conversations when they were doing their daily activities as vendors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The criteria being the basis of choosing the vendors were as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The vendors are legal which is proved by their ID card.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They should be able to speak English, Bahasa Indonesia, and Balinese language.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The educational background of the vendors is minimum elementary school</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">and maximum senior high school. The educational background was filled in the questioner to make it easier in the process of identifying the trader’s educational background.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The total numbers of the vendors in Ubud Art Market were more than 15 populations, but only 7 vendors were taken as sample for this research that filled the criteria above.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Purposive sampling was used in this study based on the criteria of choosing the vendors in order to select the representative sample of the overall population of the vendors. The data was collected by using observation method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The steps were:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Observing the conversations between the vendors and foreigners by using note taking method.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interviewing the vendors by using questioners.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Transcribing the data of the observation and questionnaires.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Categorizing the data based on each form of pidgin and selected English used by the vendors.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Categorizing the factors of the use of pidgin English by the vendors.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data was analyzed descriptively by using qualitative method. All the data were analyzed based upon the sociolinguistic theories proposed by Wardhaugh since his theory talks about standard languages (in this case Standard English) which can be the only kind of variety which would be counted as a 'proper language'. Then those data were classified into some groups according to some sub topics of analysis. Every sentence was identified and then analyzed according to the theories used.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PIDGINIZED ENGLISH SPOKEN BY VENDORS IN UBUD MARKET</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Form of Pidginized English Spoken by Vendors in Ubud Art Market</span></h2></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter discussed and analyzed the collected data during the research that concerned with Pidginized English forms and the language functions used in the conversation between vendors and foreigners in Ubud market. The collected data which in the form of conversations were analyzed in this chapter, based on the theory about the criteria of Pidgin proposed by Muhlhauster and the analysis of language functions use proposed by Muhlhauster</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">When observing pidginized English spoken by vendors in Ubud Art Market, and compared to Standard English, the clearest case which can be found on form pidginized English, are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pidginized English in Positive Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the observation been conducted in Ubud Art Market on pidginize English, some data were found in various forms. One of them is considered positive which is again classified into three divisions such as:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.1.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Statements</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are positive sentences used by vendors in Ubud Art Market, which can be commercially with Standard English from grammatical point of view.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This normal price</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I give you fabric price</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As mentioned in the previous chapter that pidgin had undergone some processes such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">simplification of grammar and vocabulary,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">a mixture of local vocabulary. </span><span class="font1">This case can be understood by the data 1, 2, 3, where the speakers use special terms, they create new expressions in order to ease their interaction with their customers, but of course, those terms are still understandable. These special terms or new expressions are created by mixing the local expressions (Balinese expressions) which have been translated into English. For instance, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">fabric price </span><span class="font1">(example no:2) mean best price or special price, same as normal price, while the expressions first price is considered to be the price given to the costumers when the shop just opened. This expression appears as the translation of the Balinese term </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">megarus</span><span class="font1">, which refers to the first, transact on that happens when the vendors are just opening their shop in the morning. The process of-simplification of grammar is shown by the data 4, 5, and 6, where the speakers simplify the words order and they do not tend to embed them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.1.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Instructions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The most common category of imperative that differs from a statement has the following features:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It has no subject</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It has an imperative finite verb</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this case, the simple forms of verbs are used regardless of person or tense. The imperative sentence ends with a period in writing and a drop it pitch of speech. For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Close the door</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clean up your room</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The ideas or the Standard English which are written by experts are supported by the data found in Ubud Art Market during the investigation of the vendors' English. The speakers use the expression in simple ways, combined with the new terms, vocabularies used by their society only. For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hello, see here please.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come here, free looking.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Another idea of pidginize English is that speakers of the language try to reduce or simplify the sentence elements, such as vocabulary, grammar, phonological variation and mix local language vocabulary with the dominant language, that is English. Some words derived from local vocabulary are used here, such as ”ya&quot; (sentence 5) which mean </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">&quot;OK&quot; </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">&quot;Eh&quot;</span><span class="font1">(sentence 6) means </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">&quot;excuse me, sorry, pardon me&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data found is quite clear to show the validity of pidginizing English in Ubud Art Market. The Standard English counterparts of those expressions used by vendors in Ubud Art Market should be:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hello, please come here to take a look.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come here, please. It is free to have a look.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.1.1.3 Positive Offerings</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">When carrying out the observation, the same case was found in pidginize forms of English in Ubud Art Market. The speakers of this variety of language speak in simple languages which are grammatically mistaken. The new terms or words are not used in accordance with word orders in the sentence, so that it sounds rude and funny. The examples of this form are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hallo, Sandal, Sir?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hallo, painting, painting?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From those forms of positive offering, it can be understood that the pidgin speakers use a very simple way in expressing their ideas. If it is compared to the grammatical aspect of Standard English, the forms should be as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hello, would you like to buy a sandal?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hello, would you like to buy some paintings?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.1.2 Pidginized English in Negative Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Like the positive forms above, negative forms also occur in pidginize English in Ubud Art Market. Quirk and Greenbaum (1973: 183) states that the negation of a sentence is accomplished by inserting </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">not, n't </span><span class="font1">between Subject and Predicate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.1.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Statements</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Concerning to the negative forms of Ubud Art Market pidginize English, Todd (1984: 5), again gives his ideas that in pidginize English, negation involves the use of one negative marker, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font1"> in this pidgin. This can be understood in the following example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">- No money – Don’t have money</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence above is identified as negative statements, where it is formed by adding negative marker </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.1.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Instructions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">If we are compared with the data of Ubud Art Market Pidginized English, some quite similar data was found as representative examples of this language variety. Based on the data, the speakers do not seem to be aware of being mistaken in arranging the sentences. They just simplify the use of the world &quot;NOT&quot; in certain or any places.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the collected data found in Ubud Art Market, there are some examples of negative instruction:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No cash, no buy, sir</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You not bargain very low</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The forms, of negative instruction of pidginized English in Ubud Art Market are only marked by the word &quot;NOT&quot;. Those data can be compared to Standard English in the sense of its grammatical aspect:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't buy anything if you don't have any money.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Don't bargain too low</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.1.3 Pidginized English in Interrogative Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Quirk and Greenbaum (1973 : 191) there are three types of interrogative form : Yes/No question, WH – question, and Alternative question.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>5.1.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes/No Question</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The case is absolutely similar to those found in Ubud Art Market pidginized English, but the speakers seem to simplify the question, that is without using </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">auxiliary, to be</span><span class="font1">, as well as modal at the beginning of the sentence. For example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You from china?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You self?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Although they expressed it in very simple ways, they still can be understood by the foreign customer. If those examples are being compared with the Standard English, the forms should be:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Are you from China?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Do you come here alone?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is not always easy for the speakers to distinguish between adjective and verbs in pidgin. They can be preceded and followed by similar items (Todd, 1984: 6) concerning to this idea.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>5.1.3.2 Wh - Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Relating to the language variety in Ubud Art Market pidginize English, ether ideas about pidgin variety will be enclosed. In relation to the topic, Todd (1884: 6) again takes part with his ideas that question involving question words like when, where, why, how, etc., are different from statement only in that question forms occur.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the observations that have done in Ubud Art Market, there are some data relating to this idea:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With dollar, how much?</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How much you want?</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the above sentences, it is understood that </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">auxiliaries, modals</span><span class="font1">, or </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">to be</span><span class="font1"> are often left out by the speakers, to make the language simple but still understandable. If we standardize them, they should be:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How much is it in dollar?</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>5.1.3.3 Alternative Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">However, the form of question which will be discussed is related with pidginize English. The similar form is also found from the data of Ubud Art Market pidginized English:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You want this big or small?</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The above data support the existence of alternative question in Ubud Art Market pidginized English, although that in a small number. The speakers of pidgin simplify their expressions only by translating their local language into English without paying attention to the grammatical aspect of Standard English. Comparing with the Standard English, the above data should be:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which one do you want? The small or the big one?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>5.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Factors that influencing the use of Pidiginized English between Vendors and Foreigners in Ubud Market.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After conducting observation on Pidiginized English spoken by the vendors in Ubud Market, there were found some factors that influence the use of pidginized English in that particular community, they were:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Weinreich (1953: 105-6), the nature of linguistic interference is the same even if the interfered language does crystallize into a new language or not; and the factors that contribute to the development of a new language are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Degree of difference</span><span class="font1">: the contact between two different languages crystallizes into a new language sufficiently different from each other.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stability of form</span><span class="font1">: many of the new languages which have achieved some stability of form arose far from the centers of social control; almost all closely connected with the great migrations of European people during the past four hundred years, in conditions of “anti-prestige” or lack of sufficient prestige.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Breadth of function:</span><span class="font1"> the functions of a new language can be broadened by administrative degree or other conscious efforts to include education, religion, etc. In some cases, the new languages have been used in written form in the press and in literature. But, special for the vendors in Ubud market, their English cannot be improved or broadened well since they thought that it takes more times to learn English. So, it takes more time for the vendors to broaden their new language or pidgin.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speaker’s own rating:</span><span class="font1"> The manner in which loyalty to a hybridized form of speech develops depends on various socio-cultural factors, such as the isolation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">of the group in contact from its unilingual hinterland, separatist tendencies of an ethnic or political content, and so forth. Taking into consideration the contact between groups ethnically and linguistically different from each other, with an urgency of communication, we can face a situation where a new “emergency language” arises. Some situations of language contact have resulted in a new language, while others have not. It is shown that the pidgin found in Ubud art market have developed by the lack of vendors own rating at the customers language. So, the vendors simplify their conversation to the foreign customer considering the time and the educational background of them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some conclusions which emerged from the investigation of pidginized English by vendors in Ubud Art Market as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is completely correct that there is language variety of pidginize English in Ubud Art Market, spoken by vendors. This variety arises because of the needs of the certain language for communication with foreigners in this tourism area, because there intense contacts between the local, in this case the vendors and the foreigners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The form of pidginize English found in Ubud Art Market, which is being compared to Standard English from grammatical one of view and it can be distinguished into three forms. There are positive forms, negative forms and interrogative forms. All of the forms use as evidences to prove the existence of this languages variety in Ubud Art Market.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This pidgin language still exists. It is caused by some conditions such as Degree of difference, Stability of form, Breadth of function, Speaker’s own rating</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font1"> As a result, they communicate with the foreigners by using non Standard English which is usually grammatically incorrect.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet.1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font1">. New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muhlhauser, Peter. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pidgin &amp;&nbsp;Creole Linguistic. Great Britain</span><span class="font1">: Basic Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarah_Thomason"><span class="font1">Thomason, Sarah G.;</span></a><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terrence_Kaufman"><span class="font1"> Kaufman, Terrence </span></a><span class="font1">(1988), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language contact, creolization, and genetic linguistics</span><span class="font1">, Berkeley: University of California Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">9</span></p>