---
layout: full_article
title: "THE CHARACTERIZATION IN THE MOVIE TWLIGHT SAGA NEW MOON"
author: "I Gede Okta Priana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 15.2 Mei 2016: 40-47</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE CHARACTERIZATION IN THE MOVIE TWLIGHT SAGA NEW MOON</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">I Gede Okta Priana email: </span><a href="mailto:igedeoktapriana@gmail.com"><span class="font2">igedeoktapriana@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2"> English Department Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah yang berjudul “The Characterization in The Movie Twlight saga New Moon” ini dipilih sebagai objek dalam menulis makalah ini. Diyanni (2001:7) menjelaskan bahwa terdapat tiga macam karya sastra yang bisa diamati, bisa diterjemahkan dan dapat dievaluasi seperti misalnya puisi, drama, dan fiksi yang dianggap sebagai suatu temuan yang dihasilkan dari imajinasi seorang pengarang. Data yang digunakan dalam penulisan makalah ini diambil dari novel “The Twilight Saga: New Moon” karangan Chris Weitz (2009) kemudian dijadikan film oleh Mellissa Rosenfelt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dokumentasi digunakan ketika data diambil dan kemudian dianalisa dengan metode kualitatif diskriftif. Teori yang digunakan dalam penulisan makalah ini adalah teori literature oleh Kenney (1966) dalam bukunya yang berjudul How to Analyze Fiction dan teori literature yang ditulis oleh Reaske (1966) di dalam bukunya yang berjudul How to Analyze Drama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dari hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa salah satu karakter Bela yang ditampilkan dalam film ini bahwa dia adalah seorang penyayang. Kasih sayangnya didedikasikan hanya untuk ayahnya dan kekasihnya Eward Cullen. Dia rela mau pindah dari arizona ke Forks hanya ingin tinggal disana lebih lama dengan ayahnya dan bertemu dengan keluarga besar Cullen dan jatuh cinta dengan pacarnya yang ternyata seorang Dracula.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Tokoh Utama, Penokohan, Kasih Sayang, Kesetiaan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Diyanni (2001:7) explains that there are three Major types of literary works available that can be observed, interpreted, and evaluated; such as poetry, drama and fiction. Among those types of imaginative literature, novel has been the most favorite of both the writer and the reader. In addition Prose can be divided into fiction and nonfiction. In term of type and organization, there are three types of fiction such as, novel novelette, and short story. A work of fiction is a part of Literature and it is also one of the branches of art.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study focuses on </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the characterization in the movie Twilight Saga New Moon</span><span class="font2">. The character is one of the main elements in a literary work. Characterization is the process by which the writer reveals the personality of a character. Characterization is revealed through direct characterization and indirect characterization. Direct</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Characterization tells the audience what the personality of the character is. Indirect Characterization shows things that reveal the personality of a character. Characterization means that impersonation or character portrayal. Minderop (2005:55) states that ccharacterization methods in the study of literature is a method or ways in which to portray the character of the figures contained in a work of fiction. Examine the use of fictional characterization methods used to clarify or distinguish the character contained in a Direct method (telling) is the technique of exposure or figure painting is done directly by the author (Pickering and Hoeper in Minderop. This is the background as well as one reason why this topic is analyzed in this thesis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background has been stated above, there are two problems thatare discussed in this under graduated thesis. Those problems are as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What type of characterization is the most dominant used in the movie “Twilight Saga New Moon”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How is the main character characterized in the movie “Twilight Saga New Moon”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In writing every scientific paper, It must have a clear aim and must based on some scientific criteria. The aims of this writing are as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out type of characterization that most dominant used in the movie “Twilight Saga New Moon”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe how the main character is characterized in the movie” Twilight Saga New Moon”</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data used in this writing were taken from the movie entitled “The Twilight Saga: New Moon” directed by Chris Weitz from a screenplay by Mellissa Rosenfelt. The genre of this movie is fantasy romance. The movie was published on 20 November 2009. As this literary study on a movie, which aims to analyze about characterization in the Twilight Saga New Moon by Chrish Weitz. The reason in selecting this movie as</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the source of the data because the movie is considered very interesting and it can be the representative of a literature works.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Documentation method was applied in collecting the data. The data of this study were collected from the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Twilight Saga: New Moon</span><span class="font2">. The followingsteps are the way in collecting the data:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;First step; watching the movie and listeningto the dialogue and action of the characters in the movie carefully in order to identify the characterization from the plot of the movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Second step; downloading the movie script of this movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Third step; having a note by pauseing the part of the movie in every scenes that performed by the characters.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fourth step; observing the data by selecting the characterizations were found in the dialogue transcript movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fifth Step;classifying the data based on the clasifications of the problems</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;formulated.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The story in the movie was analyzed per characterization become the data. The data had been collected in the novel were clasified based on their clasifications then analyzed them by using the qualitative and descriptive method. Qualitative method was a method did not involve measurement or statistics. The data had been collected would be identified first and then classified in accordance with their type of characterization.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis Of Characterization In The Movie “Twlight Saga New Moon”</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Characterization through Showing Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The statements bellow was said through dialogues between Bella and other characters which could describe her characterization in this analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">On Bella, her eyes snap open. She laid a top her bed. A book, Romeo and Juliet”, laid open on her chest. Bella sat up, the dream still weighing on her. Include her room, cluttered with pictures of Edward, of the Cullens; memorabilia of all things</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Edward. A knock on the door. Chief Charlie Swan entered carrying two gifts, one wrapped, one not.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data (1): SETTING: BELLA'S ROOM - DAY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Charlie : Happy Birth Day, Bells-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bell : Dad, we agreed, no gifts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlie : At least mine's not wrapped.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">He hands it to her. Bella's pleased, despite herself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Okay, this is actually kind of great, Thanks Dad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlie : I love you bells.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : I will never leave you alone here dad.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Charlie : Thank you, you always be mine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Don't worry about that.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The statement above showed that Bella very much loved her father and felt so lost if she did not live with her father any longer.In essence, she was like most people “ absolutely ordinary”. She did not always have to be cool or wear the cool clothes ever. Edward and Bella entered the double doors, suddenly a small, wrapped gift appeared in Bella's face. Alice presented it.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data (2) : SETTING : FORKS HIGH SCHOOL - CORRIDOR-DAY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Alice &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Happy—Birth Day...</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Shh!!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alice &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Birth Day Bella ( Alice whisper in her ear as she hugs Bella)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Alice, didn't I say no gifts?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Alice &nbsp;&nbsp;: You did, I didn't. I've already seen you open it and guess what? You love it</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You had a vision about my birthday. I think, I cant use it..look terrible Alice</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: And about the green dress you'll be. Wearing to your party tonight. Great color on you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Actually, I am already felt nervous, if I use this dress. Alice : Don't worry bells,..Another thing was that Bella was a shy person, which is just sort of how the author imagined teenagers, because that was how every teenager year was. Bella Swan was also considered definitely not materialistic type.She was in love with a vampire, Edward Cullen who made her life in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">danger, because she had to face many conflict from outside attacks. She wanted to get married with Edward; although Edward was a vampire she wanted to become a vampire. From the dialogue, It could be seen that Bella loved Edward so much, and appeared her ambitious characterization.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Data (3) : SETTING RCULLEN HOUSE-CARLISLE'S ROOM-NIGH</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">As Bella spins on Edward.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Don't even.. Talk about that. You can't let anyone hurt you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Victory or anyone else.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Edward : (sees she's worried) who else would hurt me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : you said there were more dangerous things out there than you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">And I know you have at least one enemy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hundreds of pink candles and rose-file crystal bowls. Rosalie, Esme Emette, Carlisle, Jasper and Alice look up at her, all of them stunningly beautiful. Bella would love to disappear, but Edward leads her down to. In the living room where Esme and Carlisle hug Bella warmly. Alice drags Bella over to a table piled with elaborately wrapped gifts, a huge cake and a tall stack of china plates. The others crowd around. Jasper somewhat away. Bella, no fan of being the center of attention, opens the gift to find empty car-radio box. Close on Bella's Finger, A single drop of deep red blood appeared .Bella thinks little of it, but then hears a disturbing, grisly snal she looks up just as. Jasper lunges toward her! Teeth bared, eyes beyond reason.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Data (4): SETTING : CULLEN HOUSE - KITCHEN - NIGHT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Bella sat in a chair opposite Carlisle who mopped up her blood as he removed glass shards from her arm. He dropped one into a bowl; plink. She tried not to look at the blood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : I am sure I can kill a party</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carlisle : It's not your fault. Jasper hasn't been away from human blood as long as the rest of us.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Seems like you're the only one it doesn't effect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carlisle : Centuries of practice</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Did you ever think of... living differently?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carlisle : I enjoy my work too much Helping people, saving lives. I'm hopping there's a point to my existence, even if I am damned.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bella : Damned? You're not damned .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carlisle : Then you and I agree. But Edward doesn't believe there's an after life for our kind. Looking at her, He thinks we've lost our souls.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Characterization of Bella as the Main Character</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The characters development as most fiction writers agreed was the key element in the story's creation, and in most places of fiction, a close identification with its character is crucial to understand the story. Character in fiction refer to a textual representation of human being or occasionally another creature. Characterization is the process by which an author presents and develops a fictional character. In achieving characterization an author may use a variety of methods such as by simply tell us about his or her characters, by allowing his or her characters to reveals themselves to us through their own words and actions, by the verbal context that surrounds the character, by exposition or analysis what the character is like or has someone else in the story tell us what he is like, by showing the thoughts and dialogue of others in relation to the character.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bella's Characterization through Appearance</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The factor of appearance is very important in the analysis of characterization. The character's appearance may include the dress that is put on by the character for his or her expression: The appearance may also represent the age, physical condition, health and prosperity of the character. Here the appearance of Bella Swan.The appearance of Bella Swan has very fair skinned, with long, straight, dark brown hair and chocolate brown eyes. Her face is heart-shaped, a wide forehead with a widow's peak, large, wide spaced eyes, prominent cheekbones, and then a thin nose and a narrow jaw with a pointed chin. Her lips are a little out of proportion, a bit too full for her jaw line. Her eyebrows are darker than her hair and straighter than they are arched.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Character's Relationship to Other Characters</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Art of the character's development was based on the changing nature of her relationship with other characters. If someone who was an enemy slowly became a friend, the character naturally needed to adjust to the changing relationship. If we trance the development of romance. There is one main character and two supporting characters must participate in the movie, they were Edward Cullen and Jacob Black.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The following is the conclusion of the whole reseach which was been done in the previous chapter. In analyzing the characterization of character in a movie, the dramatic method of showing can be used (direct method). In this case, Bella as the main character in the movie of Twlight Saga New Moon was the only character chosen by the author to be analyzed. In analysing the character and the characterization,there weresome ways of the methods were used in this analysis that could result some important points as follow:Firstly, one of Bella's characterization presented in this movie was as a lover. In this movie she love her father so much.She even devoted her love to her own father and her boyfriend Edward Cullen. As the proof that she loved her father so much, she moved from Arizona to Forks just wanted to stay longer with her father. When she was in Forks, She met the mysterious Cullen family, and fell in love with a coven of vampires. Bella expressedd a desire to become a vampire herself, against Edward wishes.Secondly, another characterization of Bella found in the movie was being a faithful person. Bella's faith was evidently seen through when Edward leaft her. Edward's departure leaft Bella as a heartbroken and depressed for months. Her father helped her to become a happy and a normal woman again, though she still missed Edward. She believed that Edward would come back to her again again.Thirdly, Bella Swan was also definitely not the materialistic type. She could have anything that she wanted and yet she wantednothing except her vampire boyfriend Edward. She refused to let him buy her expensive gift or to replace her banged up old truck with one of his slinky fast car. In fact, she barely tolerateed him- or anyone- buying her anything at all. She did not always have to be cool, or wear the coolest clothes ever.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Abrams, M. H., 1971. “A Glossary of Literary Terms”. Third Edition. Cornell Univercity.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">A. Stanford, Judith. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature: Stories, Poems, Playsans Essays</span><span class="font2">. Fifth Edition.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Minderop, Aberttine. 2005. “Metode Karakterisasi Telaah Fiksi”. Jakarta Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. Theory of Literature. New York : Harcout, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Diyanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Literature Reading, Fiction, Poetry, and Drama</span><span class="font2">. McGRAW-HILL INTERNATIONAL EDITION.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek and Warren. 1962. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">: Great Britain: Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek and Warren in Sukada’s book ‘Pembinaan Kritik Sastra Indonesia Masalah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sistematika Analisis Struktur Fiksi’ (1986:92)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Twilight Saga : NewMoon. 2013. Retrieved December 01, 2013, from </span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/the_twilight_saga:_new_Moon"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/the_twilight_saga:_new_Moon</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Film. 2013. Retrieved December 01, 2013, from http:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/film</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">47</span></p>