---
layout: full_article
title: "TERMS OF ADDRESS AND POLITENESS IN  “LOVE IN THE AFTERNOON”"
author: "Ni Wayan Swandewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TERMS OF ADDRESS AND POLITENESS IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“LOVE IN THE AFTERNOON”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">By : Ni Wayan Swandewi</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(081 835 1059)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">NON REGULAR PROGRAM ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY DENPASAR</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">2014</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul TERMS OF ADDRESS AND POLITENESS IN “LOVE IN THE AFTERNOON”. Di tulis oleh Lisa Kleypas tahun 2010. Pemilihan novel ini dikarenakan, di dalam novel ini terdapat banyak nya percakapan. Termasuk percakapan antara sesama pria, sesama wanita dan juga percakapan antara pria dan wanita. Novel ini sangat menarik untuk di analisis karena karakter di dalam percakapan menampilkan dilemma dalam pemakaian teori address form yang berdasarkan dimensi dari politeness secara tepat. Data diambil secara langsung dari novel “Love in the Afternoon” karangan Lisa Kleypas. Data diperoleh dengan melakukan penelitian pustaka yaitu, membaca dan memilih pecakapan yang dapat dikatagorikan sesuai dengan teori. Dimana pemilihan data harus sistematik untuk mendapakan data yang akurat. Penelitian ini menjelaskan tentang metode-metode apa saja yang digunakan dalam pengumpulan data dan bagaimana data tersebut dikumpulkan.dimana data diperoleh dengan membaca novel secara seksama. Dan mengidentifikasi dengan mempertimbangkan kesopanan. Pengumpulan dan analisis data berdasarkan teori address terms and politeness (Braun, 1988). Adapun tujuan penulisan untuk memperlihatkan Noun of address terms dapat di klasifikasikan sebagai berikut: Name terms, Kinship terms, Title, Abstract noun, Occupational terms dan Terms of endearment. Diantara berbagaimacam address terms yang dipergunakan di dalam tulisan ini, Name terms, Kinship terms, Title, dan Terms of endearment adalah yang paling sering di muncul dari pada penggunaan Abstract noun dan occupational terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords : term of address, noun of address, politness</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language as the main way to communication cannot be separated from our life because language plays an important role in each part of human life. By using the language we can express our idea, inform something to someone else, tell stories or suggest someone to do something. Besides, when a conversation occurs in communication, certainly it always involves a speaker and a hearer or an addressee who takes an important part of conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Every language reflects the social characters of the speaker, of the addressee or of the relation between them. Address system is one of the important tools of communication used in society. Address forms are used by the speaker to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">designate the person they are talking to. The use of address forms depends on the relationship between addresser and addressee, the social status or individual involved in the conversation, the purpose of the conversation and the situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness is one way to show appreciations from one person to another, but it is not a simple thing. Being polite is a complicated thing in any language. It is difficult to learn because it involves understanding not just the language, but also the social and culture values of the communication. Being polite is not only considered by saying “please” and “thank you”. But more than that, polite means the comfortable feeling of the hearer, showing respect and expressing the social distance as far as the addressee is concerning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are some factors which are consider relevant in accounting for people choice of appropriate address terms in British English such as marked setting, well-acquaint, kinship relationship, age, sex, and social status as determining by occupation and education it is interesting, because being polite cannot be show only from a certain dimension.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background above, two problems are being formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of address terms occur in the novel “Love in The Afternoon”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors influence the use of address terms in the novel “Love in The Afternoon”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are two aims of study can be found, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify type of address terms occur in the novel “Love in The Afternoon” by Lisa Kleypas.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the factors influence the use of address terms in the novel “Love in The Afternoon” by Lisa Kleypas.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data in this writing were taken from the novel “Love in The Afternoon” by Lisa Kleypas published in 2010. The reason for selecting this novel because it used a lots of conversations among the characters, include the conversation between male and male, male and female, or female and female characteristic. This novel is interesting to be analyzed because the conversation of the characters can present the dilemma of the usage of appropriate address form based upon the dimension of politeness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Collecting data is an essential step in every research. In this writing, the data collected by doing Library research. This method was conducted by reading and selecting literary work. The data is the object of the analysis. The collection of the data must be systematically done in order to get accurate data. The data were taken by reading the novel carefully. To identify the characteristic which is considered being polite or not to the addressee In the novel “Love in the afternoon”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research of this writing is about method of analyzing data. In analyzing the data, all of the collecting data analyzing based on the theories of politeness and address terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Starting from classifying the data, in this case the address term used by the characters from the conversation of the novel. Then the data were categorized into each part of noun of address terms, such as: name terms, kinship terms, title, abstract noun terms, occupational terms, terms of endearment and nickname. Secondly identifying the use of respect, endearment, and rank, then putting on the data as the example of those factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are some basic concepts that have relation in this study, they are concepts of politeness, concept forms of address terms, and concept of novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Theories used for this study are theory Braun with his book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font1"> (1988). According to Braun, Forms of Address are words and phrases used for addressing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Noun of address terms can be classified as:</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Name Terms</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Numerous classes of names can be distinguished according to the different naming systems. Personal names, however, are something restricted or even tabooed as form of address.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the following dialogue that’s found that name terms “Beatrix Heloise Hathaway” is used in:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Beatrix Heloise Hathaway</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(She is addressed with her name “Beatrix”, when her friends ‘Amelia’ call her.) (Scene: at Yard Ramsay House – in the afternoon)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Amelia : “Beatrix.” (Amelia stood beside her at the window, laying a gentle arm across her shoulders.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Are you felling melancholy, dear? Perhaps you should have gone to London for the season as your friend prudence did. You could stay with Leo and Catherine or with Poppy and Harry at the hotel-“ Beatrix : “have no interest whatsoever in talking part in the season,” (Beatrix said.) “I’ve done it four times, and that was three times too many.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Amelia : “But you were very sought after. The gentlemen adore you. And perhaps there will be someone new there.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : Her first name is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Beatrix</span><span class="font1">; first name is commonly put at the first of someone’s name. This comes before the middle name or family name. Her middle name is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Heloise </span><span class="font1">and family name is </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Hathaway</span><span class="font1">. It means that she belongs to Hathaway’s family and family name also can be used as normal ways of identifying family relationship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinship Terms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">That expresses the relationship between individuals as they relate one to the other. (Are for blood relation), such as:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, Grandmother, Grandfather and etc.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Mother</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">In this novel, Audrey is the (daughter-in-law) from Mrs. Phelan. The Kinship terms mother used by Audrey to address her Mother-in-law (Mrs. Phelan). (Scene: Phelan House-Tea time-In the afternoon)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Christopher, Audrey and Mrs. Phelan, she drank tea. Setting down her half finished a cup of tea. And then Mrs. Phelan pushed back from the table. Christopher rise to help her with her chair.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mrs. Phelan : “I can’t enjoy my tea with that beast starting at me at any moment. It could leap forward and rip my throat out.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Audrey : “His leash is tied to the furniture </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Mother</span><span class="font1">,”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mrs. Phelan : that doesn’t matter. It’s a savage creature, and I detest it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(She swept out of the room, her head high with indignation.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : Kinship terms for blood relations between the speaker and the hearer. The kinship Mother used by Audrey to address her mother-in-law. This kinship also indicated that Audrey and her Mother-in-law (Mrs. Phelan) have a closest relationship. (Braun 1988).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Title</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Is In some languages, title may even be inserted between the first and last name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sir , Mr. , Ma’am, Madam, Mrs, Miss, Ms , Professor, Dr.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Title found in “Love in the Afternoon” are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mr.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(The title Mr. used by Beatrix, to addressed Mr. Chickering when she receives an invitation to dance from him.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Scene: at Stony Cross Manor – in Ball Room – In the Night)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Chickering: “Would you do me the honor, Miss. Hathaway?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix : (She smile at him)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“It would be my pleasure, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Mr.Chickering</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mr. Chickering: “you look lovely tonight, Miss. Hathaway?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix : “Thank You, Kind Sir.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : The title </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. </span><span class="font1">used by Beatrix to Address Mr. Chickering when she receives an invitation to dance from him. The Title </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Mr. </span><span class="font1">is used to address a man to show the respect and also indicates appreciateness to the addressee, although she has higher status than him. (Braun: 1988)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstract noun</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Abstract noun are forms of address which originally refers to some abstract quality of the address such as:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Your Excellency”, “Your Grace”, “Your Majesty”, “Your Honour”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The abstract Noun Terms found in the novel “Love in the Afternoon” are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Your Majesty</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The use of Abstract Noun Terms </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Your Majesty</span><span class="font1"> is used to address His Grace the Duke of Cambridge.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. The used of Abstract Noun Terms Your Majesty to address His Grace the Duke of Cambridge:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(This abstract noun terms use by Christopher to address Queen. (His Grace the Duke of Cambridge).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Scene: at Hyde Park London – in the afternoon)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Queen</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">: “Captain Phelan, Our subjects’ enthusiasm does your honor.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Christopher</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">: “The honor belongs to all the soldiers who have fought in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Your Majesty’s</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font1">service – and to the families who waited for them to return.”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Queen</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Queen</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">: “Well and modestly said, Captain. Come forward.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">: “Remain”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Her attentions switched to Albert, who sat on the dais and cocked his head as he regerded her curiously.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“What is your companion’s name?”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Christopher</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">: “His name is Albert, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Your Majesty</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : The word majesty was the legal term for the supreme status and dignity of the state. Majesty was used to describe a monarch of the very highest rank. And it is used for the monarch in official documents or the most formal situations. It is used by Captain Christopher Phelan to address the Queen (Captain Christopher Phelan to address the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Queen (Your Majesty) which indicates if the speaker has lower status than the Hearer and it also shows the respect to the hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Occupational Terms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Designating an addressee’s profession or functional serve as forms of address: Waiter, Waitress, Driver, Doctor, etc</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Doctor</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(This term is used by Audrey to address the Doctor)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Scene: at Phelan House – in the front receiving room – in the afternoon)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;“Is she ill?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Audrey &nbsp;: &nbsp;“Only distraught.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix &nbsp;: &nbsp;“And... your husband?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Audrey &nbsp;: &nbsp;“He’s dying, He doesn’t have long. A matter of days, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Doctor</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font1">says.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis: The Occupational Terms Doctor is used by Audrey. Although Audrey has higher status and also has higher rank than the Doctor, he is respected by all people but he keeps using this occupational terms to show his respect and appreciation with him as the Doctor of her husband.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Terms of endearments</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Terms of endearments are defined by context and function rather than formal or semantic characteristics or to address small children, to whom the speaker feels close, for instance, My Boy, Dear, Honey, Baby, Love, Pumpkin, Sugar, Sweetheart, etc</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My Love</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(This term is used by Christopher to address Beatrix)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Scene: Long a creek – in the Morning)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Christopher : “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">My Love</span><span class="font1">... I would choose the small sum of hours I’ve spent with you over a lifetime spent with another woman. You never needed to write that note, asking me to find you. I’ve wanted to find you my entire life. I don’t think there’s a man alive who could be all the think you deserve in a husband... but I beg you to let me try. Will you marry me?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix : “Yes, yes, yes,”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Christopher : “What kind of wedding would you like?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beatrix : “The kind that turns you into my husband.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : The Terms of Endearments are usually used to address small children or persons to whom the speaker feels close, almost any noun – whether previously existing or invented for this purpose can serve as a form of address. This term is used by Christopher to address her Girlfriend, Beatrix. Christopher also wants to show she has already Loved him. (Braun 1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Factors that contain the politeness of address term</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pride and Holmes mention factors constraining the polite choice of address term are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marked setting</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It includes setting where the hearer is, such as the courtroom, congress, and where the status is clearly specified, speech style is rigidly prescribed, and the form of address of each person is derived from his social identify, for example the use:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Your Majesty” for a King of the kingdom,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Your Honour” a title used to address a judge or magistrate,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Mr. Chairman” for the leader of the court.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation below show the Rank, between the Queen and Captain Phelan)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Scene: at Hyde Park London – in the afternoon)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Queen : “Captain Phelan, Our subjects’ enthusiasm does your honor.” Christopher : “The honor belongs to all the soldiers who have fought in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Your Majesty’s</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><span class="font1">service – and to the families who waited for them to return.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Queen : “Well and modestly said, Captain. Come forward.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(The Queen leaned from the horse to pin the bronze cross with its crimson ribbon to his coat. Christopher made to withdraw, but she stopped him with a gesture and a word.) Queen : “Remain”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Her attentions switched to Albert, who sat on the dais and cocked his head as he regerded her curiously.) “What is your companion’s name?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Christopher : “His name is Albert, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Your Majesty</span><span class="font1">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Analysis : Rank is refers to a hierarchy or ranked status. In this Novel, Christopher appreciates and respects by each other. In the conversation above Christopher address the Queen with abstract noun term </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Your Majesty</span><span class="font1">, the difference in addressing above shows the different rank between the speaker and the hearer, Christopher has lower status than the Queen; he addressed the Queen using Pronoun of address </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You. </span><span class="font1">Meanwhile Christopher appreciates her using abstract noun term </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Your Majesty. </span><span class="font1">(Pridge and Holmes: 1072).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rank</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It is a reference to a hierarchy within a working group or to ranked statues like teacher – pupils, here the rank or status between the speaker and hearer is clear. . For example: the senior has the option of dispending the speaker from differing title last name (TLN) by suggesting that he uses a first bane or by tacitly accepting first name. A professor addressing a doctoral</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">candidate or younger instructor, wishes to receive back first name (FN) he gives. And the teacher addresses the students by their first names and the students use title and last name in addressing back or even use the first name (FN) if the teacher allows and suggests that use.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Identity set</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">It refers to a list of occupational titles or courtesy title accorder people in certain statues. Therefore the address term that is used is in according to the hearer’s occupational. John can be addressed as doctor in hospital. There are two dimensions which also provide the basis for a distinction between two different types or politeness. This theory is proposed by Pridge and Holmes (1972):</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Politeness: is solidarity emphasizes shared attitude and values.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Politeness: involves expressing oneself appropriately in terms of social distance and respecting status differences.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter serves to provide several conclusions regarding the analysis of Address Terms and Politeness in the novel Love in the Afternoon, Noun of Address Term can be classified as; Name Terms, Kinship Terms, Title, Abstract Noun, Occupational Terms, and Terns of Endearment. From Braun theory from the book entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font1"> (1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">First, in this novel, address terms occur as, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Name Terms</span><span class="font1"> (numerous classes of names can be distinguished according to the different naming system. Personal names, however, are something restricted or even tabooed as form of address). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kinship Terms</span><span class="font1"> (that expresses the relationship between individual as they relate one to the other. (Are for blood relation), such as: Mother, Father, Grand Mother, Sister, etc). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Title</span><span class="font1"> (is a prefix or suffix added to someone’s name to signify either veneration, an official position or a professional or academic qualification. In some language, title may even be inserted between a first and last name such as: Sir, Mr. and Mrs). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Abstract Noun</span><span class="font1"> (forms of address which originally referred to some abstract quality in addressee, like Your Majesty). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Occupational Terms</span><span class="font1"> (Designating an addressee’s profession or functional serve as forms of address like Waiter, Waitress, etc). and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terns of Endearment</span><span class="font1">, (Are defined by context and function rather than formal or semantic characteristics or in addressing to small children, to whom the speaker feels close, for instance like My Boy, Honey, etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second, the factor of address terms that influenced in this novel are: Market setting, Rank, and the Identity set. Market setting is where the hearer is, such as the courtroom, congress, and where the status is clearly specified, speech style is rigidly prescribed, and the form of address of each person is derived from his social identify, for example the use: “Your Majesty” for a King or Queen of the kingdom, “Your Honour” a title used to address a judge or magistrate, and “Mr. Chairman” for the leader of the court. Rank is reference to a hierarchy within a working group or to ranked statues like teacher – pupils; here the rank or status between the speaker and hearer is clear. And the Identity set. Refers to a list of occupational titles or courtesy title accorder people in certain statues. There for the address term that is use in according to the hearer’s occupational. John can be address as doctor in hospital. There are two dimensions also provide the basis for a distinction between two different types or politeness this theory mentioned by Pridge and Holmes (1972)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Braun, Friedrike. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Terms of Address</span><span class="font1">. New York. Mountoun de Gruyter Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, P. and Stephen Levinson. 1987. Universals in language usage:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (Seventh Edition)</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">London: Cambridge University Press http/www.google.com. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Baptist name in English</span><span class="font1">. http/www.wikipedia.com. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Family name, Given name, Nick name in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford University Press </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Phenomena</span><span class="font1">. Insther N Goody (Ed). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Question and Politeness</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strategies in Social Interaction</span><span class="font1"> (56-310) 1987. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Prabandari. 2007. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nominal Address Term And Politeness in the Movie Princess Diaries</span><span class="font1">” Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pridge and Janet Holmes. 1972. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistic.</span><span class="font1"> England. Penguins Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Putra, Astina. 2011. “ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Politeness Strategies Used in the Movie Jerry Meguire</span><span class="font1">” Spencer, Helen. 2002. “Language, Behavior, and Culture”. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Politeness Research.</span><span class="font1"> University of Luton.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tandyar. 2009. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Politeness in Language Function in the Movie Elizabeth the Golden Age</span><span class="font1">” Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Watt’s, Richard. 2005. “Politeness in Language. Studies in its History, Theory, and Practice”. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Intenational</span><span class="font1">. Guangdong University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 2000. Pragmatic: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness and Interaction</span><span class="font1">. Hongkong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p>