---
layout: full_article
title: "CONJUNCTION AND ITS FUNCTION IN NOVEL “IF IN STAY”"
author: "Triposa Christariana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">CONJUNCTION AND ITS FUNCTION IN NOVEL “IF IN STAY”</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">By: TRIPOZA CHRISTARIANA 0318351134</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Jurusan Sastra Inggris, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul Konjungsi dan Fungsinya dalam Novel &quot;If I Stay&quot; oleh Forman. Penelitian ini adalah mengamati tentang jenis konjungsi yang terjadi didalam novel dan fungsi konjungsi yang digunakan dalam novel. Tujuan dari tulisan ini adalah untuk mengetahui jenis hubungannya dan untuk menjelaskan fungsi konjungsi yang digunakan dalam novel. Kata sambung yang diambil dari novel berjudul bahasa Inggris “If I Stay” oleh Forman (2009). Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan metode dokumenter dan analisis literari. Dalam menyelesaikan proses pengumpulan data, yang diperhatikan adalah teknik pengambilan yang diterapkan. Data yang terkumpul dianalisis secara deskriptif. Data untuk penelitian ini miliki data kualitatif. Teori utama yang digunakan dalam makalah ini adalah teori konjungsi dari Halliday dan Hassan dalam buku mereka &quot;Kohesi dalam Bahasa Inggris&quot; (1976, teori ini mencakup tentang jenis- jenis konjungsi . Selain itu, makalah ini juga menggunakan teori dari Stern, dalam bukunya yang berjudul” Grammar bahasa Inggris dengan Latihan dan Kunci Jawaban” (2003) untuk menjelaskan fungsi dari konjungsi. Temuan ini menunjukkan empat jenis konjungsi yang diusulkan oleh Halliday dan Hassan, yaitu aditif, adversative, kausal, dan temporal yang ditemukan didalam novel &quot;If I Stay&quot; oleh Forman. Setelah itu, fungsi konjungsi dalam novel dianalisi berdasarkan teori yang diusulkan oleh Stern. Ada dua kesimpulan yang ditemukan, berdasarkan pada permasalahan yang dianalisis. Pertama, Dalam novel &quot;If I Stay&quot; keempat jenis hubungannya diusulkan oleh Halliday dan Hasan ditemukan dengan berbagai jenis. Kedua, konjungsi yang ditemukan dalam novel &quot;If I Stay&quot; memiliki beberapa fungsi. Fungsi konjungsi bergabung dari satu kata dengan kata yang lain, konjungsi bergabung dari satu klausal dengan klausal yang lain, konjungsi berrgabung dari satu kalimat dengan kalimat yang lain, dan konjungsi bergabung dari satu frase dengan frase yang lain.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: bersama, aditif, yang berlawanan, kausal dan temporal</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In communication we have to consider grammar, situation, and the audience.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The message must be well-structured so that it can be easier to understand. To make a well structured sentence, we have to organize with grammatical rules. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">communication, there is a transfer of information whether it is spoken or written. The written text demonstrates how the language is exploited or manipulated in order to achieve the intended goal of the writer. To form u understandable English is not an easy task, even for those educated in the language. The difficulties occur in using their English, especially in understanding conjunctions. A conjunction is a way of linking different parts of text to create cohesiveness. It is difficult to learn to use conjunctions correctly in a foreign language. Most English conjunctions have several different functions and these may correspond to several different conjunctions in another language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the background, there are two problems that may arise in interpreting a conjunction in a novel:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the types of conjunction occur in the novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“If I Stay”</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of conjunction used in the novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“If I Stay”</span><span class="font0">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the types of conjunction those are mostly used in novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“If I Stay”</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the functions of conjunction those are used in novel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“If I Stay”</span><span class="font0">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data of this study was taken from one source, which is a novel entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">“If I Stay”.</span><span class="font0"> The novel was written by Forman in 2009. The selection of data of the novel is related to the scope of discussion. This novel was used as the data source because no one used it as a data source in analyzing conjunction, and the language which was used in folktales was easy to understand and consists of many conjunctions. The method that was used in collecting data is literary analysis and documentation. The process of collecting data would involve taking notes and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">classification. The novel was a primary source of data collection. The methods that were used in analyzing the data were qualitative and descriptive method. Qualitative refers to the method in which the data was analyzed in an ordinary and natural way without any manipulation. However in descriptive method, the data was analyzed by elucidating it in words or sentences.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to Halliday and Hasan (1976:1), concept of cohesion can be divided into four main items; they are text, texture, ties, and cohesion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Text</span><span class="font0"> is language that is functional which is doing some jobs in some contexts, as opposed to isolated words or sentences (Halliday and Hasan , 1976: 10). Halliday and Hasan (1976; 1-2) also proposed that text may be spoken or written, prose or verse, dialogue and monologue.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Texture</span><span class="font0"> is entirely appropriate to express to property of “being a text” ( Halliday and Hasan , 1976: 2). A text has texture and this is what distinguishes it from something that is not a text. It derives from fact that it functions as a semantic unity with respect to its environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ties</span><span class="font0"> is term to refer to a single instance of cohesion for one occurrence of a pair of cohesion of cohesively related items (Halliday and Hasan, 1976; 3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion</span><span class="font0"> is a semantic one. It refers to relations of meaning that exists within the text and that defined it as a text. According to Halliday and Hasan, (1976:4-5) cohesion occurs where the interpretation of some elements in the discourse is dependent on that of another. The one presupposes the other in the sense that it cannot be effectively decoded except by the recourse to it. When this happens, a relation of cohesion is set up, and the elements, the presupposing and the presupposed, are thereby at least potentially integrated to a text. from something that is not a text. It derives from fact that it functions as a semantic unity with respect to its environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ties</span><span class="font0"> is term to refer to a single instance of cohesion for one occurrence of a pair of cohesion of cohesively related items (Halliday and Hasan, 1976; 3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion</span><span class="font0"> is a semantic one. It refers to relations of meaning that exists within the text and that defined it as a text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Halliday and Hasan, (1976:4-5) cohesion occurs where the interpretation of some elements in the discourse is dependent on that of another. The one presupposes the other in the sense that it cannot be effectively decoded except by the recourse to it. When this happens, a relation of cohesion is set up, and the elements, the presupposing and the presupposed, are thereby at least potentially integrated to According to Halliday and Hasan (1976:238), there are four types of conjunction; they are additive, adversative, causal, and temporal. For details explanation are as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And</span><span class="font0"> in all this time he met no one. (Additive)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b.</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yet</span><span class="font0"> he was hardly aware of being tired. (Adversative)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">c</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So</span><span class="font0"> by night time the valley was far below him</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> (Causal)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">d</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Then, as</span><span class="font0"> dusk fell, he sat down to rest. (Temporal)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The different types of conjunctive relations that enter into cohesion are not the same as the elementary logical relations that are expressed through the structural medium of coordination. The conjunctive relations are textual; they represent the generalized types of connection that we recognize as holding between sentences. It means that the phenomena of conjunctive relations can be a grouped into four categories that may occur in either ‘internal’ or ‘external’ context.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Additive</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The additive relation is somewhat different from coordination proper, although it is no doubt derivable from it. Considering cohesive relations, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and, or,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">nor</span><span class="font0"> type can be grouped under the heading of additive (Halliday and Hasan, 1976; 233). While additive indicates something rather looser and less structural than what it meant by coordinate The reason is that a coordinate pair functions as a single unit.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adversative</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Contrary to expectation as the basic meaning of the adversative relation derived from the content of what is being said or from the communication process, and the speaker -hearer situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Causal</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">So, thus, hence, consequently, accordingly, therefore</span><span class="font0"> and a number of expressions like </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">as a result (of that), because of that, in consequence,</span><span class="font0"> are the causal relation expression. All the example of causal are regularly combined with initial </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and. </span><span class="font0">Thus </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font0"> occurs only initially, unless it is followed by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and.</span><span class="font0"> There are three specific relations under the heading of causal relations. They are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">'result, reason,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">purpose'. </span><span class="font0">The simple form of expression such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">so means, as a result, for this reason, for this purpose.</span><span class="font0"> Except, they are expressed as prepositional phrases, they are not distinguished.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The simple form </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">thus, hence,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font0"> all occur regularly in an internal sense which is implying some kinds of reasoning or argument from a premise. The word </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font0"> occurs frequently in another meaning, also internal, that is shared with </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">then; </span><span class="font0">it is a statement about the speaker’s reasoning processes: T conclude from what you say (or other evidence)’ (Halliday and Hasan 1976: 257).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Temporal</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The temporal relations are the relations between two successive sentences. Their relation in external terms, as content may be simply one of the sequences in time. The one is subsequent to the other. This temporal cohesion is expressed in its simple form by </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">then.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The other expressions of temporal relationship besides </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">then</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">end then</span><span class="font0"> are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">next, afterwards, after that, subsequently, following, later, since.</span><span class="font0"> Halliday and Hasan (1976; 261) stated that the presence of an additional component also make temporal relation more specific in the meaning, as well as succession in time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>2.3.2 Stern’s Theory of Function of Conjunction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Beside, Stern (2003: 101) proposed that the function of conjunction is to join any of the following language units such as word, clause, sentence, and phrase to another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunction joins one words to another</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For data: smile but sad</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunction joins one clause to another</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For data: I saw a doctor because I felt unwell</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunctions joins one sentence to another</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For data: it was raining, so I did not go out</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunctions joins one phrase to another</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For data: the bus and the cab got terible accident</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stern (2003) also proposed that a major use of conjunctions is to join sentence parts that are clauses. When we use of conjunction in this way, it is often possible to choose between putting the conjoined clause (headed by the conjunction) first and putting it second. Because the beginning of the sentence is the most prominent, your choice will depend on which clause you want the reader or listener to focus on. Besides, based on stern (2003: &nbsp;103), there are two subclasses of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">conjunction, and one of them has three subdivision, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coordinating Conjunctions</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coordinating conjunctions (in bold below) are conjunction that join small scale units of language such as words and phrases. Such as: and, but, either….or, neither….nor.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coordinating conjunctions also join clauses. The clauses headed by a coordinating conjunction</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Subordinating Conjunctions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to Stern (2003), subordinating conjunctions are the conjunctions that join clauses to each other. But the two clauses are not equal. One is the main clause (also called a super ordinate clause). The other headed by the subordinating conjunction is the subordinate clause. Stern(2003: 104) also states that in the sense that the subordinate clause, together with its subordinating conjunction, cannot Stern alone but must be join in any one of three functions underlined) are called a “coordinate clause”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stern (2003) also gives the explanation about the three subdivisions of subordinating conjunctions that joined the three clauses above, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal Conjunction is the subordinating conjunction that used to join the main clause with a noun.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The subordinate clause (what was mine) acts as a noun because it is the object of the verb </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">took</span><span class="font0">. The main nominal conjunctions are: whoever, whatever, who, whom, which, that, when, where, how, what, why, whether.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adjectival conjunction is the subordinating conjunction that used to join an adjective (bolded) with main clause.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adverbial Conjunction is the subordinating conjunction that used to join an adverb with an adverb clause.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In the novel “If I Stay”, I found four types of conjunction, they are: Additive relation: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0">, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font0">; Adversative relation: but, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">only</span><span class="font0">; Causal relation: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">because</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font0">, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">then</span><span class="font0">; and Temporal relation: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and then</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">after that</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">afterwards</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">since</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">before</span><span class="font0">, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">after</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The function of conjunction in novel “If I Stay” are: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Conjunction joins one word to another, Conjunction join one clause to another, Conjunction join one sentence to another, Conjunction join one phrase to another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>7.</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Bott, Lewis; Steven Frisson; Gregory L. Murphy. 2009. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cognitive</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Psychology;Comparative Psychology</span><span class="font0">; Interpreting Conjunctions. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Quartely Journal of Experimental Psychology</span><span class="font0">, April 2009. Volume 62, Issue 4, pages 681-706. Retrieved from </span><a href="http://www.google.com"><span class="font0">www.google.com</span></a><span class="font0"> about jurnal conjunction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Budiutami, Ni Made Ayu. 2005. The Analysis of Conjunction used in the Short</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Strory “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Colonel’s Lady</span><span class="font0">”. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Halliday, M.A.K, &amp;&nbsp;Hasan. 1976. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English.</span><span class="font0"> London: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nunan, David. 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font0">. London:Clays Ltd, St. Ives Plc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Poviana, I Made Agus. 2009. The Analysis of Conjunction used in Bali Travel News.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rahayuni, Ni Kt Sri. 2006. The Analysis of Conjunction on Opinion Article Text in The Jakarta Post</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Stern, George. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">An Outline of English Grammar with Exercises and Answer</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Key</span><span class="font0">. Singapore. Learners Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suwandana, I Made. 2009. The Analysis of Reason Conjunction in English and the Translation Into Indonesia. Denpasar : Udayana University</span></p>