---
layout: full_article
title: "VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS OF MEN’ S FRAGRANCE ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE DETAILS MAGAZINE"
author: "Putu Christiyaningrat Ary Fizziela"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS OF MEN’ S FRAGRANCE</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE DETAILS MAGAZINE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Putu Christiyaningrat Ary Fizziela</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non- Regular Program of English Departement Faculty of Letters and Culture</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “Verbal and Visual Sign of Men’s Advertisment in the DETAILS Magazine” Tujuan dalam penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi dan menggambarkan tanda verbal dan visual yang ditemukan dalam iklan wewangian. Lebih khusus, hal ini dimaksudkan untuk menganalisis fungsi dan makna tanda untuk membantu pembaca memahami pesan dari wewangian iklan cetak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini diambil dari majalah DETAILS edisi Juni - Juli 2014 yang dianalisis berdasarkan teori sign oleh Chandler. Yang menyatakan bahwa tanda sebagai komposisi 'penanda' dan 'bertanda'. Teori kedua makna oleh Leech dalam bukunya yang berjudul &quot;Semantic of Meaning&quot;. Secara umum sebuah iklan memiliki tujuh jenis berarti mereka: makna konseptual, makna konotatif, makna gaya, afektif, reflected, collocative, dan tematik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis ini menunjukkan bahwa tanda-tanda verbal dan visual memiliki korelasi dengan data dan sangat penting untuk membuat iklan yang baik. Analisis ini menjelaskan bahwa setiap majalah memiliki cara yang berbeda untuk menyampaikan sebuah iklan, baik dari segi struktur maupun komponen. Dalam hal tanda-tanda verbal dan visual, teks dalam iklan umumnya dalam arti konseptual, karena pembaca dapat memahaminya dengan lebih mudah. Arti lain, seperti makna konotatif juga ditemukan dalam teks. Mereka bertujuan untuk menarik perhatian dan membangkitkan minat pembaca untuk membelinya</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Verbal information on a product is very important for consumers to recognize the product and associate it with good attributes. One of the verbal aspects of an advertisement is text. Dyer (1993) states that words do not only</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">describe communicative feelings, association and attitudes, but also bring ideas to our minds. These are the key parts of speech for the advertiser.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Visual aspect is the picture of an advertisement. Dyer (1993) states that pictures are easier to be understood and have more impacts than words, visual aspect generally has a greater opportunity to communicate excitement and mode of imagination. By presenting a visual sign, printed advertisement can be easily remembered in mind by looking at the picture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DETAILS magazine is a magazine for men and it contains advertisements of branded kinds of products such as men's fragrances. Some men consider that fragrance is a very important thing in someone’s life. Besides, the quality of branded fragrance smells better than ellegant than any other fragrances.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems that are formulated in this study they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What verbal and visual signs are presented in each men’s fragrance advertisement in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the function and meaning of a sign that exists in each men’s fragrance advertisement in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As formulated in the problem above, the aims of this study can be divided into two points:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the verbal and visual signs which are found in each advertisement in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the function and meaning of sign that exists in each</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">advertisement in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbal Signs</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The Components of the advertisement based on the concepts of advertising proposed by Chandler (2001) and the verbal signs of advertisement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The headline of the advertisement “Chime for Change Founded by GUCCI” is that fragrance can change someone’s life to be more confident and ellegant. The advertiser expresses the product which is founded by GUCCI and it does not sell knockoffs or imitations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Body copy of this advrtisement consists of several sentences. The first part is “GUCCI Made to Measure”, this gives information that the product is made to measure personality of a man from the fragrances which he uses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second part is “Introducing the essence for men”. Its statement means that the advertiser suggests and offers this product introduced to the man with the essence of the new fragrance which will make person feel more comfortable. The third part is “Gucci supports women”. It means that the men’s fragrance has special value which can make the man feel more confident and look perfect for women. “You Choose How”. It means how the man treats the woman to be attractive because of the quality of the fragrance. It would be easier for man from get attention to the woman and do something with the woman as dating couple.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The signature is “GUCCI”. It shows distinctive characteristics or the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">identity of product being advertised. Standing details “</span><a href="http://www.chimeforchange.org"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.chimeforchange.org</span></a><span class="font2">” is giving an information above how to get further information about the product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual Signs</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The model is an actor, director and writer, James Franco, who wears custome as a symbol of the glamor and degrees a person, with a small light that surrounded blurred. This advertisement reflects the impression of glamorous. It confirms fragrance products which are classy with glamorous and elegant fragrance which can also add a sense of comfort and confidence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This advertisement is an original product from “GUCCI Made of Measure”. Gucci launches a new fragrance for men called “Made to Measure” in fall 2013. “Gucci Made To Measure” cologne by Gucci, splash on a bit of “made to measure” from the scent designers at gucci for an air of luxury that will surround you all day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3 The Meaning and Function</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The headline analysis is “Chime for Change”. It reflects the thematic meaning and expressive function, because it is as a message at the advertiser. If the product is a combined at prime ingredients sourced around the world, the advanced scent reminds the luxury and craftsmanship of a GUCCI “Made to Measure” and it is an expression of the advertiser that people are interested in this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first sentence of body copy of this advertisement is “Made to Measure”. It reflects the connotative meaning and expressive function because</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">this sentence is impossible if a person uses the fragrance to measure their</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">position. But the advertiser wants to persuade the person to use this product. The product is an ordinary fragrance and the sentence gives information that the product makes the person who use the product become more confident and makes the person stand out in a crowd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The second sentence of the body copy of this advertisement is “Introducing the essence for men”. It reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. Because this sentence contains a message and informs the reader that knows the product is intended for men. The last sentence “Gucci supports women, You choose how”. This statement has connotative meaning and informational function. Because this is a figurative phrase whose meaning contains persuasion for men to use the product from GUCCI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The name of the product is “GUCCI” which is written on product packaging reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function because it shows the real product being advertised. The sentence “</span><a href="http://www.chimeforchange.org"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.chimeforchange.org</span></a><span class="font2">” reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function because this sentence shows the reader if he want a further information about the product and order these products.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The discussion of the analysis of verbal and visual signs in advertisement in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine has been presented in previous this chapter. Based on results of the analysis on four advertisements in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">DETAILS</span><span class="font2"> magazine, there are some points that can be concluded, as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Every magazine has a different way to publish the advertisements, both in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">terms of structures and components. As in advertisements shown in DETAIL magazine. The verbal and visual sign are more varied. Advertisements in DETAILS magazine as the visual signs are more highlighted than the verbal signs. As we can see in the advertisement itself, the size of image of products is large with limited text. Advertisements contained in this magazine tend to have an incomplete standard component of advertisement, the headline and signature line are considered the most important and integral part of an advertisement. Other components are often omitted, in accordance with the requirements of the advertisement itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of meaning and functions of the verbal and visual helps the readers understand the message of printed fragrance advertisement. The meaning is classified into seven types such as: conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, stylistic meaning, affective meaning, reflected meaning, collocative meaning, and thematic meaning. and the function of language was classified into five function such as : informational function, expression function, aesthetic function and phatic function.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Chandler, Daniel. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Signs : for Beginners</span><span class="font2">. </span><a href="http://visual-memory.co.uk/daniel/documents/S4B/semiotic.html"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://visual-memory.co.uk/daniel/documents/S4B/semiotic.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, Gillian. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising As Communication</span><span class="font2">. London and New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Goeffrey. 1996. English in advertising: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Study of advertising in Great Britain</span><span class="font2">. London: Longmans</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech. Goeffrey. 1974. Semantics: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font2"> Hannondsworth, Middlesex. England: Pinguin Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prosad. Litton. 2009. Semantics : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Seven Types of Meaning in Semantics</span><span class="font2">. </span><a href="http://universeofenglish.blogspot.com/2009/02/seven-types-of-meaning-in_semantics.html"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://universeofenglish.blogspot.com/2009/02/seven-types-of-meaning-in semantics.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Parwanto, I Wayan, Ari. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Analysis of Verbal and Visual Sign in Advertisement” Mike Famous “ n Cycle World Magazine”</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar : Udayana University Undergraduates Thesis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Putra, I Gst Ngurah Bagus Adnyana. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Analysis of Language Fuction in Tourism Advertisements of The Beat Magazine”</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar: Udayana University Undergraduates Thesis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Oktayana, I Wayan. 2010 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;The Analysis of Verbal and Visual Aspect in Watch Advertisement”</span><span class="font2"> Denpasar: Udayana University Undergraduates Thesis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Smith, Ruth Ann 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Effects of Visual and Verbal Advertising Information on Consumers’ Inferences.</span><span class="font2"> </span><a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/418881"><span class="font2">http://www.jstor.org/stable/418881</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Details</span><span class="font2"> Magazine (vol. June - July 2014 edition)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>