---
layout: full_article
title: "Positive Politeness Strategies in Animation Movie “Home” Directed By Tim Johnson"
author: "Ni Luh Putu Budi Pradnyani, Made Budiarsa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">2017: Vol 19.1 Mei 2017:198-205</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Positive Politeness Strategies in Animation Movie “Home” Directed By Tim Johnson</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Luh Putu Budi Pradnyani<sup>1</sup>*, Made Budiarsa<sup>2</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>[123]</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:anyawedos@gmail.com"><span class="font1">anyawedos@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:made_budiarsa@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">made_budiarsa@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>3</sup>[igedeputusudana@yahoocom]</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul “Positive Politeness Strategies in Animation Movie “Home” Directed by Tim Johnson”. Skripsi ini fokus pada penggunaan strategi kesopanan positif dan jenis-jenis strategi kesopanan positif yang banyak digunakan di dalam percakapan. Pengumpulan data dalam penelitian ini diawali dengan observasi dan mencatat percakapan yang mengandung strategi kesopanan positif. Teori kesopanan oleh Brown dan Levinson (1987) digunakan untuk menganalisis data. Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa strategi yang digunakan oleh karakter dalam film animasi ini adalah Strategi 2(Exaggerate), strategi 3 (Intensify interest to hearer), strategi 4 (Use in-group identity markers), strategi 5 (Seek agreement), strategi 7 (Presuppose/raise/assert common ground), strategi 8 (Jokes), strategi 10 (Offer, promise), strategi 11 (Be optimistic), strategi 12 (Include both S and H in the activity), dan strategi 15 (Give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation). Berdasarkan hasil analisis dapat disimpulkan bahwa terdapat 19 data, 10 jenis strategi kesopanan positif, dan strategi yang paling banyak digunakan oleh karakter animasi di dalam film “Home” adalah strategi 4 (Use in-group identity markers).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kesopanan positif, animasi, film</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Politeness is best expressed as the practical application of good manners of the etiquette, and is also one way of showing appreciation from one person to another. Politeness may be defined as a language that makes people easier to communicate with one another. Using language to communicate means applying strategies in such a way in order to accomplish the goal of communication. In a conversation, utterances appear to convey message or idea. In order to keep and maintain the smooth and meaningful conversation between a speaker and a hearer, there should be a strategy used. One of the strategies is called politeness strategy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The goal of politeness is to make all of the parties relaxed and comfortable with one another, these culturally defined standards at times may be manipulated to inflict shame on the designated party. Since many linguists are really concerned with the field of linguistics, particularly politeness, Lakoff (1973), Searle (1975), Brown and Levinson (1978), Leech (1983), then, it can be said that politeness has a proper place to be learned since all people apply it in their daily conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Theoretically, positive politeness is a redress directed to the addressee’s positive face. Brown and Levinson (1978) propose five super-strategies to minimize or alleviate face threat such as bald-on record, positive politeness, negative politeness, off record, and the Face-Threatening Acts (FTAs). This study is not concerned with all of those strategies; it is primarily concerned with positive politeness strategies. Positive politeness strategies refer to language that attend to the people’s needs to be appreciated and approved of; these strategies are communicative ways of building solidarity, showing that the other is liked and seen as desirable. Furthermore, positive politeness is chosen rather than the other politeness strategies because it is challenging to be analyzed and through this study hopefully many people will find out that politeness consists of several types with various strategies. Then, that is why this study is concerned with the words and sentence chosen by the speaker and the hearer in order to fulfill their needs to be appreciated and approved of in the movie, entitled “Home” directed by Tim Johnson.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on background above, the problem of this study can be formulated as follows: 1. What types of positive politeness strategies are used by the characters of the animation movie “Home”?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of positive politeness is the most used by the characters in the animation movie “Home”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems above, this study has two aims; they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of positive politeness strategies used by the characters of the animation movie “Home”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the most positive politeness used by the characters in the animation movie “Home”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The research methods used in this study are data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Data source is the explanation of from where the data are taken and the reason why the data are used. According to the need of analysis, the data were taken from the movie entitled “Home”and its movie script. The movie was chosen because it contains a lot of utterances indicating politeness, especially positive politeness. The story is very interesting. Besides, from this movie we can learn much about social cultural values from different social status. In the United Kingdom, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Home</span><span class="font1"> went to number one on the Official Video Chart in its first week of sale. It has a deep rooted story that told about how people fit in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In order to obtain the necessary data and information as the main topic of discussion, this study used the documentation method. In collecting the data, several steps were used. Firstly, the data were collected by reading the subtitles thoroughly. Secondly, note taking was done whenever the positive politeness strategies occurred in the dialogue between the characters in a movie. Thirdly, the utterances that contained positive politeness were further classified into some strategies of positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Method and technique of analyzing data used in this study was the qualitative method. The collected data in this study were analyzed descriptively. The data analysis correlated to the problem formulated. First, the data were classified based on the same type of positive politeness strategies and were analyzed based on the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Second, the data were analyzed to find out the most used positive politeness strategies by the characters in the movie based on theory proposed by Brown and Levindon (1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There were five examples of positive politeness strategies. Each example is typed in bold. The analysis can be presented to be as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.1Strategy 2: Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Data 1) Oh &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: What for are you did this? I am Boov, beloved by all humans.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tip &nbsp;&nbsp;: I know what you are.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oh : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Excellent! Can I come into the out now? (00:15:34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above takes place at a minimart. The participants in this conversation are Oh and Tip. The conversation is between Oh as the speaker and Tip as the hearer. Before that, Oh is running away from the Boov’s security because he sends an invitation to entire galaxy. He does not realize that Gorg; Boovs’ enemy; will receive his invitation. He tries to hide and find that there is nobody inside the minimart. When he enters the back doors, he meets Tip the human girl with her pet trying to avoid all the Boovs. She drives recklessly and does not know what to do because she is afraid that the Boovs may catch her. Unfortunately, she has small accident and stop at the minimart; the same minimart with Oh. Then she comes inside through the front door. When they meet for the first time, they are shocked. Tip pushes Oh to the fridge and locks him. In this situation Tip thinks that all the Boovs are her enemies. She is angry and upset with Oh because her mother is caught by the Boovs. Oh does not know why Tip locks him but he must run away as far as he can. He introduces himself to Tip that he is beloved by human. When Tip says that she knows who Oh is, Oh replies Tip by using exaggeration tones and stress. Oh’s expression shows that his situation is appropriate for the application of strategy 2; to try and give the hearer positive face using the exaggerative words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The speaker said </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Excellent! can I come into the out now?”</span><span class="font1"> to the hearer, this utterance uses Strategy 2 in which the speaker tries to make or redress positive face to the hearer using the word “excellent”. The speaker applies this strategy with exaggerated intonation and stress, hoping that the hearer will change her mind.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3: Intensify interest to H</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Data 2) Captain Smek &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: We are doomed! The Gorg are going to find us</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">again!The maniac Boov has ruined everything. This is bad. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">And I really love this planet. Look at all great stuff they’ve got. Like this! A headband! And for evening wear, you slide it down you got a beautiful spare tire. I love it!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Boov &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Very nice! </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:18:43)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above takes place at the Boov’scentre in Paris. The participants are Captain Smek and the Boov. This conversation is between Captain Smek as the speaker and Boov as the hearer. Captain Smek as the head of alien herd calls The Boovs. They are good running away. The Boovs want to trade their place with humans; Boovs to Earth and humans to the Humanstown, they do that because they want to hide from their enemy named Gorg. After successfully moving to the Earth, one species named Oh invite all Boovs to the party he has arranged. Unfortunately, the invitation is sent to the entire galaxy, including gorg. All the Boovs are panicking, they are afraid that the Gorg will receive the invitation and eventually finding where the Boovs are. Before having conversations with Boovs, Captain Smek was looking for ideas that might stop the message/invitation from Oh to their enemy, Gorg. He is frustrated and gathers all the Boovs in their hall to ask them how to stop the invitation to the Gorg.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The focus is on his utterance </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“And I really love this planet. Look at all great stuff theyʼve got. Like this! A headband! And for evening wear, you slide it down you got a beautiful spare tire. I love it!”</span><span class="font1"> in this sentence Captain Smek shares some of his wants which are to intensify his own contributions to the conversations by ‘making a good story’. Captain Smek shares some of his wants to intensify the interest of Boov to know his good experience about living Earth. He tells that the Earth has some great stuff that in their home do not exist. Even though it is irrelevant to talk about , Captain Smek adds his good idea about the Earth; indicating he is heavy hearted to leave the Earth. The exaggeration in this case may redress an FTA simply by stressing the sincerity of s’s good intentions, but there also seems to be an element of attempting to increase the interest of the conversational contributions by expressing them dramatically.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 4: Use in-group identity markers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Data 3) Captain Smek : Good news! Thanks to my leadership skills..cowering, running and pulling a skedaddle..we are safe from our enemy.. theGorg. Nasty.</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Give Daddy some sugar!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oh &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Captain Smek has saved us again! </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:02:38)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The situation of this conversation is that Captain Smek would like to make a speech to the Boovs about what and how their new home looks like and that he has good news. He is explaining that Gorg will not find them in their new home. In his speech he also explains what human look like.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the utterance </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Give Daddy some sugar”,</span><span class="font1"> Captain Smek as the speaker wants to do the conversation with a familiar way of communication to interact his Boovs. He uses the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ʻDaddyʼ</span><span class="font1"> to refer himself as daddy to his Boovs even though he is a Captain to maintain that S considers the relative P (power, status difference) between himself and the addressee to be small, thus softening the imperative by indicating that it is not a power backed command. Captain Smek uses positive politeness strategy that is address form to soften FTAs which is the second-person plural pronoun of address doubles as an honorific form to singular respected or distant alters. The other address forms used to convey such in-group membership include generic names and terms of address.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 12: Include both S and H in the activity</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Data 4)Tip &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Stop being such a Boov. It’s our only chance. Come on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oh &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: This has low probability of success!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Tip &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Let’s go (00:59:02)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The situation is Tip and Oh are doomed because car does not work anymore. There is a problem in the machine. They are lost in the jungle and nobody’s there. Oh is frustrated and he thinks that he cannot go to Australia. He sings the Death song; he illustrates that situation like a desire to die forever. Tip does not know what to do either. Suddenly, Tip sees something stranger. She tells Oh about it, and finally she knows that it is a Gorg ship. Tip asks Oh to come near together towards to the Gorg ship. Oh says that he is afraid to come near to the Gorg ship because all the materials are metric, something dangerous can happen. Yet, Tip does not hear what Oh said, she believes that there is something to fix her car.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the utterance “Let’s go”, S uses an inclusive ‘we’ form and S can call upon the cooperative assumptions or seems to be used to stress the cooperativeness of S’s actions. Here, Tip as the speaker uses this strategy to take action with Oh to follow her</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">to come near to the Gorg ship. Tip applies this strategy for making the H to follow what she said or doing the activity together.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 15: Give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">(Data 5)Tip &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Nobody’s perfect. My mom says your mistakes are what make you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">human</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oh &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: That is not makes you Boov. Gratuity Tucci..before we</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">came...</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Tip &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(give the key)Call me Tip (00:54:04)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The situation is Tip and Oh have been through many experiences to run away from Captain Smek. The conversation takes place in the hill near the Boov center. In the conversations above the participant is Tip as the speaker and Oh as the hearer. Before that, Oh can fix his mistakes; cancels the invitation to the Gorg, Captain Smek says that Oh must be erased because he is afraid that Oh will do the mistakes again. Tip defends Oh and says that Oh is the hero because he can fix his mistakes by himself. Captain Smek does not hear, and still order the Boovs to erase Oh. When the Boovs wants to shoot Oh, Tip will threat with the gravity thingy. She holds the gravity thingy and turning it upside down. The situation is crowded and uncontrolled, Oh and Tip run away to save their life. They manage to escape and go to a hill near the center.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the conversation above Tip as the speaker uses strategy 15 Give gifts to H. S may satisfy H’s positive-face want (that S want H’s wants, to some degree) by actually satisfying some of H’s wants. Hence, we have the classic positive-politeness action of gift-giving as Tip did. She gives Oh the car key and says ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Call me Tipʼ</span><span class="font1">, in this utterance Tip wants that Oh says the nickname; it means Tip considers that Oh is her friend now. In this case, Tip as speaker gives the positive-face to the hearer and Oh reply with a big smile.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are 19 data positive politeness strategies being discussed from the analysis. The characters uses strategy 2 (Exaggerate), strategy 3 (Intensify interest to hearer), strategy 4 (Use in-group identity markers), strategy 5 (Seek agreement), strategy 10 (Offer, promise), strategy 11 (Be optimistic), strategy 12 (Include both S and H in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">activity), and strategy 15 (Give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation). The most strategy used by the characters in the movie is strategy 4 (Use in-group identity markers). This strategy has 5 occurrences among the others.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, P. and Levinson, S. 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: Some Universals in Language usage. </span><span class="font1">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stuckenberg, J.H. (1898) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to the Study of Sociology</span><span class="font1">. New York: A.C. Armstrong and Son.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">White, Jane.J. (1989) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Power of Politeness in the Classroom: Cultural Codes that Create and Constrain Knowledge Construction</span><span class="font1">. Catonsville: University of Maryland Baltimore County (Downloaded September 20<sup>th</sup>, 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mu, Yuting. 2015. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Politeness Strategies in English and Chinese Reviews.</span><span class="font1"> China: Shandong Vocational College of Foreign Affairs Translation (Accessed in September 16<sup>th</sup>, 2016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">205</span></p>