---
layout: full_article
title: "CONFLICT OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN FILM OF THE CURIOUS CASE OF BENJAMIN BUTTON"
author: "Sang Ayu Made Dewi Krisnawati"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: </span><span class="font0">81-87</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONFLICT OF THE MAIN CHARACTER IN FILM OF </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE CURIOUS CASE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">OF BENJAMIN BUTTON</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Sang Ayu Made Dewi Krisnawati email:</span><a href="mailto:krisnawatidewiss@yahoo.com"><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> krisnawatidewiss@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty of Letters &amp;&nbsp;Culture Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal ini berjudul “Conflict of The Main Character in The Film The Curious Case of Benjamin Button”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah menganalisis siapa tokoh utama, menganalisis aspek psikologi dari tokoh utama, mengidentifikasi jenis dari konflik dan bagaimana cara tokoh utama mengatasi konflik tersebut di dalam film karya David Fincher. Teori yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori Myers (1992) untuk mengidentifikasi jenis konflik yang terjadi pada pemeran utama, Deets dan Stevenson (1986) untuk mencari cara yang digunakan untuk mengatasi konflik yang terjadi. Untuk mengidentifikasi aspek psikologi pada pemeran utama di dalam film The Curious Case of Benjamin Button menggunakan teori dari Bernhardt (1953).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: karakter, konflik, psikologi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Literature is the form of human creativity consisting idiom, feeling-idea, spirit and experience using the language as the media and having positive impact to life. Literary work can be used as the reflection of condition when and where the literary work was made. Literary work makes people able to experience the new life trough the story with their imagination. Many people would agree that literature is a word artfully arranget to stimulates feeling and impact understanding. Literature can be divided into three genres:fiction, poetry, and drama. A good work of literature must both entertain and enlighten the readers (Warren and Wallek, 1986 : 107).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conflict was chosen as the topic of this study because conflict is also as one of the important aspect in the story itself. Many literature work must have conflict in it because without it, the story would not be interesting. The other reason why conflict is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">chosen as the topic of this study because as we know nowdays, conflict probably has become the biggest issues in this country, inside the government. Society, family and many more. Therefore hopely, doing analysis on conflict could open our perspective about what conflict is, and what is the best way to solve it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the background, there are two problems that be discuss in this writing, they are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Who the main character in the film “The curios case of Benjamin Button”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">What kinds of conflict were faced by the main character in film “The</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">curios case of Benjamin Button”?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">3.</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the main character resolve the conflict?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the problems above, this scientific writing has some aims. They are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify who is the main character in the film “The curios case of Benjamin Button”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe kind of the conflict was faced by the conflict.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze how the main character resolve the conflict.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A method is a procedure or a process adopt to determine the data and then analyze. In this study the methology was divides into three categories. It contains data source, method and technique of collecting data and method and tecnique of analyzing data. Each of the items is explained more detailed as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">All the data analyze in this writing were taken from film “The curious case of Benjamin Buuton” directed by David Fincher and was produced by Kathleen Kennedy. The film was written by Eric Roth and Robin Swicord. The film was</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">adapted from the short story by F. Scott Fitzgerald with the same title. Benjamin Button who acted by Brad Pitt is the main character of the story. This film contain of conflict among the characters, Benjamin had a strange growing up, he begins to biologically grow younger. However, the conflict suddenly happened when Daisy got pregnant he realized that her perhaps could not be a father for his daughter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and technique of collecting data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method that used in collecting the data was documentation method. A film “The curious case of Benjamin Button” was selected because it contained the point of conflicts that was interested to analyze. The observation of data source was the most important element. There were three technique in collecting the data. Firstly, watching the film “The curious case of Benjamin Button” and reading the script movie at the same time to make the conversation compatible to each other. Secondly, classifying every conflict experienced by the main character in the film using the theory from Kenney (1966). Last step was note taking and classifying the conflicts that were found in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and techique of analyzing data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The film was analyzed per conclict. In analyzing the data, descriptive – qualitativemethod would be applied. The data that have been collected would be identified first and then classified in accordance with their type of conflict. There were two types of conflict found in the film. There are external and internal conflict. There were two types of conflict found in the film. There are external and internal conflict. After knowing the types of conflicts found in the film, the it would be analyzed based on the theory of conflicts found in the film. The it would be analyzed based on the theory of conflict, such as : avoidance, pacification, competition, compromise, and creative integration.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conflict of The Main Character in The Film </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Curious Case of Benjamin Button</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Main Character</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Benjamin Button who acted by Brad Pitt is the main character of the story. In the end of World War 1, Benjamin was born inNew Orleans. His mother dies shortly after giving his birth and his father Thomas Button took him out and abandoned in the porch a nursing home. Benjamin had a stange growing up, he begins to biological grow younger.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">• </span><span class="font3">External Conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">External conflict occurs when a person faces someone else or situation that is working againts one’s desire or goal. Dispute between the main character and another character or nature. According to the sentence in bold is represent to show the conflict of the story. When Daisy got pregnant he realized that her perhaps could not be a father for his children. Because he was born with unusual circumstances, he grew younger and younger.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">BENJAMIN.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">What if it has........what if its like me?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">DAISY</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Then we’ll love it all the more</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BENJAMIN .</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I want to be father ...not a little brother ...I don’t want</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">To be picked up from elementary school by my kid.....I don’t want anyone babysitting me.....</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DAISY</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m going to make this work ..this is what I want, and I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Want it with you.....</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BENJAMIN</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">You know there’s nothing I Wouldn’t do for</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">you.......</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Internal conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to the sentence in bold is represent to show the internal conflict of the story. Benjamin struggles within himself. Benjamin is a man who has a strange physical growt. The internal conflict occurred when Benjamin decided to leave his daughter and Daisy. Benjamin fights within his own mind, he thought that Caroline should have a real father, although he wanted to be her father. It can be shown when Benjamin narrated his story by himself that he sold everything he had for both of them.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">BENJAMIN.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Isold the summer house on Lake Pontchartain.....I sold myShare on Button’s Button....I sold the saiboat....I put it all into an account for your mother... and before you would ever remember me.....</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">BENJAMIN.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">I want you to know I love you..</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">BENJAMIN.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">I left, so that you and your mother could have a life</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Resolve of Conflict</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The resolve of external conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Benjamin stayed in Paris, helped Daisy with anything she need. He stayed in Paris for awhile, just look out for this daughter. Although he was born with unusual circumstances, he wanted to be father for his own child, even he knows that he will growt younger and younger everyday.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The resolve of internal conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Benjamin regressed psychological as well as psysically, sometimes fighting and struggling with his unique with his unique condition. Benjamin has</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a strange growing up, he begin to biologically grow younger. Daisy is adamantly optimistic and assures Benjamin that she can care for him and baby, but Benjamin is not vonvinced. He tells her that she would be disappointed with such a life and that the baby deserves a father and not a playmate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the foregoing analysis and discussion, the following points can be presented as conclusion :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two kind of Conflict was faced by main character in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Curious Case of Benjamin Butto.</span><span class="font3">Those are external and internal conflict. Conflict is a natural part of any communication relationship. It is an inevitable part of life for a variety of different reasons, internal conflict is something that the character in the novel brings to the story and external conflict occurs when a person faces someone else or situation that is working again one’s desire or goal, dispute between the main character and another character or nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Benjamin Button as the main character in The </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Curious Case of Benjamin Button </span><span class="font3">has internal conflict within himself. Benjamin had strange growing up, he begins to biologically grow younger. Benjamin regresses psychologically as well as physically, sometimes figthting and struggking with his urque condition. External conflict faced by Benjamin is when Daisy get pregnant he realized that her perhaps could not be a father for his chilren. Because he was born with unusual circumstance, he grow younger and younger.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7.BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Bernhardt. 1953. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology</span><span class="font3">. Canada :McGraw –Hill Book Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Charlina. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Conflict in The Da Vinci Code</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dewi. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">TheConflict of Jennifer Parker in Rage of Angels.</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">DiYanni. 1994. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: Reading Fiction, Poetry, Drama and the Essay</span><span class="font3">. New York: Steven Pesinger, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Griffith. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Writing Essays About Literature</span><span class="font3">. Boston: Thomson Corporation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hamzah. 1985. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">PengantarBermain Drama</span><span class="font3">. Bandung: RosdaKarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kenney. 1966. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font3">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kennedy. 1991. Literature: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Fiction, Poetry and Drama</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harper Collins Publisher, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Knicbokckers. 1963. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York: Holt Renehart and Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lusiana. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict of The Main Character in Desire of The Heart</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moner. 1998. NTC’s Dictionary of Literature Terms. Chicago: NTC Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Morgan. 2003. Conflict in Fiction :ForemostPress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Myers, Gail E.and Michele F. Myers. 1992. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Laboratiry Approach</span><span class="font3">. Singapore: McGrowHill, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Reaske. 1970. The Guide College Writer’s Guide to the Study of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Literature</span><span class="font3">. New York : Random House.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Roth. 2008. The Curious Case of Benjamin Button. (available from : </span><a href="http://www.imbsdb.com/scripts/curiouse-case-of-benjamin-button,-The.html)"><span class="font3">www.imbsdb.com/scripts/curiouse-case-of-benjamin-button,-The.html)</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stanford. 1995. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict and the Stiry of Our Lives: Teaching English For Violence Prevention</span><span class="font3">. 84:38-42.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stanley, Deetz and Stevenson Sheryl L. 1986.Managing Interpersonal Communication.University of Michigan.Harper and Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warre. 1962. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory of Literature</span><span class="font3">. London Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">87</span></p>