---
layout: full_article
title: "Figurative Senses in Sidney Sheldon’s Rage Of Angels and Their Translation Procedures in Malaikat Keadilan"
author: "Ni Kadek Ratna Kusuma Rini"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vol 18.2 Pebruari 2017: 184-192</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Figurative Senses in Sidney Sheldon’s </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rage Of Angels</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> and Their Translation Procedures in </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Malaikat Keadilan</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Kadek Ratna Kusuma Rini<sup>1*</sup>, Frans I Made Brata<sup>2</sup>, I Wayan Suardhana<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font3"><sup>[123]</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:nakusuma95@gmail.com"><span class="font3">nakusuma95@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:fbrata@gmail.com"><span class="font3">fbrata@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font3">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:wayan_suardhana@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">wayan_suardhana@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font3">] </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;Makna Kiasan pada Novel Rage of Angels dan Prosedur Terjemahannya pada Novel Malaikat Keadilan” yang difokuskan pada identifikasi dan klasifikasi jenis-jenis makna kiasan yang terdapat pada novel Rage of Angels and menganalisis prosedur terjemahannya yang diterapkan pada novel Malaikat Keadilan sebagai bahasa sasaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Data diambil dari novel bahasa Inggris berjudul Rage of Angels ditulis oleh Sidney Sheldon dicetak di Amerika Serikat dan diterbitkan oleh Warner Books pada tahun 1980 dan versi Indonesia berjudul Malaikat Keadilan yang diterjemahkan oleh Suwarni, AS dan diterbitkan oleh PT Gramedia Jakarta pada bulan Juli 1985. Metode yang digunakan dalam pengumpulan data adalah metode penelitian pustaka. Hal itu dilakukan dengan membaca dan mencatat. Data dianalisis secara kualitatif dan dijelaskan secara deskriptif berdasarkan teori makna kiasan pada majas dan teori prosedur penerjemahan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Teori tentang makna kiasan dikemukakan oleh Larson dalam bukunya yang berjudul Meaning-Based Translation (1998) diterapkan untuk menganalisis masalah nomor satu tentang jenis-jenis majas, sedangkan untuk masalah nomor dua dianalisis menggunakan teori prosedur terjemahan oleh Vinay dan Darbelnet dalam Venuti (2000). Teori pendukung yang menjelaskan secara jelas tentang dua jenis prosedur peminjaman yang diusulkan oleh Molina dan Albir (2002). Temuan menunjukkan bahwa ada tujuh jenis makna kiasan yang ditemukan dalam novel Rage of Angels. Dalam menerjemahkan novel, metode penerjemahan yang diterapkan yaitu terjemahan langsung dan tak langsung. Metode-metode tersebut adalah metode peminjaman, calque, harfiah, transposisi, modulasi, kesepadanan, dan adaptasi. Ketujuh prosedur muncul dalam penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: makna kiasan, prosedur penerjemahan, terjemahan langsung, terjemahan tak langsung</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Translation plays an important role in transferring the source language message to the target language. It is used to facilitate the understanding of the meaning or the content of the source text within the target text. Newmark (1988:5) states that</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">translation is rendering the meaning of a text into another language in the way that the author intended the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Larson (1998: 22) states that each language has its own idiomatic way to express the meaning through lexical items (words, phrases, sentences, etc) especially English which is very rich in figurative expressions. On the one hand, figurative senses are difficult to be understood because of their unpredictable meaning and grammar; on the other hand, they are considered one of the most peculiar parts of the language. The figurative sense is taken as a topic in this writing because translating the figurative language is not an easy task to do. The process of finding the right expressions in the receptor language can be very complex; therefore, the translator should find out the closest natural equivalent in translating the figurative language in order to get the best result. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rage of Angels</span><span class="font3"> is selected to be analyzed for its figurative senses and their translation procedures in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Malaikat Keadilan.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the background above, two problems can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What type of figurative senses occurred in novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rage of Angels</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What translation procedures were applied to the translation of figurative senses in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Malaikat Keadilan</span><span class="font3">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the problems that rise above, the aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and classify the types of figurative senses found in the novel Rage of Angels by Sidney Sheldon.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the translation procedures applied to the novel Malaikat Keadilan as the TL.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were taken from the novel written by Sidney Sheldon entitled Rage of Angels with 504 pages. This novel was translated by Suwarni A.S with 551 pages entitled Malaikat Keadilan in Indonesian version. Rage of Angels was chosen as the data source because it contains a lot of figurative expressions that rarely occur in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">daily communications and those are hard to understand since a single word may have more than one sense.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The method applied in collecting data is library research method. The first step was reading the novel carefully to have a good understanding of the story. Then, words, phrase, or sentence that contain figurative expressions were found and at the same time, their translations were found in the translated novel in order to find out the translation procedures used. The next step was continued by taking note of the figurative expressions that occur in the source novel and their translation in the translated novel. The figurative expressions and the sentence in which the figurative expressions occur were noted down in paper, and then their translations in Indonesian version were also noted down. Ultimately, the data were classified to be analyzed using the theories concerning this topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The qualitative method was used in this study since it describes and gives actual explanation. In the first step, the figurative expressions classified from the English novel were analyzed based on their types proposed by Larson in her book Meaning-Based Translation (1998). They are metonymy, synecdoche, idiom, euphemism, hyperbole, metaphor, and simile. The second step was continued by analyzing the data in finding the translation procedures used in the translation of figurative senses by applying the recent theory from Vinay and Darbelnet in Venuti </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Methodology for Translation </span><span class="font3">(2000). The translation procedures are divided into direct translation which covers three translation methods; and oblique translation which covers four translation methods. The supporting theory proposed by Molina and Albir (2002) is applied in this study in order to explain clearly the two types of borrowing occurring in the novel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussions</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The types of figurative senses occurring in the novel </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rage of Angels</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metonymy</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Michael Moretti was front-page news, the son-in-law of Antonio Granelli, capo di capi, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">head of the largest of the five eastern Mafia Families </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Sheldon, 1980:04).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is categorized as metonymy because there is an association between </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the head</span><span class="font3"> which refers to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the leader</span><span class="font3">. It does not mean that Granelli’s real head is the largest of the five eastern Mafia Families, but it is about the position of Granelli as the leader of the eastern Mafia Families. In this case, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">head</span><span class="font3"> replaces the Granelli’s position as the leader; the only one who makes the rule.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Synecdoche</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The town remembered, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and there were almost a hundred people at Abner Parker's funeral, people he had helped and advised and befriended over the years. (Sheldon, 1980:26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The expression of the town refers to the people who live in town together with Jennifer Parker and her father, not the real town (building) itself. Because town is a thing not human, it cannot breathe, think, and remember something like human. In this context, the word town is a substituted place in a figurative way. In conclusion, this example is categorized as synecdoche because the sentence contains figurative sense (the town remembered) based on part whole relationship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idiom</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I hear on the grapevine </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">that you may be moving to Washington soon. (Sheldon, 1980:47)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The expression above was found in the 2nd edition Oxford Dictionary of Idioms (page 128) and means acquire information by rumour or by unofficial communication. As a result, the example above is considered an idiom because the expression of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">i hear on the grapevine</span><span class="font3"> contains more than two words which cannot be understood literally and which function as a unit semantically. The expression above has no meaning if it is separated individually. When the words are combined, the idiomatic meaning appears as ‘an acquire information by rumour’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Euphemism</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Michael was </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">gone</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. (Sheldon, 1980:495)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word gone in this context is a euphemism used to mean a person who is alrready died. There is a substitution of one expression (gone) for another (died). This euphemistic expression is substituted for a certain word in the part of death. It is used to avoid an offensive expression or is considered unpleasant.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">But you'll never </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">prove it in a million years.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot; (Sheldon, 1980:168)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The expression </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">prove it in a million years</span><span class="font3"> is an exaggeration. It is impossible for someone to wait and prove something in a million years. There is no one who can live for million years. The expression </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">But you'll never prove it in a million years</span><span class="font3"> means that you cannot prove it at all whenever you try to do it and the exaggeration is deliberately given by the author. Million years are used to describe something that happens for a very long time.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Otto Wenzel was an enigma</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. (Sheldon, 1980:35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is considered a metaphor because it is an analogy between two objects; Otto Wenzel and an enigma. Enigma is a thing or situation that is mysterious and difficult to understand. The meaning of the word enigma in this context refers to a person that is mysterious and also difficult to understand by other people. Therefore, it can be concluded that Otto Wenzel is a person who has a mysterious characteristic and he is also difficult to understand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">g.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">The District Attorney had carried on like a raging bull</span><span class="font3">. (Sheldon, 1980:61)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this context, the expression compares </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The District Attorney</span><span class="font3"> who got angry and mad like </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">a raging bull</span><span class="font3"> because of some point of similarity or some common characteristic in which the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">raging bull</span><span class="font3"> refers to a person who gets mad and angry to someone because of something. The preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font3"> is used in this expression to ensure the comparison between The District Attorney and a raging bull.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of basic principles of translation a. Borrowing</span></h2></li></ul>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">He was an </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">orchestra </span><span class="font3">leader and the jury was his orchestra. (Sheldon, 1980:93)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Di Silva tak ubahnya pemimpin suatu </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">orkes</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, sedang para juri itu adalah pemain-pemain orkes tersebut. (Suwarni, 1985:102)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">It is categorized a naturalized borrowing translation procedure since it fits the spelling rules in the target language. The word orchestra in source language is taken directly into orkes in the target language with the same meaning as a large group of people who play various musical instruments together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">b. Calque</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The defendant sitting over there-Abraham Wilson-murdered a man </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">in cold blood</span><span class="font3">. (Sheldon, 1980:92)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tertuduh yang duduk di situ itu — Abraham Wilson — telah membunuh seseorang </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dengan darah dingin</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. (Suwarni, 1985: 101)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">In the source language, the noun phrase is translated with respect to the TL syntactic structure. In SL, the structure of noun phrase is modifier+noun, while in TL the structure is noun+modifier. The position is switched when it is translated in TL. Therefore, the expression is considered undergoing lexical calque since it respects the syntactic structure of the TL, whilst introducing a new mode of expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">c. Literal</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Scanlon was released from the </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Correctional Center </span><span class="font3">and Jennifer found a small motel on the West Side for him to move into. (Sheldon, 1980:296)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Scanlon dilepas dari </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rumah tahanan pusat</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, dan Jennifer menemukan sebuah penginapan kecil di West Side kemana dia bisa pindah. (Suwarni, 1985: 329)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">In the expression containing euphemism above, literal translation procedure is used. Correctional Center is categorized as a noun phrase and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">rumah tahanan pusat</span><span class="font3"> is also categorized as a noun phrase in TL. Each of its elements is translated literally or known as word for word translation. The translation of the expression is grammatically correct and sounds natural in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">d. Transposition</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Because </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Adam was a methodical man </span><span class="font3">he ran a check on Jennifer Parker's background. (Sheldon, 1980:46)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Karena </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Adam biasa bekerja dengan metode</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, maka dia menyelidiki latar belakang kehidupan Jennifer Parker lebih dahulu. (Suwarni, 1985:50)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">In the example above, the data were taken from the expression containing metaphor. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">methodical</span><span class="font3"> is an adjective; while it is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bekerja dengan metode </span><span class="font3">or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">methodically</span><span class="font3"> which is categorized as an adverb. The phrase undergoes transposition because there is a process of replacing one word class (adjective) in SL into adverb in TL without changing the meaning. The translator successfully makes the translation sound natural in TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">e. Modulation</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Michael Moretti was front-page news, the son-in-law of Antonio Granelli, capo di capi, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">head of </span><span class="font3">the largest of the five eastern Mafia Families (Sheldon, 1980:04)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Michael Moretti merupakan bahan berita di halaman depansurat-surat kabar. Dia adalah menantu Antonio Granelli, capo di capi, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pemimpin </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">dari salah satu keluarga-keluarga mafia yang terbesar di kawasan sebelah timur (Suwarni, 1985:04)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Head</span><span class="font3"> means a person who is in charge of a group of people or an organization. The word head is translated figuratively into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemimpin,</span><span class="font3"> therefore the translation is not </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kepala</span><span class="font3"> but </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemimpin</span><span class="font3">, because in this context it refers to Antonia Granelli who is the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">leader of the group. It is considered the modulation method because it is obtained by a change in the point of view from the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kepala</span><span class="font3"> into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemimpin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">f. Equivalence</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">&quot;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I hear on the grapevine </span><span class="font3">that you may be moving to Washington soon. (Sheldon, 1980:47)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Aku mendengar berita burung</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, bahwa kau akan pindah ke Washington dalam waktu singkat.” (Suwarni, 1985:51)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The idiom undergoes equivalence method in the translation into TL. It is translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">aku mendengar berita burung</span><span class="font3"> but is not translated into the equivalent term in TL. However, the translation of the idiom sounds natural and acceptable in the TL. Even the style or the structural method is different but it describes the same situation without changing any meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">g. Adaptation</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SLT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">TLT</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">&quot;Because </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">you're setting yourself up as a clay pigeon</span><span class="font3">. (Sheldon, 1980:80)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kau &nbsp;menjadikan &nbsp;dirimu &nbsp;bulan-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bulanan. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">(Suwarni, 1985:89)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The translation undergoes adaptation because it creates a new situation to demonstrate situational equality in order to make the reader easier to understand the TL text. It will sound strange and has no meaning if it is translated literally in the TL into </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kau membuat dirimu seperti merpati dari tanah liat.</span><span class="font3"> Nevertheless, the translation of the expression above sound natural and acceptable in the TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Having analyzed the figurative senses in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Rage of Angels,</span><span class="font3"> the seven types of figurative senses were found. They are metonymy, synecdoche, idiom, euphemism, hyperbole, metaphor, and simile. Those data were counted as figurative senses since the certain features of the lexical combination which make them have different meaning from the primary meaning. There are seven procedures used to translate the figurative senses in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Malaikat Keadilan</span><span class="font3"> as the translated novel</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> The translation methods in direct</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">translation as a source language orientation which are applied are borrowing, calque and literal translation; while in oblique translation as a target language orientation, the methods of translation which are applied are transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. Meaning Based Translation. Maryland: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Molina, L and Albir A. H. 2002. Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. Spain: Universitat Autonoma da Barcelona.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Newmark, Peter. 1988. Approaches to Translation. Oxford: Pergamon Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vinay, J.P. and Darbelnet, J.2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Methodology for Translation.</span><span class="font3"> In Venuti (ed). 2000: 84-93. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">192</span></p>