---
layout: full_article
title: "THE LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT BY THE CHILDREN AT TK NEGERI NEGARA IN ACQUIRING ENGLISH VOCABULARY THROUGH THE ENGLISH CHILDREN MUSIC VIDEO"
author: "Ni Komang Wulan Triningsih"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">THE LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT BY THE CHILDREN AT </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TK NEGERI NEGARA</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> IN ACQUIRING ENGLISH VOCABULARY THROUGH THE ENGLISH CHILDREN MUSIC VIDEO</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NI KOMANG WULAN TRININGSIH</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Anak-anak memiliki cara tersendiri dalam mempelajari bahasa Inggris. Menganalisa video music adalah salah satu cara yang digunakan untuk melihat ekspresi dan respon yang diberikan oleh anak-anak. Penelitian bertujuan untuk melihat respon yang diberikan kepada anak-anak selama menonton video musik berdasarkan dengan teori Chomsky dan melihat sebagaimana efektif music video untuk mendukung anak-anak dalam memperoleh kosa kata bahasa Inggris. Video yang digunakan diambil dari situs youtube.com dan melakukan penelitian langsung ke TK Negeri Negara. Anak-anak sangat menikmati menonton video musik lagu anak-anak berbahasa inggris. Dengan menggunakan video ini, perolehan kosa kata bahasa inggris dapat lebih sederhana dan menyenangkan, mudah untuk belajar dan mudah untuk diajarkan. Dari hasil yang didapat melalui proses langsung penelitian ke lapangan, video yang digunakan haruslah menarik, berisi hal-hal yang kreatif dan menghibur. Lirik dalam video haruslah berisi kata-kata pengulangan yang bertujuan untuk mempermudah anak-anak dalam mengingat kata-kata.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: anak-anak, kosa kata, video musik</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is the specific human capacity for acquiring and using complex systems of communication. English is one of the languages in the society. It is a universal language and considered a second language or foreign language in multilingual countries. In the process of mastering English, people pass some ways, formal and informal ways. Joining courses, or school is the formal way, and the informal way is through imitating and acquiring it from surroundings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Language acquisition refers to the process of natural assimilation, involving intuition and subconscious learning. What children learn about language is determined by what they already know about the world. It is the product of real interactions between people in environments of the target language and culture, in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">which the learner is an active player. It is similar to the way in which children learn their native tongue, a process that produces functional skill in the spoken language without theoretical knowledge. It develops familiarity with the phonetic characteristics of the language as well as its structure and vocabulary, and is responsible for oral understanding, the capability for creative communication and for the identification of cultural values.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Children learn to speak by imitating the utterances heard around them and analogy. They strengthen their responses by repetitions, corrections, and other reactions that adults provide; thus, language is practiced based General perception is that there is no difference between the way in which one learns a language and the way in which one learns to do something else. Young children have their own way to learn English. In fact, children are constructive learners in learning a language. They are active meaning makers. They are continuously interpreting and making sense of their world based on what they have already learned, on what they have already seen and heard (Pappas, C. et. 1995:7). Most of young children are good imitators and they have this own way to learn English. They usually repeat what they saw and heard. Therefore, videos of English children song are used to acquire English vocabulary through any activities involve inside, such as watching, singing and repeating English word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background of the study above, the problems of the research are formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How effective musical video is to support young children in Learning English?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What responses are given by children after watching the music video to acquire English Vocabulary?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Sudy</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In accordance with the problem of the study formulated above, the aims of study can be divided into:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out that musical video can be effective to support young children in Learning English</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the response given by the children after watching the music to acquire English Vocabulary</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source which is described and analyzed in this study, was the video songs which were taken from the website’s information especially the site </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font1">, totaling fifteen educational children video songs. The other data were taken from preschool children at </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TK Negeri Negara</span><span class="font1">. There were some children in playgroup aged 3-6 years old.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected by making directly observing children including some steps. The children and the music video were selected for children in English language relevant to the topic of this study. The children in the class room when they were watching the video songs (how they responded to and what they would say) were observed and taking notes was done while the children were watching the videos to see the improvement and the responses in acquiring English vocabulary. The children in the class were taught to see how they responded and made progress after watching the video and doing the activities from the video, containing note every word, phrase, or clause pronounced by the children. The activities which contain the process of acquiring English vocabulary by music video were taken down. Note taking was used to know the progress made by children during the observation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data in this study were qualitatively analyzed and descriptively presented. The analysis was focused on the responses given by the children by using video songs in children language process and the effectiveness in acquiring new English vocabulary. The data of this study were analyzed based on the theory proposed by Noam Chomsky (1968) and supported by other theories of language acquisition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of language development by the children in acquiring English vocabulary through the English children music video</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Younger children responded quickly to what they heard and what they saw. Children’s brains were programmed to see the world around them for patterns of meaning. Spending time with young children through singing and watching English children music videos commonly became their favorite activities which would gain a lot of values. Rose and Dryden (2005) stated that singing a song is another important way for the children to build up their vocabulary. Singing is good to be used to transfer a language to a child, because singing is fun and they can imitate it from us easily and repeat it again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">With the music video the acquisition of English vocabulary can be simples and fun, easy to teach and easy to learn. Video serves as a multipurpose input material of delivering oral language instruction to children. It is visual and highly motivational. Video makes young children learn not only the actions as people are speaking language but also the way they respond to what others say. In the classroom the videos were repeatedly played until the children felt more familiar with the songs. The English children music videos learned are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Video song no.1 “twinkle-twinkle little star”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“Twinkle-Twinkle Little Star” is a classic children’s song that is known and loved around the world. The video tells the reassuring story of a friendship between a restless owl and a little star that watches over the forest. This song has become the most famous nursery rhyme and children enjoy singing the song over and over during the day.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ask the children to put their hands and wriggle their fingers to make the stars shining on the sky at night time. When they said “like a diamond in the sky”, the children made the shape of a diamond by joining certain fingers on two hands.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“ Twinkle twinkle little star.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">How I wonder what you are</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Up above the world so high</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Like a diamond in the sky</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Twinkle twinkle little star.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">How I wonder what you are”</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Values of vocabulary:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Using videos with young learners allows us to teach additional vocabulary by discussing the images on the screen in addition to the lyrics. Talk about words like </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">owl, moon</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">fly</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">goodbye</span><span class="font1">, and more. By singing this song they could learn the concept of some shapes as </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“stars” </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“diamond”</span><span class="font1">. They could also pick up the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">“sky” </span><span class="font1">and understand the concept of night time (the only time they can see the stars on the sky).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Video Song no. 5 “BINGO”</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">&quot;BINGO&quot; is a popular kid song that follows a familiar pattern and more active and interesting. The children were asked to do different actions in each verse. For first verse, one letter was removed and replaced with a hand claping instead of singing letter B. In the second verse you pat your legs instead of singing B and I. In the third verse, the children pat your tummy. In the last verse, the children jumped instead of singing B, I, N, G, and O.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ask the children to make line and pretend to be a farmer and his dog and also five children to make word B I N G O. When they sang “there was a farmer” the child who pretended to be a farmer one step forward, and when sang “had a dog” the child who pretended to be a dog one step forward too. When the video started to sing and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">spell B I N G O, the other children did as like on video, such as, “clap, pat your legs, pat your tummy, pat your head, and jump”.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>BINGO</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">♫ There was a farmer had a dog.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and Bingo was his name-o.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">B-I-N-G-O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">B-I-N-G-O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">B-I-N-G-O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And Bingo was his name-o</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Clap!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pat your legs!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pat your tummy!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pat your head!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jump!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">B-I-N-G-O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">B-I-N-G-O</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And Bingo was his name-o.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Values of vocabulary:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">This video showed that there was a farmer and his pets dog named Bingo. From this video, the children learned how to spell Bingo named, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">B I N G </span><span class="font1">and </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">O</span><span class="font1">. The children can also spell their names with English alphabet. The children also learn new words farmer, dogs and pets. They also knew that a dog was a pet animal. This helped students follow along with the actions in addition to developing letter recognition skills. Letter recognition, simple spelling, English intonation and rhythm, actions (clap, pat your legs, pat your tummy, pat your head, jump). Languages focused on this song were about body, intonation/rhythm, alphabet/spelling. This song was a great introduction to spelling, excellent for listening comprehension, and for developing rhythm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As said by Brown (2000:40), that children are excellent imitators. It is simply a matter of understanding exactly what they are imitating. The video song must be repeatedly played, because by using this method the children can practice her mind to remember every single word when they watch it. The children show positive and increasing progress day by day, they are able to remember more than one word. The video song that played is very simple and how to convey it for children are very interesting by inviting them to sing and following the movement on video.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on analysis and discussion, there are several points being concluded: Knowing how the Music Video is effective to support young children in learning English is done at classroom in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">TK Negeri Negara</span><span class="font1">. Young children will be able to acquire the English vocabulary through imitation, repetition and practice. The children can imitate and repeat what is said on video. For the first time the children watching music video, they only repeat the words said on video, because they like to imitate without knowing the meaning of those words exactly and they interested with the pictures on video. The songs on music video should be fun, creative and enjoyable that make the children feel more relax and have fun. The lyrics may consist of many repetitive words in order that the children will feel easy to learn and remember the words. Energetic rhythms and Interested picture on video have become the most favorite and enjoyable video song for children for long period of time. Knowing how the children response after watching music video in acquiring the English vocabulary is the interested one. The children do some actions or movements while watching and singing the video, they feel interested to join in and become part of the activity on video and as well as avoiding the children to feeling bored.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, Doulas. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Principal of Language Teaching and Learning”</span><span class="font1">. San</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fransisco. Longman Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chomsky, Noam. 1968. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Mind”</span><span class="font1">. San Diego, California: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, inc</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pappas, C, et.al. 1995. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Integrated Language Perspective in Elementary School”</span><span class="font1"> : Theory into actions. London : Longman Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rose, Collin &amp;&nbsp;Gorden Dryden. 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Learning Fundamentals”.</span><span class="font1"> London : Greenwich Editions.</span></p>