---
layout: full_article
title: "FIGURATIVE EXPRESSIONS MOSTLY USED IN WILLIAM WORDSWORTH’S POEM OF NATURE"
author: "Dewa Made Wiadnyana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>FIGURATIVE EXPRESSIONS MOSTLY USED IN WILLIAM WORDSWORTH’S POEM OF NATURE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Dewa Made Wiadnyana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jurusan Non-Reguler Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Abstrak:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Makalah ini menganalisa tentang kecenderungan penggunaan majas yang muncul dalam tiga puisi William Wordsworth yang masing-masing berjudul “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud”, “The World Is Too Much With Us”, “A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill”.</span><span class="font1"> Teori yang digunakan adalah teori </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font1"> oleh K.L Knickerbocker dan Willaiard Reninger (1963), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Term</span><span class="font1"> oleh Katheen Morner dan Ralph Rausch (1991), dan terakhir dari buku yang berjudul </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation</span><span class="font1"> oleh Mildred Larson. Data diklasifikasikan dan dianalisa sesuai dengan jenis majas yang ditemukan dalam puisi, yaitu personifikasi, hiperbola, paradoks, simile, kiasan, metafora dan metonimi. Dan majas yang paling banyak muncul adalah personifikasi. Penggunaan personifikasi dalam hal ini memperkaya dan memperindah puisi-puisi William Wordsworth yang kebanyakan mengambil tema alam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Literature, Poetry, Figurative Language</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature is created based on human consciousness and imagination. It is a form of human creation that departs from reality of life; it can take form of a story, a play, or a poem. And language is the medium for the writer to create his imagination and can also be the medium of the literature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Poetry is one of the literary works. Poetry is an imaginative awareness of experience expressed through meaning, sound, and rhythmic language choice so as to evoke an emotional response. According to Knickerbocker &amp;&nbsp;Reninger (1963: 307), poetry is the hymns of praise, and the essays on the nature of poetry would cram the selves of any modest public library and overflow onto the floor as well. Good talk about poetry is nevertheless rare, and even the best of it will rest lightly on fallow</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ground until we ourselves have learned how to penetrate the inner life of a few poems. And Emily Dickinson in Smith’s (1985: 5) states that if I read a book and it makes my whole body so cold no fire can ever warm me, I know that is poetry. If I feel physically as if the top of my head were taken off, I know that is poetry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">William Wordsworth is a famous poet in the world. William Wordsworth was an early leader of romanticism (a literary movement that celebrated nature and concentrated on human emotions) in English poetry and ranks as one of the greatest lyric poets in the history of English literature. William Wordsworth was born on April 7, 1770, in Cooker mouth, Cumberland, England, the second child of an attorney. When many poets still wrote about ancient heroes in grandiloquent style, Wordsworth focused on the nature, children, the poor, common people, and used ordinary words to express his personal feelings. His definition of poetry as &quot;the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings arising from &quot;emotion recollected in tranquility&quot; was shared by a number of his followers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The writer focuses the research to analyze figure of speech of poetry. Most of poetry use figure of speech to make poetry more beautiful. It is difficult for the reader to get the meaning of the poetry. A figure of speech is an expression that is designed to evoke emotion or create deeper meaning. The words in a figure of speech are not literal. The writer interests to analyze figure of speech in poetry because figure of speech does not have literal meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problem of this research is “What figurative language tends to be mostly used in William Wordsworth’s poem of nature?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aim of Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aim of this research is to know the tendency of using the most frequently figurative language in William Wordsworth’s poem of nature.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The </span><span class="font2">data in this research was taken from William Wordsworth’s poems which describe his love to nature, and this study is limited only to those poems as a case. The data covered </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">poemhunter.com</span><span class="font2"> and those poems are: “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud”, “The World Is To Much With Us”, “A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method that was used in this study is documentation through closely reading it as many times as needed in order to understand and get the main idea of the poem. The reading mainly focused on identifying of the various figurative languages in William Wordsworth’s poems of nature. These data are classified based on the types of figurative language, their functions, and the tendency of using the same figurative language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All of collected data were descriptively analyzed based on the theory of figurative language proposed by K.L Knickerbocker and H. Willard Reninger (1963), and were supported by other theories which are related to this topic in order to get detailed information about the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Figurative Language Tends to be Used in William Wordsworth’ s Poem of Nature</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Personification</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- The leaves in myriads </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jump</span><span class="font2"> and spring</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It seems like the poet wants the readers to use their imagination to make this poem livelier and has a wonderful impression. The leaves are said to have been jumping and springing to draw a picture for the reader how the winter is coming. It actually jump and spring because of the hailstones storm, not by the own will of the leaves.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- The waves beside them </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dance</span><span class="font2">;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A personification is used here to give a sense of a living situation. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Waves</span><span class="font2"> here is said to have an ability to dance. In fact that wave is a rise line of water that moves across the surface of the sea. It is a movement but not in literally dance like a dancer does.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- Beside the lake, beneath the trees, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Fluttering and dancing</span><span class="font2"> in the breeze.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The last sentence in this stanza of the second poem is using personification. The poet wants to describe how the wind blowing the daffodils so that it is said as if they were dancing. The feeling of joy is mixed with the magnificent view that the person see, makes the flower here seem to dancing as they are alive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- This Sea that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bares her bosom</span><span class="font2"> to the moon;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It is clearly that personification is used in this line. If we think objectively; the sea does not have a bosom, the poet describes the wave of water surface as its bosom which is always rolling up facing the moon. And the moon is over the sky while the sea is in the land. This sentence is included as personification because the poet wants to describe the sea is not just a sea but a sea which has characteristic like human.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- When all at once I saw a crowd, A host, of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">golden daffodils</span><span class="font2">;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Daffodil is a kind of flower which the most common type of color is yellow; they can also occur in various combinations of yellow, white, cream, orange and pink but never gold. Golden was used to give exaggeration to the Daffodils, to express the feeling of the poet. It was just ordinary yellow but when he saw the Daffodils, he imagine of the beauty of the spring that will come very soon. Here hyperbole is used</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to give a sense of a magnificent view that the person saw. How lovely a flower can be if there is something beautiful comes with it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- We have </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">given our hearts away</span><span class="font2">, a sordid boon!</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The above sentence shows hyperbole. Special effect in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">given our hearts away </span><span class="font2">which means that human take too much from the nature without thinking the effect that will happen if they run out of natural resources. It is just like giving our hearts away, wasting the most important element of our life. The poet wants to remind us how dangerous it can be if we keep wasting our natural source. As we know, we can live in this world because of what nature provides us. If we cannot conserve the natural wealth, then it will be the end of our lives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- Or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hear old Triton</span><span class="font2"> blow his wreathed horn.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The phrase of “hear old Triton” seems to be an exaggerated. Because actually we are not able to hear the voice of God, in this case is the Triton, God of the sea. In real life, we mankind consider God as an invisible creature that cannot be touched or heard, but we believe that He show His existence by showing His mighty powers. The poet wants to make his poem to have a soul, by giving special effect that the impossible things sometimes could turn out be possible.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simile</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">-I wandered lonely </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">as</span><span class="font2"> a cloud</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The writer uses simile to make a picture how he wants to wander around like the cloud. How he can move around without any obstacle. Floats over the valleys and hills where he can see all the nature below. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cloud</span><span class="font2"> here is said here to have a slow movement and feels like it is in peace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">-Continuous </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">as</span><span class="font2"> the stars that shine</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first sentence in this stanza of the second poem is using simile to describe the previous feeling. Here the person in the poem is continuing his joy as he sees a host of daffodils that stretched along the bay. Just like the stars that have no end in the sky and at the end we only can see it twinkle in the edge of the Milky Way. The writer slightly exaggerates in describing the flower he sees. As it is like million stars </span><span class="font0">5</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">over the sky, throughout the eye can see. This may be because he fascinated by the beauty of what he sees.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">-And are up-gathered now </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font2"> sleeping flowers;</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two figures of speech that are found in this line, simile and personification. Simile can be seen from the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">like</span><span class="font2"> that is used by the poet. It is related to the previous line, where it is said that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the wind that will be howling at all hours.</span><span class="font2"> By using this comparison, the poet wants to convey the idea that there is no use enjoying the attractive of the nature if the destructiveness of natural is already happens. It is like flowers going to die as a result of having no exciting parts. Simile is used to give a special image.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metaphor</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">-The winds that will be </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">howling</span><span class="font2"> at all hours</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">On the above line, the writer compares the winds to a wolf or any other animals that howls. The sound of the winds that blows hard is said </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">howling</span><span class="font2"> by the writer to describe how scary the sound is. The forces of nature which can be very harmful for the mankind if we still exploit the nature without conserve it. Again, an important message is conveyed by the poet to the readers about how important nature is for us.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">-Have </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sight of Proteus</span><span class="font2"> rising from the sea</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Instead of saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">have sight like Proteus rising from the sea.</span><span class="font2"> The writer wants to us his imagination to have the power like Proteus. The powers that able to change everything, placing the cycle of life back in balance. Save the nature that the world has, but it is just his imagination.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Allusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">-Have sight of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Proteus</span><span class="font2"> rising from the sea; Or hear old </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Triton</span><span class="font2"> blow his wreathed horn.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The two words above, Proteus and Triton are the names of God that are used in the poem. Proteus is an early sea-God that able to change the liquid quality of </span><span class="font0">6</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">water in the sea. Meanwhile Triton is the messenger of the big sea. He is Proteus’ brother and His special attribute was a twisted conch shell, on which he blew like a trumpet to calm or raise the waves. It means that the writer wants to have sight of Proteus and blow wreathed horn of Triton. Allusion is used to give a symbol in the poem, as the writer wants to have the power like Proteus or Triton.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis and discussion in the previous chapter, the following points can be drawn as conclusion:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are seven kinds of figurative expressions found in those three poems; including personification, hyperbole, paradox, simile, allusion, metaphor and metonymy. Among the kinds of figurative expressions presented in this study, personification is the most frequently to appear in the three poems that are chosen as the data. It is proved by the fact that this kind is founded in nine usages. William Wordsworth wants to give more human characteristics of what he sees in the nature. His idea is telling the readers that the nature is a power and able to describe how its feeling and that make those three poems more imaginative and livelier.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Diyanni, Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reading Fiction, Poetry And Drama.</span><span class="font2"> Singapore: MC. Graw-Hill Book.Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Geoffrey Leech, 1974. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics</span><span class="font1">. United States of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Knickerbocker, K.L &amp;&nbsp;Willard Reninger, H. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font2">. New</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">York. Chicago: Holt, Rinehart and Winston</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning–Based Translation.</span><span class="font2"> New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morner, Kathleen &amp;&nbsp;Ralph Rausch. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms.</span><span class="font2"> New York: NTC Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Steen, Gerard. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analyzing Metaphor in Literature: With Examples from William Wordsworth’s “I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud”.</span><span class="font2"> </span><a href="http://www.jstor.org"><span class="font2">www.jstor.org</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wordsworth, William. </span><a href="http://www.poemhunter.com/"><span class="font2">http://www.poemhunter.com/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>