---
layout: full_article
title: "Textual Metafunctions in Inauguration State Speech Text of President  Joko Widodo"
author: "W. Sri Kusumawardani, Anak Agung Putu Putra"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78129 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-78129"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-78129"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p01"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i02.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Textual Metafunctions in Inauguration State Speech Text of President Joko Widodo</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">W. Sri Kusumawardani, Anak Agung Putu Putra Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">[</span><a href="mailto:wayansrikusumawardani@gmail.com"><span class="font4">wayansrikusumawardani@gmail</span><span class="font5">.</span><span class="font4">com</span></a><span class="font4">], [</span><a href="mailto:putraharini@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">putraharini@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract--</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">This research aimed to find out the textual metafunction in the text of the state speech inauguration of the President Joko Widodo. Textual metafunction is realized by a thematization system in the form of elements of themes and rheme. Textual metafunction realized by the thematization system is related to grammatical elements used to express information in a clause. This research applied a descriptive qualitative approach. The data source of this research was in the form of an oral source from the video of President Joko Widodo's inauguration speech for two periods, namely 2014-2019 and 2019--2024 which was downloaded through the sit</span><a href="http://www.youtube.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">e www.youtube.com. </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">This type of research data was written data. Written data was obtained from the results of oral transcription into written form so that data forms were obtained, such as words, phrases, groups of phrases, clauses, and text units. The theory used is the Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) theory proposed by Halliday and Matthiessen (2014). The method and techniques of collecting data applied in this research were the listening method and the note taking technique. Then, method and techniques of analysing data applied were the distribution method and basic techniques for direct elements. In addition, the method of presenting the results of data analysis applied was a formal method in the form of signs and symbols as well as an informal method in the form of words, phrases, phrases, clauses, and texts. The results showed that both of the themes of the text of the inauguration speech President Joko Widodo was concerning the sovereignty of the people and the Unitary Republic of Indonesia. Textual metafunction was examined based on a thematization system in the form of theme elements (topical, interpersonal, textual) and rheme. Based on the analysis, there was an increase in the use of themes from 2014 (42.2%) to 2019 (57.8%). Meanwhile, the use of rheme in 2014 was dominated by the material processing rheme, which is 27 uses, while in 2019 it was dominated by the behaviour processing rheme, which was 40 usage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">speech text, SFL, textual metafunction, theme</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font4">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui metafungsi tekstual dalam teks pidato kenegaraan pelantikan Presiden Joko Widodo. Metafungsi tekstual direalisasikan oleh sistem themetisasi berupa unsur tema dan rema. Metafungsi tekstual yang direalisasikan dengan sistem themetisasi berhubungan dengan unsur gramatika yang digunakan untuk mengungkapkan informasi di dalam sebuah klausa. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan deskriptif kualitatif. Sumber data penelitian ini berupa sumber lisan yang berasal dari video pidato pelantikan Presiden Joko Widodo selama dua periode, yakni 2014—2019 dan 2019--2024 yang diunduh melalui situs</span><a href="http://www.youtube.com/"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.youtube.com</span><span class="font4">.</span></a><span class="font4"> Jenis data penelitian ini berupa data tulis. Data tulis didapatkan dari hasil transkripsi lisan ke bentuk tulis sehingga diperoleh wujud data seperti kata-kata, frasa, grup frasa, klausa, dan unit teks. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori Linguistik Sistemik Fungsional (LSF) yang dikemukakan oleh Halliday dan Matthiessen (2014). Metode dan teknik pengumpulan data yang digunakan adalah metode simak dan teknik catat. Metode dan teknik analisis data digunakan metode agih dan teknik dasar bagi unsur langsung. Metode penyajian hasil analisis data yang digunakan adalah metode formal yang berupa tanda dan lambang serta metode informal yang berupa uraian kata, frasa, grup frasa, klausa, dan teks. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa tema kedua teks pidato pelantikan Presiden Joko Widodo mengenai kedaulatan rakyat dan NKRI. Metafungsi tekstual dikaji berdasarkan sistem themetisasi yang berupa unsur tema (topikal, interpersonal, tekstual) dan rema. Berdasarkan hasil analisis, terjadi peningkatan penggunaan Theme dari tahun 2014 (42,2%) ke tahun 2019 (57,8%). Sementara itu, penggunaan rema tahun 2014 didominasi oleh rema berproses material, yakni 27 penggunaan, sedangkan tahun 2019 didominasi oleh rema berproses tingkah laku, yakni 40 penggunaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">teks pidato, LSF, metafungsi tekstual, tema</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Language in a text can carry out its function in communication process. According to Sutjaja (2005), a text is always associated with two levels, namely the linguistic level and the extralinguistic level. One of the linguistic levels associated with the text, namely lexicogrammar or better known as grammar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One way of expressing ideas / ideas both oral and written in text form can be done through speech. Generally speech texts have different forms of language. Speech text is seen from the speaker and the background of the speaker. In this study, the analyzed text was the inaugural speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">of Indonesian Republic President, Joko Widodo, in the periode 2014-2019 and 2019-2024. The interesting thing from the text of the state address for the inauguration of the President of the Republic of Indonesia, Joko Widodo, namely (1) the speech text is an implementation of the President's performance that will be carried out during his term of office, (2) the President's language practice is straightforward, clear, and what it is, ( 3) the speech contains linguistic representation that expresses the organization of one's experience through information conveyed in a text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the reasons above, this research is interesting to be carried out based on the LSF theory which focuses on the use of clauses in a text. The LSF theory holds that language can play three metafunctions, namely the ideational function, the interpersonal function, and the textual function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As for the language metafunction that realizes the organization of human experience, namely the textual function. At the lexicogrammatical level, the textual metaphy is realized by the use of a thematization system that is related to the theme structure of a clause. The structure of a theme can not be separated from the elements of themes and rheme. The identity of the theme structurally is a clause element that occupies the initial position, ahead of the rheme. The part that can be categorized as a theme is the part that contributes significantly to communication. This happens because the theme which carrying out the task as the starting point of the message and emphasizes what the clause is ‘what the clause is going about’ (Halliday, 2004: 67).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This research is expected to be important because it can explore one of the language metaphysics, namely the organization of human experience (textual) which is realized through the thematization system contained in the text of the inauguration speech of President Joko Widodo. In addition, the study of the speech text that refers to</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">in-depth analysis of the thematization system has never been done in previous studies so that the presence of this study is one of the analysis formulas and additional variations on LSF research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methods</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Method has a close relationship with the theory, meaning that the selection of the use of certain methods and techniques at the stage of providing data is largely determined by the basic nature of the object of research (Mahsun, 2006: 17). This research was examined using qualitative methods. The data source of this study came from audio-visual recordings (videos) of the inauguration speech of the Indonesia President, Joko Widodo, in the period 2014--2019 which was downloaded on the site </span><a href="http://www.youtube.com"><span class="font4">www.youtube.com</span></a><span class="font4"> and transcribed into written form. This type of research data is written data in the form of words, phrases, phrase groups, clauses, and text units.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The method of collecting data in this study uses the simak method, which is the simak written method. Researchers listened to the written text of the transcription to find clauses in the Text of President Joko Widodo's Inauguration Speech. The data collection method in this study is supported by note taking technique by noting each clause in the President Joko Widodo's Inauguration Speech Text. The data analysis method used in this study is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">a qualitative method. Qualitative research emphasizes the meaning, reasoning, and definition of a particular situation in a particular context. (Sarwono, 2006: 257). The method of presenting analysis data uses formal and informal methods. Formal methods are applied to present the results of data analysis in the form of signs and symbols, such as parentheses (()), percentages (%), and labeling in simple calculations. Meanwhile, the informal method is applied in the form of narration in the form of a description with words, clauses, and sentences of the problems studied.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The theory used in this study is the Functional Systemic Linguistics (LSF) theory which refers to Halliday and Matthiessen (2014). LSF Theory examines three main functions of language, namely (1) the exposure function (ideational function), (2) the interpersonal function, and (3) the organizing function (textual function).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One of the metafunctions used in the coupling of human experience, namely the textual function that is realized by the thematization structure. Thematization structure is inseparable from the use of elements of themes and rheme. The theme is an element in the structural arrangement that makes up a clause and serves as the destination of the starting point of a message. The theme can be interpreted as a focus or can be said to be a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">reference. Meanwhile, rheme is the development of the theme as a reminder of the message in the speaker's perspective. Themes have three types, namely textual themes, interpersonal themes, and topical themes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Themes</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Identification of themes and rheme can be done by looking at the position of the verb or process in the clause. Themes and themes are determined by the verbs' existence in the clause or simply the theme as the explained element and the Rhemeinder as the explanatory element.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Halliday (2014: 88), the theme-rheme system is the core of the message and the translation of the message. That is, the theme can be considered as a message or headline, while rheme is as an explanation of the purpose of the message or headline in the clause. More specifically Saragih (2006: 94) explains that the theme is the main resource, while rheme is an element of the clause after the theme. The position of the theme in the structure of the clause is always at the beginning, while the rheme has the nature of following the theme's existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The theme-rheme system belongs to the system of developing texts related to the pattern of statements or speech. Text development can be interpreted as a strategy for packaging information</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">from one statement to the next or from one clause to the next. The purpose of theme-rheme analysis is to describe the main and explanatory topics in the clause. In addition, theme analysis aims to find out and provide a starting point for discussion or main points, while rheme analysis aims to provide explanatory points in clauses. Based on the results of analyzing the theme-rheme system in the inauguration speech of President Joko Widodo can be categorized as the clause structure forming the theme-rheme, namely simplex and complex themes. Description of simplex themes and complex themes is presented below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simplex Theme</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Simplex theme is a simple structure in the main information clause. Halliday (2014: 98 compare to Saragih, 2006: 90) states that the simplex theme only includes one element of the clause. This type of theme only includes the position of participant I as a single theme in the structure of the clause, for example in the following below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">saya mengajak saudara-saudara sebangsa dan setanah air”</span><span class="font4">/ (TP 2014)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">saya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">mengajak saudara-saudara sebangsa dan setanah air</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Them e</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kita tidak akan pernah besar jika terjebak dalam keterbelahan dan keterpecahan”// (TP 2014)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tidak akan pernah besar jika terjebak dalam keterbelahan dan keterpecahan</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Theme</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The clauses example (1) and (2) can be described as simplex themes. The words </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kita</span><span class="font4"> in the two examples above are one word element, not followed by word companions and only have one function as the first person singular, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span><span class="font4">, and plural, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kita</span><span class="font4">. Meanwhile, the phrase group that accompanies the participant has a position as rheme. In addition, the position of the theme is the point of thought explained by rheme. Instead, rheme is an explanatory of theme. The topic raised from the use of the above clause is the unity of Indonesia Republic. The motif of using the theme in the two clauses above, namely the President's invitation to the Indonesian people to unite so that there is no division and disunity between one another.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Complex Theme</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Complex themes are the main information structures that consist of several themes, namely textual, interpersonal, and topical themes. Textual themes include conjunctions, relative pronouns, and connectors in the form of transition phrases. Interpersonal themes include question markers, vocabulary, and information. Topical themes consist of one component phrase or group of phrases in a clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Topical Theme</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Topical themes can be the form of processes, circumferences, or participants. The appearance of a topical theme in a clause can be identified through the presence of several phrases before the process element or verb in the clause. Topical themes in the text of state inauguration speech of President Joko Widodo were divided into two categories, namely the human topical theme and the non-human topical theme. The examples of the use of the two topical themes are explained as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“saya juga mengajak seluruh lembaga negara”/ (TPP 2014)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">saya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">juga</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">mengajak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">seluruh lembaga negara</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">P</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sirkum</span></p></td><td colspan="2" rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Topical</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Theme</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">President Joko Widodo's statement in clause (3) has a single human topical category. Clause (3) has a participant structure and circumference as a topical theme. The words saya are inclusive so that one speaker can involve other speakers in his statement. For example, in the example of clause (3), President Joko Widodo stated that he was exclusively inclusive of inviting all state institutions to play an active role in nation building. The topic discussed in the above clause, namely the efficiency of the bureaucracy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kita harus menuju ke sana</span><span class="font4">”// (TPP 2019)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Harus</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Menuju</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ke sana</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">P</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sir.</span></p></td><td colspan="2" rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Topical</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Theme</span></p></td></tr>
</table></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data clause (4) has a category of plural topical human participants. The theme structure of President Joko Widodo's statement consists of participants and circumferences. The word kita associate with the applicable inclusive plural participants. That is, it can involve parties outside the speaker in the contents of the conversation. The theme of the clause above is the ideals of the Indonesian people. The President has a desire to reduce poverty in Indonesia, which until now Indonesia has occupied the top five of the world economy with poverty approaching zero percent. </span><span class="font4">(5) “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bangsa besar yang kreatif yang ikut menyumbangkan keluhuran bagi peradaban global”/ (TPP 2014)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bangs a besar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yan g</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kre atif</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ya ng</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ikut</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menyu mbang kan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kelu hura n</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bagi perad aban global</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">P</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Con j.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adj.</span></p></td><td colspan="4" rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Topical</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Theme</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Clause (5) in the statement of President Joko Widodo contains topical use such non-human phrases ‘bangsa besar’, conjunctions ‘yang’, and adjectives ‘kreatif’. The topic emphasized in the clause above is the ideals of the Indonesian people. In clause (5) President Joko Widodo focuses on developing the Indonesian nation as a large and creative nation. Means that Indonesia as a large archipelago-shaped country, which has a wide diversity of races, cultures and ethnic groups has the potential to develop creative human resources to provide benefits, both thought and energy for global world civilization.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(6) “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tugas kita itu menjamin delivered”</span><span class="font4">// (TPP</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2019)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">tugas kita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Itu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">menjamin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">delivered</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">P</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Dmns.</span></p></td><td colspan="2" rowspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Topikal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Theme</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In clause (6) the use of non-human topical themes is in the form phrases of ‘tugas kita’ which function as participants. President Joko Widodo focused his statement on our task phrase addressed to the bureaucracy. ‘Delivered’ in the sense that the program has reached the community and the community feels the results of the program implementation. The topic expressed based on the use of the clause above is the efficiency of the tasks of state institutions..</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interpersonal Theme</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Interpersonal themes are a key element in clauses marked by the use of question words, information questions, vocative, and affirmative mode information. The example of interpersonal theme analysis in President Joko Widodo's state address can be seen as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(7)</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Karena </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">inilah </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momen sejarah bagi kita semua untuk bergerak bersama”/</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(TPP 2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In &nbsp;data &nbsp;(7) there is a statement by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">President &nbsp;Joko Widodo &nbsp;that contains &nbsp;an</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">interpersonal theme as a confirmation of this mode, which ‘inilah’. The implication of the word ‘inilah’ contains information that shows the affirmation of time, place, event / event regarding a matter. The theme explained in the clause above is about togetherness to build national unity. In the clause above,word ‘inilah’ shows the affirmation of an important event for the people of Indonesia to work together, advance the nation and state of Indonesia so that they become stronger and authoritative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(8) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“saya atas nama pribadi atas nama Wakil Presiden Muhammad Jusuf Kalla dan atas nama bangsa Indonesia menyampaikan terima kasih dan penghargaan setinggi-tingginya kepada </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bapak Prof. Dr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bapak Prof. Dr. Boediono”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">/</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(TPP 2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The phrase ‘Bapak Prof. Dr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono’ and ‘Bapak Prof. Dr. Boediono’ in data (8) is a vocational sub-theme that labels the names of presidents and vice presidents who served previously. The use of the phrase has implications and scope, namely the word ‘Bapak’ used by President Joko Widodo representing respect or appreciation for the intended social status and Prof. Dr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Prof. Dr. Boediono refers to the full name along with the title to respect the functional position of the intended person. The topic expressed based on the use of the clause above is the respect of the previous state leaders. </span><span class="font4">(9) “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Eselon I, eselon II, eselon III, eselon IV, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">apa </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">enggak kebanyakan</span><span class="font4">?”// (TPP 2019)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In clause (9) there is a question marker ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">apa’</span><span class="font4">. The question marker ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">apa’</span><span class="font4"> refers to the name, type, nature, category, etc. without any views or ideas. In the data above, question markers ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">apa’</span><span class="font4"> refer to the type of echelonization contained in government. The theme discussed in the above clause is the simplification of echelonization. The use of marker ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">apa’</span><span class="font4"> on the data above shows President Joko Widodo questions about the many existing echelon in the governance structure so as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">to be cut and trimmed in accordance with the task at hand.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Textual Theme</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Textual theme are complex sub-themes consisting of conjunctions, relative pronouns, and transition phrases. Examples of textual themes contained in the text of the State of the Republic of Indonesia inauguration speech, Joko Widodo, as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Conjunction markers of single clauses </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dan, tetapi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(10)</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Harus disertai kerja keras </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kita harus kerja cepat”</span><span class="font4">// (TP 2019)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Kita tidak akan pernah besar jika terjebak dalam keterbelahan </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">keterpecahan”// </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">“ </span><span class="font4">kita tidak pernah betul-betul merdeka tanpa kerja keras”// (TP 2014)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Data (10) and (11) contain the use of the words conjunction ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dan’</span><span class="font4">. The implication of the word conjunction ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dan’</span><span class="font4"> on data (10) connects President Joko Widodo's ideas / thoughts to the statement regarding Indonesia's target to reduce poverty with hard work and fast work. In the data (11) conjunction ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dan’</span><span class="font4"> connects ideas / thoughts of President Joko Widodo about the importance of hard work to achieve independence. In data (10), the topic explained is about developing the country. Hard and fast work are efforts to develop a country that also has an impact on human resource potential. Furthermore, the topic in data</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;explains the unity of the Republic of Indonesia. The Indonesian people are expected to be able to forge relations with one another regardless of one's background. If it is implemented, life will avoid division and division. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Inter-clausal Conjunction </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kalau, karena, sehingga</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">(12)</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Pak, ayo kita pindah lokasi”//</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kalau </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kita tidak pindah”/</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“ini akan menjadi kebiasaan di titik itu lagi”// “Dan itu akan dianggap sebagai aturan”// </span><span class="font4">(TP 2019)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The use of conjunction ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalau’</span><span class="font4"> in data (12) by President Joko Widodo has implications for one statement idea to another statement idea. This becomes a unified information unit between the statements before and afterwards. The topic presented in the clause above is breaking down routines. In the above data, the use of conjunctions ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kalau’</span><span class="font4"> linking President Joko Widodo's statement regarding the opinion that if the president does not change locations when standing when halalbihalal, this will be considered as a rule determined by law. These rules will become routine so that it is monotonous. What the president wants to say based on this clause is that we must have the courage to break through routines to redevelop other potentials within ourselves. That is, not only</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">based on the same thing, the same thing. We must dare to take new actions for something new.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Transition phrases </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">oleh karena itu</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> dan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">oleh sebab itu</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(13) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lima tahun ke depan menjadi momentum pertaruhan kita sebagai bangsa yang merdeka”// “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Oleh sebab itu</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">, bekerja, bekerja, dan bekerja adalah yang utama”//</span><span class="font4"> (TP 2014)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the data (13) President Joko Widodo uses the transitional phrase ‘oleh sebab itu’. This link has the implication of linking clauses before and after it. The purpose of using conjunctions is to realize the meaning of statements that have causal implications. That is, this conjunction links statements of cause and effect between clauses. The theme of the clause above is an effort to realize Indonesian independence. As in the data example (13), it is stated that the momentum of President Joko Widodo's governance over the next five years must work hard to maintain Indonesia as an independent country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1 Level of the Use Complex Themes in</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">President &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Joko &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Widodo's</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Inauguration Speech</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Type</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Subtype</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Amount</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TPP</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2014</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TPP</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2019</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Textual</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">a. Conjunction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">108</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">144</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">b. Relative pronouns</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">c. Connecting Transition Phrases</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Interpersonal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">a. Words Ask Questions Information</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">b. Vocative</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">c. Enforcement Affirmation Modus</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Topical</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">43</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">58</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Total (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">42,2 %</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">57,8 %</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lima tahun ke depan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi momentum pertaruhan kita sebagai bangsa yang merdeka</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Theme</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">(15) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“… &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bahwa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tugas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;birokrasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">adalah </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">making delivered</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font4">// (TP 2019)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">bahwa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tugas</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">birokrasi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">adalah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">making delivered</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Theme</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the table above it is known that the use of Theme elements is dominated by textual themes in the form of conjunctions, namely in 2014 (108 uses) by 64.7% and in 2019 (144 uses) of 63 %. This reflects that President Joko Widodo's state address was dominated by the use of conjunctions.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>2. Rheme</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Rheme is the explanatory element of the core statement in a clause. Halliday (2014) limits Theme and Rheme to processes (verbs) so that statements after the process are categorized as rheme. An example of rheme in the second statement of President Joko Widodo's inauguration speech can be seen below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(14) “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">l</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ima tahun ke depan menjadi momentum pertaruhan kita sebagai bangsa yang merdeka”// (TP 2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rheme in data (14) and (15) is shown by the lingual unit which is after the verb element. The verb element is a separator between Theme and Rheme. Rheme describes old information on the Theme. The theme described in data (14) concerning the independence of the Indonesian people. This was revealed because the president has a great responsibility in continuing the ideals of the nation and state which are realized with the performance of five years of office. Furthermore, the Theme in clause (15) is the emphasis on bureaucratic performance. This was stated by the President because he saw a lack of bureaucratic performance in the previous period. This deficiency is evaluated by the President to be increased again in order to achieve the prosperity of the people. The presence of Rheme in the clause is very important because it is in the form of a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">further explanation of the Theme regarding a matter to be conveyed in the clause.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Table 2 Number of Rhemes in the State Text of the Inauguration of President Joko Widodo</span></h2>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Process</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Number Rheme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TP 2014</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">TP 2019</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Material Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">33</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Relational Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Mental Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">25</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Verbal Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">11</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Behavior Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">24</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">40</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Form Process</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">94</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">142</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Number of rheme usage by President Joko Widodo in Table 2 shows that in 2014 Rheme use of material processing is more dominant, whereas in 2019 the use of Rheme processes the most dominant behavior. This means that President Joko Widodo's state address in 2014 dominantly stated the explanatory element of information in the form of actions to do something (things that will happen). Meanwhile, the 2019 state address dominant rheme proceeded with behavior because President Joko Widodo put forward the empirical / concrete actions in realizing the explanatory elements of the information conveyed.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. Conclusions</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Analysis of the textual metafunction in inauguration state speech text of President Joko Widodo's was divided into an analysis of theme and rheme. Based on the analysis of the theme, it</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">can be concluded that in general the second theme of the text of the inauguration speech was President Joko Widodo, which is about the sovereignty of the people and the Republic of Indonesia. Meanwhile, according to the results of simple calculations, an increase in the use of themes from 2014 (42.2%) to 2019 (57.8%). This is due to the duration of the president's speech in 2019 which is longer than 2014. This is due to the increase in information or things that were delivered by the president after seeing the development, shortcomings, and performance of government officials in the previous period. Furthermore, rheme in President Joko Widodo's state speech text in 2014 was dominated by rheme's material processing, which was 27 uses, while in 2019 it was dominated by rheme's behavior process, which was 40 uses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Alwi, Hasan, dkk. 2000. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia. Edisi Ketiga</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Balai Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Budiman, Umiati. 1987. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sari Tata Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Klaten: PT Intan Pariwara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bungin, Burhan. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: Prenada Media Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Faradi, Abdul Azis. 2015. “Kajian Modalitas Linguistik Fungsional Sistemik pada Teks Debat Capres-Cawapres pada Pilpres 2014—2019 dan Relevansinya dengan Pembelajaran Wacana di Sekolah.” Dalam </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">RETORIKA</span><span class="font4">: &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ilmu Bahasa</span><span class="font4"> Vol. 1, No.2 Oktober 2015, &nbsp;233-249.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ejournal.warmadewa.ac.id/index.php/jret"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ejournal.warmadewa.ac.id/index.php/jret</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Fauzan, Umar. 2015. “Transitivitas Teks Berita TVOne mengenai Kasus ‘Luapan Lumpur Sidoarjo’”. Jurnal </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">PEDAGOGIK</span><span class="font4"> 2015 Vol.8 No.1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halliday, M.A.K. &amp;&nbsp;Matthiessen, Christian M.I.M. 2004. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar. Third Edition</span><span class="font4">. New York: Oxford University Press Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halliday, M.A.K. dan Christian Matthiessen. 2014. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Functional Grammar (Fourth Edition)</span><span class="font4">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halliday, M.A.K. dan Hasan. 1985. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font4">. Geelong: Deakin University Press. </span><a href="http://www.jurnal-pedagogik.info/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.jurnal-pedagogik.info</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kridalaksana, Harimurti. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Linguistik</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mahsun. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bahasa: Tahapan Strategi, Metode, dan Tekniknya. Jakarta</span><span class="font4">: PT Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Moleong, Lexy J. 2008. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif (Edisi Revisi)</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Rhemeja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Moleong, Lexy J.. 2005. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif.</span><span class="font4"> Bandung: Rhemeja Rosdakarya</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ramlan, M. 2001. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sintaksis Ilmu Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: CV Karyono.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sarwono, J. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Kualitatif dan Kuantitatif</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sinar, T. S. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teori dan Analisis Wacana: Pendekatan Linguistik Sistemik Fungsional</span><span class="font4">. Medan: Penerbit Mitra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Tehnik Analisis Bahasa (PengantarPenelitian Wahana Kebudayaan secara Linguistik)</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 2015. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa: Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguistis</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Universitas Sanata Dharma Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Widodo, Dhanu Priyo dkk. 2018. “Transitivitas Pidato Kampanye Ahok pada Pemilihan Gubernur DKI Jakarta Periode 2017-2022.” Jurnal </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia</span><span class="font4"> Vol.3 No.1 Maret 2018. 18-26.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wiratno, Tri Dr. M.A. 2018. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Ringkas Linguistik Sistemik Fungsional</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">youtube.com/watch?v=XpVhf80mb9M</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">129</span></p>