---
layout: full_article
title: "THE EFFECT of GA3 AND SALINITY on GROWTH of ROSELLE (Hibiscus sabdariffa L.)"
author: "Aisar Novita, Mohammad Basyuni, Abdul Rahman Cemda, Silvia Nora, Merlyn Mariana"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-73075 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-73075"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-73075"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOSCIENCES AND BIOTECHNOLOGY </span><span class="font4">∙ </span><span class="font0">Vol. 8 No. 2 </span><span class="font4">∙ </span><span class="font0">April 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">eISSN: 2655-9994</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">pISSN: 2303-3371</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v08.i02.p01"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v08.i02.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">THE EFFECT of GA</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">3 </span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">AND SALINITY on GROWTH of ROSELLE (</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"> L.)</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h2><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font7"><a name="bookmark1"></a>A</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">isar Novita<sup>1*</sup></span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Mohammad Basyuni<sup>2</sup>, Abdul Rahman Cemda<sup>3</sup>, Silvia Nora<sup>4</sup>, Merlyn Mariana<sup>4</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font7"><sup>1*</sup>Departments of Agrotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Muhammadiyah Sumatera Utara, Indonesia <sup>2</sup>Departments of Forestry, Faculty of Forestry, Universitas Sumatera Utara, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font7"><sup>3</sup>Departments of Agribussiness, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Muhammadiyah Sumatera Utara, Indonesia <sup>4</sup>Politeknik Pembangunan Pertanian, Medan</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">*Corresponding author: </span><a href="mailto:aisarnovita@umsu.ac.id"><span class="font7">aisarnovita@umsu.ac.id</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">In order to alleviate the deleterious effects of salinity, different types of phytohormones have been used. Among them, GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">has been the main focus of some plant scientists. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of gibberellic acid and salinity on growth and production of roselle (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> L). This research was conducted in a greenhouse of Agriculture Faculty, University of Sumatera Utara, Medan. The study used utterly randomized design with two factors. The first factor was gibberellic acids. They were gibberellic acid (5 mg L<sup>-1</sup>) and no gibberellic acid. The second factor was salinity. They were 0 dsm<sup>-1</sup> and 4-5 dsm<sup>-1</sup>. The interaction between gibberellic acid and salinity acid indicated a significant effect on the percentage of germination, chlorophyll a and b and beta-carotene. The application of giberellic acid helped in the tolerance of plants to salinity. Thus, application of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">become essential to improve overall productivity in salinity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords:</span><span class="font7"> salinity, gibberellic acid</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">, Hibiscus sabdariffa.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">The conversion of agricultural land to residential and industrial areas has resulted in a reduction in agricultural land. This causes agricultural development to be directed at marginal lands such as saline soils. Saline soil is soil that contains a certain amount of neutral dissolved salt which adversely affects plant growth and production (Kusmiyati </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., 2014).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Rosella flower (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> L.) contains compounds that have antioxidant activity, so they can ward off free radicals. The usefulness value of roselle is very wide for both food and health, so that the potential for roselle diversification is quite large. The important content contained in rosella flower petals is an anthocyanin pigment which acts as an antioxidant (Nasifa and Husni, 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Growth regulators are non-nutritional organic compounds which in low concentrations can promote, inhibit or qualitatively change plant growth and development. One of the growth regulators that is often used is gibberellin (GA</span><span class="font3">3</span><span class="font7">) which plays a role in influencing various physiological processes in plants (Maharani </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., 2018). According to Yasmin (2014), the application of the GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">concentration given is able to stimulate plant growth by increasing plant height and leaf area. Giving GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">was influenced by the concentration given, the concentration of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">needed by each type of plant was different. Giving the right concentration of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">can increase plant growth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">The application of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">reduced the inhibitory effect of NaCl on growth attributes and photosynthetic pigments in </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7">by inducing the enzyme activity and enhancing RWC, and thus GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">helped in the tolerance of plants to salt stress (Ali </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., 2011). Therefore, research is needed to </span><span class="font6">evaluate the effect of gibberellic acid and salinity on growth of roselle (</span><span class="font6" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font6"> L).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>MATERIALS AND METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">In order to study the effects of gibberellic acid and salinity on growth and production of roselle (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> L.) an experiment was conducted in a greenhouse of Agriculture Faculty, University of</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Sumatera Utara, Medan. The research used a completely randomized design with two factors. The first factor was giberellic acids were gibberellic acid (5 mg L<sup>-1</sup>) and no gibberellic acid. The second factor was salinity were 0 dsm<sup>-1</sup> and 4 dSm<sup>-1</sup>. If the effect ofdifferent treatments on the real variance, then tested further by Duncan's multiple range test.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Land preparation</span><span class="font7">. Land located in the greenhouse area cleaned. Size of 10 kg polybags filled with top soil.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Seed preparation</span><span class="font7">. The seeds were used in this research comes from Darmaga, Bogor, Jawa Barat. The varieties used was sabdariffa. The seeds were disinfected by alcohol 70% (for 10 seconds), sodium hypochlorite 10% (for 60 seconds) and benomyl 2:1000 (for one minute) Afterward, the seeds were rinsed with distilled water twice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Gibberellic acid treatment. </span><span class="font7">Seeds were soaked in 500 ml of distilled water for 12 hours (no GA</span><span class="font3">3</span><span class="font7">), and the seeds were immersed in 500 ml of a solution of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">for 12 hours and then redried to original weight with forced air under shade.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Salinity treatment</span><span class="font7">. To apply the salinity treatment, the salty soil was taken from the Kecamatan Percut Sei Tuan, which was measured for its salinity using a DHL meter at a salinity level of 4 dSm-1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Measurements were made by taking saline soil samples, then drying them in the sun, then the saline soil weighed 10 grams per sample. Then put the soil sample into a beaker glass and add distilled water to 100 ml. then measured the salinity level using a DHL meter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Planting</span><span class="font7">. The seeds were germinated directly on the polybag according to each treatment. </span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Parameters observed:</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Percentage of Germination. </span><span class="font7">Germination percentage was calculated up to 1 WAP. Germination (DB) was calculated based onthe percentage of normal seedling compared to the number of seeds that germinated.</span></p><a name="caption2"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font8" style="font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Germination percentage</span><span class="font8"> =</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Number of seeds germinating per polybag The number of seeds planted per polybag</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font8" style="font-style:italic;">X 100%</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Chlorophylla and Chlorophyll b. </span><span class="font7">Analysis of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b was conducted in Laboratorium Central, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Sumatra Utara, Medan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Beta-carotene Content</span><span class="font7">. Analysis of betacarotene content performed at the Laboratorium Pangan, Agriculture Faculty, University of Sumatra Utara, Medan.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">Gibberellin and salinity stress conditions showed a significant effect on the growth and production variables of roselle such as the percentage of germination,</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">chlorophyll a and b, beta-carotene (Table 1). Gibberellin markedly better impact on salt stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Gibberellic acid (5 mg L<sup>-1</sup>) under salt stress on roselle maintain germination success although chlorophyll a and b decreased and was not formed flowers (generative phase) to be harvested. This context is correlated to generative step because gibberellin given during seed soaking focused on sustaining the germination success, so do not increase levels of chlorophyll a and b.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">In this study the majority of the roselle are getting treatment salinity stress thus lowering the average thick cuticle, but when viewed from the flats of plants that survived</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">produced an increase in the thickest of the thick cuticle contained in roselle that is subjected to salinity stress. The application of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">reduced the inhibitory effect of NaCl on growth attributes and photosynthetic pigments in </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> by inducing the enzyme activity and enhancing RWC, and thus GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">helped in the tolerance of plants to salt stress. Ali </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">. (2011), the application of GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">reduced the inhibitory effect of NaCl on growth attributes and photosynthetic pigments</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">by inducing the enzymes CA activity and enhancing RWC. Therefore, it is suggested that GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">might help in the tolerance of plants to salt stress. Novita </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., (2017), reported that Salinity not only affects leaf morphology and transpiration rate but also leads to</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">reduction of total chlorophyll content as the salt concentration increases. All the growing tissues are potential sites for GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">biosithesis. The developing fruit and seeds are the GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">biosynthetic pathway. Moosavi </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., (2013) reported that salinity stress had a negative impact on germination rate, germination percentage, long sprouts, shoot length and roselle seed viability index (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7">). Overall, salinity through increased osmotic pressure leads to a reduction in water uptake and metabolic and</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">physiological processes will come under its influence. So that it causes delays in germination by increasing seed germination. Gibberellins are a group of phytohormones associated with dormancy and shedding of leaves (senescnese). The phytohormone Giberellin GA</span><span class="font3">3 </span><span class="font7">is a hormone that accelerates seed germination, shoots, stem elongation, leaf growth, stimulates flowering, fruit development, affects root growth and differentiation (Campbell, 2005).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Table 1. Average of Chlorophyll a, Chlorophyll b, Beta-carotene, Percentage of Germination and Beta-carotene on Interaction of Gibberellic Acid and Salinity Stress.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Chlorophyll &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Percentage of</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Treatment &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chlorophyll a</span></p>
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">b &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;germination</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Betacarotene</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;">Interaction Gibberellic Acid and Salt Stress</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">A0C0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2634.333 a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1348.333 a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100,000 a</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">A0C1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;88,890 b</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">A1C0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2350.667 b &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1265.333 b &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100,000 a</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">A1C1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1159.667 c &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;824.000 c &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100,000 a</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font7">3.491 b</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">-</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">3.547 a</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">-</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font7">Means values in a column and row followed by unlike letter (s) are significantly different at 5% level using DMRT (Duncan Multiple Range Test).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Attempts to improve yield under stress conditions by plant improvement have been mostly unsuccessful, primarily due to the multigenic origin of the adaptive responses. Therefore, &nbsp;a &nbsp;well-focused</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">approach &nbsp;&nbsp;combining &nbsp;the molecular,</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">protectant such as osmoprotectants (proline, glycine betaine, trehalose, etc.), plant hormone (gibberellic acids, jasmonic acids, brassinosteroids, salicylic acid, etc.) have been found useful in mitigating the salt-</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">physiological, biochemical and metabolic aspects of salt tolerance is essential to develop salt-tolerant crop varieties. Exploring suitable ameliorants or stress alleviant is one of the tasks of plant biologists. In recent decades exogenous</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">induced damage in plant (Ahmad </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., 2011; Azzedine </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font7">., 2011).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Salinity not only affects leaf morphology and transpiration rate but also</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">leads to a reduction of total chlorophyll content as the salt concentration increases.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">Gibberellic acid (5 mg L-1) and salinity (4-5 dsm-1) on growth and production of roselle help maintain germination success although chlorophyll a and b decreased and was not formed flowers (generative phase) to be harvested.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font7">Ahmad, P dan S. Umar. (2011). Oxidative stress: role of antioxidants in plants. Studium Press, New Delhi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Ali. H.M., M.H. Siddiqui., M.O. Basalah., M.H. Al-Whaibi., A.M. Sakran and A.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Seedling Growth of Roselle (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7">). </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Global Journal of Medicine Plant Research</span><span class="font7">, 1(1):124-</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">127,2013.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Nasifa IH and P Husni. (2018). Potensi Antioksidan Dalam Kelopak Bunga Rosella &nbsp;(</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus &nbsp;sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> L.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Sebagai Anti-Aging. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Farmaka Suplemen</span><span class="font7">. Vol. 16, No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Novita, A., A.R. Cemda and H. Julia . (2017). Effects of Plant Hormones Interaction Under Salt Stress on Growth of Roselle (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus Sabdarifa</span><span class="font7"> L.). ICoSAaNRM 2017. ISBN 978-602-6997-70-8. Hal: 88-95.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Yasmin. 2014. Pengaruh Perbedaan Waktu Aplikasi Dan Konsentrasi Giberelin (Ga3) Terhadap Pertumbuhan Dan Hasil Tanaman Cabai Besar (</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Capsicum annuum</span><span class="font7"> L.) </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Produksi Tanaman</span><span class="font7">. Volume 2, Nomor 5, Juli 2014, hlm. 395-403</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Al-Amri. (2011). Effects ofgibberellic acid on growth and photosynthetic pigments of </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Hibiscus sabdariffa</span><span class="font7"> L. under saltstress. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Afr J Biotechnol </span><span class="font7">11:800–804.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Azzedine, F., H. Gherroucha and M. Baka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">(2011). Improvement of salt tolerance in durum wheat by ascorbic acid application</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">. J Stress Physiol Biochem </span><span class="font7">7:27–37.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Campbell, N.A., J.B. Reece, and L. G.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Mitchell. 2005. Biologi. Edisi ke-</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">5.Terj. Dari: Biology. 5th ed. oleh</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Manulu, W. Jakarta: Erlangga.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Maharani A, Suwirmen and ZA Noli. (2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Pengaruh Konsentrasi Giberelin (GA</span><span class="font3">3</span><span class="font7">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">terhadap &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pertumbuhan Kailan</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">(</span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Brassica oleracea</span><span class="font7"> L. Var alboglabra) pada Berbagai Media Tanam dengan Hidroponik Wick System. </span><span class="font7" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Biologi Universitas Andalas (J. Bio. UA.)</span><span class="font7">. 6(2) hal: 63-70 (ISSN : 23032162)</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Moosavi, S.G., M.J. Saghatoleslami., H.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Javadi., S.M. Moosavi., Z. Jouyban., E.</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">Ansarina and M. Nasiri. (2013). Effect</span></p>
<p><span class="font7">of Salt Stress on Germination and Early</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">FACULTY OF AGRICULTURE, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY </span><span class="font4">∙ </span><span class="font1">5</span></p>