---
layout: full_article
title: "PIDGINIZED ENGLISH SPOKEN BY HANDICRAFT SELLERS IN SANUR"
author: "Meynar Clavarius Audito P"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>PIDGINIZED ENGLISH SPOKEN BY HANDICRAFT SELLERS IN</span><br><br><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark2"></a>SANUR</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Meynar Clavarius Audito Pamungkas</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Non-regular Program English Department Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Abstrak :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Artikel yang berjudul “Pidginized English Spoken by Handicraft Sellers in Sanur” ditulis berdasarkan penelitian yang dilakukan yang dilakukan di Sanur. Tujuan ditulisnya artikel ini adalah untuk mengetahui bentuk pidgin apa saja yang terjadi di sana. Penelitian yang dilakukan berdasarkan teori sosiolinguistik, terutama teori yang disusun oleh Holmes (1992), Muhlauser (1986), Spolsky (1998). Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif. Terdapat lebih dari 20 penjual kerajinan, 5 dari mereka diteliti dengan pemilihan secara acak, dan terfokus pada 2 penjual saja. Data dikumpulkan dalam bentuk rekaman dan catatan. Penelitian ini fokus pada bahasa dan ekspresi yang digunakan para penjual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan penelitian, dalam bentuk grammar, ada beberapa jenis kalimat yang diucapkan para penjual kerajinan. Kalimat tersebut bisa dibagi dalam tiga bentuk : positive forms, negative forms, interrogative forms. Terdapat dua faktor yang mempengaruhi penggunaan pidgin oleh para penjual kerajinan di Sanur. Faktor pertama adalah faktor ekonomi yang berhubungan erat dengan sektor pariwisata. Faktor pendidikan juga berpengaruh besar dalam penggunaan pidgin. Hasilnya, ketika berkomunkasi dengan para pembeli asing, mereka menggunakan Bahasa Inggris dalam bentuk yang mudah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci : Pidgin, Pidginized English, Teori Sosiolinguistik</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>1.Background</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">English is very important for communication nowadays. It is an international language and used by many countries as their basic language. Most of the foreigners or western people use English in their communication. Indonesia, especially Bali is one of the famous tourism objects in the world. Many people from around the world come to Bali for their vacation or business. But there will be some problems in the communication when the local people do not understand English or speak it well. There will be some misunderstandings that occur between them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the contact between the local people, foreigners ussually try to use simple English to make communication easy. Based on education, there are local people who will use English well, or they who will combine their language with English. They who are the second option do not have a good education of English. They try to make conversation by creating their own terms, expression words which are partly or completely different from the Standard English. The English that they use is influenced by their own dialects, combination with local terms, words, and expression. This kind of language is wellknown as pidgin language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two problems was discussed. First, what forms of pidginized English are spoken by the handicraft sellers in Sanur Beach? Second, what factors contributing to the existence of pidginized English spoken by the handicraft sellers in Sanur Beach?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims study were : first, to identify and describe the form of the Pidgin used by the handicraft sellers in Sanur Beach. Second, to analyze the factors contributing the Pidgin English spoken by the handicraft sellers in Sanur Beach.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study was taken from the handicraft sellers in location of observation at Sanur Beach. The data was collected by direct observation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">using observation and interview. The observation was done at Sanur Beach where the local handicraft sellers do their daily activities. When they were involved in conversation with the foreigners, they would be observed. Note and video taking techniques were used to get the complete data including what, when, and where the conversation takes place. The collected data was analyzed descriptively by using qualitative method. The data from note taking and the observation were transcribed and typed up using a data sheet. After that, the data was categorized based on each type of pidgin. The reasons for using pidgin that was derived from the respondent’s answers that was classified into some groups, according to some sub topics of analysis. The transcribed and categorized data were analyzed based on the theory of sociolinguistic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">When observing pidginized English spoken by handicraft sellers in Sanur, and compared to Standard English, the clearest case which can be found of form pidginized English, are :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pidginized English in Positive Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the investigation conducted in Sanur on pidginize English, some data was found in various forms. One of them is considered positive which is classified into three divisions such as :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Statements</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This best quality</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance that is proper to be expressed was “This is the best quality”. The use of to be ‘is’ was missing. According to Simple Present Tense rules, the use of ‘to be’ is very important. In the utterance above, the function of verb replaced by to be. The utterance will be meaningless without ‘to be’. The utterance is used to convince the customer that the goods are in good quality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Instructions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hello, come looking-looking</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance is used to invite the customer to take a look the trader’s shop, therefore, the exact utterance was “Hello, please come here to take a look”. It is not permitted to use of verb in reduplication. This utterance was translated ‘word-by-word’ from “Halo, datang lihat-lihat”. The use of ‘please’ to soften the sentence and make it more polite.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Offerings</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hallo, bracelet Mam?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance is used to offer the customer to buy a bracelet, therefore, the exact utterance was “Hello, would you like to buy a bracelet?”. The use of modal as question word was missing, therefore, the utterance did not complete and unclear. Fortunately, the traders offer their product with gesture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pidginized English in Negative Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The speakers use the negative form, which is divided into two parts. Since doing the observation , both types of sentences are rather complicated for them to say than the positive forms. They are as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Statements</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">No, no. no bargain</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance is used to prohibit the customer bargain the price, therefore, the exact utterance was “You cannot make any bargain for this one”. The utterance did not complete, therefore, made it meaningless in terms of sentence structure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Instructions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">No bargain too low.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence is used when the customer bargain too low, therefore, the exact utterance was “Do not bargain too low”. The utterance maybe unclear because the handicraft seller use ‘No’ which meant ‘Do not’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pidginized English in Interrogative Forms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Pidginized English in Interrogative forms is divided into two :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes / No Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Want different color?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This utterance should have been “Do you want the different color?” . The use of auxiliary ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2">’ was missing. According to Simple Present Tense rules, yes/no questions are also using the auxiliarly </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2"> (for I, you, they, we, and plural nouns) or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">does</span><span class="font2"> (for he, she, it, and singular noun). The utterance mentioned above is used to offer the customer the different color of the trader’s wares.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wh- Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Below are some examples of pidginized English spoken by the traders :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How much you want?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance mentioned above is used to ask the number of items required by the customer when the transaction occured, the utterance should have been “How much do you want?”. Similar with example </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font2">, The use of auxiliary ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2">’ was missing. The addition of an auxiliary ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2">’ after Wh-word is also important. According to Simple Present Tense rules, wh-questions use the auxiliary </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2"> (for I, you, they, we, and plural nouns) or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">does</span><span class="font2"> (for he, she, it, and singular noun) before the subject.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alternative Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The similar form is also found from the data of pidginized English spoken by handicraft sellers in Sanur :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You want this big or small?</span><span class="font2"> (statue)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence is used to give the customer a choice of size, therefore, this sentence should have been “Which one do you want? The small or big one?”. The use of auxiliary ‘do’ was missing. The addition of an auxiliary ‘do’ is important. According to Simple Present Tense rules, wh-questions are also using the auxiliary ‘do’ or ‘does’ before the subject.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Conditional Factors Contributing to the Existence of Pidgin Spoken by Handicraft Sellers in Sanur</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two factors contributed to the development of a variety of language the locals (handicraft sellers) may use. They are internal and external factors.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Factors</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">These factors come from the English language, in this case, the target language:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The difference of language systems whether in the level of grammar and phonology, between the English language as the target language and the mother tongue from the handicraft sellers, make the emergence of the simplification from the target language system. For example : “Tomorrowtomorrow come again”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The complex language system from the English language made the imperfect learning and knowledge of the handicraft sellers. To make it easier for them to speak English with the foreign customer, they just want to simplify them. For example : “Statue, statue?”</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;External Factors</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Most of the external factors come from the environment where the language is being used :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Both Balinese language and Bahasa Indonesia influence the process of the handicraft sellers in using pidgin language, but Balinese language as the handicraft sellers’ mother tongue is more influental.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lack of mastering the targeting language (English language) by the handicraft sellers, make them just want to make the English language simple as possible in order that the foreign customer come to their shop and buy something there. It is also influenced by education.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most of the handicraft sellers have less opportunity to learn the English language it make them less knowledgeable with the English language, so they just simplify it.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In grammatical form, there are some types of sentence forms produced by the handicraft sellers that are observd in Sanur, when they were in communication with the foreigners. It can be divided into three forms. There are positive forms, negative forms and interrogative forms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This pidgin language exists, caused by some conditions such as economic factors, of which the tourism plays as important role. To run a business in particular tourism industry like selling handicraft, they try to use English to communicate with the foreign tourist in which they don’t know exactly about it, and they try to simplify it. The educational factor also determines such use of language. Mostly handicraft sellers in Sanur are communicating with foreigners using non Standard English, and impolite.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction To Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Muhlauser, Peter. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pidgin and Creole Linguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Basil.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Spolsky, Bernard. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Oxford: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">