---
layout: full_article
title: "SUBSTITUTION AS A COHESIVE DEVICE IN THE DIALOGUE OF THE DRAMA PYGMALION"
author: "I Wayan Paramartha"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">SUBSTITUTION AS A COHESIVE DEVICE IN THE DIALOGUE OF</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE DRAMA </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">PYGMALION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I WAYAN PARAMARTHA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bejudul “Substitution as Cohesive Devices in the Dialogue of the Drama Pygmalion”. Sumber data yang diambil berasal dari buku drama Pygmalion yang ditulis oleh Bernard Shaw. Makalah ini menganalisis dan menduskusikan tentang jenis-jenis substitusi yang terdapat pada dialog dan tujuan dari penggunaan substitusi tersebut. Alasan memilih drama Pygmalion karena drama tersebut sering digunakan dalam belajar bahasa Inggris dan sangat menarik untuk dianalisis. Teori utama yang digunakan untuk menganalisa data dalam penelitian ini adalah teori Cohesion oleh M.A.K Halliday dan Ruqaiya Hasan di dalam buku mereka yang berjudul Cohesion in English (1976), yang mengklasifikasi substitusi menjadi tiga jenis, yaitu: substitusi nominal, substitusi verbal dan substitusi clausal. Dari hasil analisa ditemukan bahwa jenis-jenis substitusi yang terdapat pada dialog drama Pygmalion adalah substitusi nominal, substitusi verbal dan substitusi clausal dan substitusi tersebut menyebabkan dialog menjadi koheren. Dari hasil analisa pembaca akan mengerti tentang jenis-jenis substitusi, jadi pembaca akan memahami tujuan dari penggunaan jenis-jenis substitusi di dalam drama tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: nominal, verbal, clausal substitusi.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Coherence in linguistics is what makes a text semantically meaningful. It is especially dealt with text linguistics. Coherence is achieved through syntactical features such as the use of deictic, anaphoric and cataphoric elements or a logical tense structure, as well as presuppositions and implications connected to general world of knowledge. The purely linguistic elements that make a text coherent are subsumed under the term cohesion. (Yudhistira, 2012) According to Halliday and Hasan (1976), cohesion can be classified into two types: grammatical cohesion and lexical cohesion. The previous type refers to a combination of sentences by means of grammatical term. The latter refers to a combination of sentences by means of lexical component. Grammatical cohesion can be divided into four</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">kinds. They are reference, substitution, ellipsis, and conjunction. The dialogues found in the drama were analyzed in this undergraduate thesis, particularly are those related to grammatical cohesions called substitutions. The basic theory of substitution was successfully applied by Gunawan (2011) in his study “Substitution in Hill’s Novel ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Killing the Lawyers</span><span class="font2">’”. In his analysis of substitution, he used the theory proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976). He tried to analyze the types of substitution found in the novel and how the substitution was presented in the novel. This study tried to analyze substitution used in the drama dialogue in the drama </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2">. The dialogues were taken because nowadays people are faced with many problems in their everyday life and they need to relax by doing something to refresh themselves. One of the ways is entertainment. There are many kinds of entertainment, and one of them is reading drama. This drama is used because it is often used as a reference in order to learn English. The discussion in this paper is focused on the substitutions. The substitution can be divided into three kinds. They are nominal, verbal and clausal substitutions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the background given above, there are two major problems required to be discussed as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of substitution occur in the dialogues of the drama entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the substitution contribute to the dialogue in the drama entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2"> coherent?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of the study are as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the type of substitution that occur in the drama entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain how the substitution contribute to the dialogue in the drama entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2"> coherent.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In analyzing the data of this study, the research method which is used can be divided into three aspects, they are: data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study was taken from the book. There were five acts in the drama </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2"> written by George Bernard Shaw (1916). The dialogue in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2"> drama was taken as data source because the sentences in the dialogue are quite simple and did not contain many difficult terms. The reader could easily understand substitution through the dialogue as a pattern.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The method that was used in collecting the data was library research method. In collecting the data, there were some steps being used. The first steps, the dialogue relevant to the research were chosen and read to find out the relevant examples. The examples were quoted as many as possible from the dialogue. Finally, they were classified into several categories.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">All of the data was analyzed qualitatively using the descriptive method. This technique gives explanation in a descriptive way. It means that the analyses are presented in detailed description in accordance with the fact. There were some ways in collecting the data. First, the dialogue was read next substitution in the dialogue was determined. After that, the substitution was selected and classified. The data was descriptively analyzed base on Halliday’s and Hasan’s (1976) concept of substitution of the text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Substitution as a Cohesive Device in the Dialogue of the Drama</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of types of substitutions in Pygmalion Drama Dialogue</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were classified according to the types of substitution using the theory proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976). There are three types of substitution, nominal substitution, verbal substitution and clausal substitution. In this drama, they were expressed by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one/ones, do</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">not</span><span class="font2"> found as follows;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nominal Substitution</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Nominal substitution includes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one</span><span class="font2">/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ones.</span><span class="font2"> The substitute </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one</span><span class="font2">/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ones</span><span class="font2"> is the marker of grammatical relation, it presupposes a particular noun, typically one that is to be found in the preceding text. The substitute </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one/ones</span><span class="font2"> function as the head of a nominal group and can substitute only for an item which is head of nominal group. Nominal substitution is always accompanied by some modifying element which functions as defining word or clause in the particular context. Bellow is the analysis of nominal substitution found in the drama </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2">, for example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">HIGGINS [storming on] Take all her </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">clothes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">off and burn them. Ring up Whiteley or somebody for new </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ones</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Wrap her up in brown paper til they come. (Shaw, 1916: 41)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the text above, the example of nominal substitution </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ones</span><span class="font2"> is used to substitute </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">clothes</span><span class="font2">. The substitution </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one</span><span class="font2"> is used to substitute for </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">clothes</span><span class="font2"> in the previous sentence. It is presented anaphorically since it refers back to the previous sentence. Without the substitution mentioned above the full dialogue will be; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Take all her </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">clothes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">off and burn them. Ring up Whiteley or somebody for new </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">clothes</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Wrap her up in brown paper til they come.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verbal Substitution</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Verbal substitution includes </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2">, with the unusual morphological scatter </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">does, did, doing</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">done.</span><span class="font2"> It operates as a head of verbal group, in the place that is occupied by the lexical verb and its position is always final in the group. In many cases, the verbal substitute </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">do</span><span class="font2"> is parallel to the nominal substitute </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">one</span><span class="font2">. It is shown in following analysis, for example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">THE BYSTANDER [suspiciously] Who </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">told you my people come from Selsey? </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">THE NOTE TAKER. Never you mind. They </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">did</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. [To the girl] How do you come to be up so far east? You were born in Lisson Grove. (Shaw, 1916: 22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The verbal substitution appeares in dialogue above. It appeares in The Note Taker dialogue. The substitution appeared is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">did.</span><span class="font2"> The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">did</span><span class="font2"> is past form from substitution do. The substitution </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">did</span><span class="font2"> in The Note Taker dialogue is used to substitute The Bystander dialogue </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">told you my people come from Selsey?</span><span class="font2"> It is presented anaphorically since it refers back to the previous sentence. Without the substitution mentioned above the full The Note Taker will be; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Never you mind. They </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">told me your people come from Selsey</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. [To the girl] How do you come to be up so far east? You were born in Lisson Grove.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clausal Substitution</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Clausal substitution is a kind of substitution in which the one that is presupposed is not an element within the clause but an entire clause and the contrasting element is provided outside the clause. In the environment it may take either of two forms, positive and negative. The positive is expressed by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> and the negative expressed by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">not</span><span class="font2">. It is shown in the following analysis, for example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">HIGGINS [looking at him much as if he were a pickpocket] I'll take my oath </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ive met you before somewhere</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Where was it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">FREDDY. I dont think </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. (Shaw, 1916: 75)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the dialogue above, clausal substitution occurs in the Freddy dialogue. Clausal substitution </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font2"> appears in the dialogue marked by bold form. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">so </span><span class="font2">in the dialogue is used to substitute for ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ve met you before’</span><span class="font2"> in the Higgins dialogue. It is presented anaphorically since it refers back to the previous sentence. It makes cohesiveness in the dialogue. Without the substitution mentioned above the full Freddy dialogue will be; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I don’t think I’ve met you before somewhere.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis above leads to several conclusion based on the problem being formulated. Repetited words do not always appeared in identical words, it could also appear on different ways, namely, by the substitution as one of cohesive devices. The substitution consists of nominal substitution, verbal substitution and clausal substitution. Those kinds of substitution are used to substitute for the word or clause in the previous sentence although some are used to substitute for the word or clause in the same sentence. The substitution may appear within a sentence or between sentences. If they appear between sentences, they relate one sentence to the other. There are three types of substitution found in the dialogue of the drama Pygmalion, namely nominal substitution, verbal substitution and clausal substitution. The clausal substitution appears the most and followed by verbal substitution and nominal substitution. Therefore, the relation built by the substitution provides cohesion. It shows that the function of substitution is to built up a text, so it can avoid the repetition of words or clauses. The reason as there substitution makes the dialogue of the drama </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion</span><span class="font2"> coherent because it is presented anaphorically. It means that they refer to the preceding text and point reader backward. Substitution is a carrier of some information which differentiates the instance in which it relates by cohesion. It has a relation within the text. A substitution is sort of counter which is used in place of the repetition of a particular item.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Halliday, M.A.K and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in English</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> London: Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Isaacs, William. 2013. Dialogue and the Art of Thinking Together.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.clarku.edu/difficultdialogues/learn/index.cfm"><span class="font2">http://www.clarku.edu/difficultdialogues/learn/index.cfm</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shaw, Bernard. 1916. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pygmalion.</span><span class="font2"> Penguin Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yudhistira, Ramona Inu. 2012. Anaphora. </span><a href="http://tir4.wordpress.com/tag/anaphora/"><span class="font2">http://tir4.wordpress.com/tag/anaphora/</span></a></p>