---
layout: full_article
title: "Gossiping Among the Characters in “Confession of A Shopaholic“"
author: "Ni Made Mitha Suandari, I Made Suastra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">2017: Vol 19.1 Mei 2017:188-197</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Gossiping Among the Characters in “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Confession of A Shopaholic</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Made Mitha Suandari<sup>1*</sup>, I Made Suastra<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Nyoman Seri Malini<sup>3</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">[123]English Department, Faculty of Arts – Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:mithasuandari@gmail.com"><span class="font1">mithasuandari@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:madesuastra@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">madesuastra@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:kmserimalini@yahoo.com"><span class="font1">kmserimalini@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font1">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian dengan judul Bergosip Antara Karakter di “Confession of a Shopaholic” bertujuan untuk mengetahui fitur linguistik pria dan wanita dan fungsi gosip selama sesi gosip di antara karakter dalam film Confession of a Shopaholic. Gosip sering muncul selama percakapan sehari-hari kita dengan orang lain dan itu akan, entah bagaimana, mempengaruhi cara pria dan wanita menggunakan bahasa, mempengaruhi orang dan dipengaruhi oleh orang lain. Data untuk penelitian ini adalah sebuah film berjudul Confession of a Shopaholic, dan dalam mengumpulkan data, metode dokumentasi digunakan. Setelah data dikumpulkan, data-data tersebut dianalisis secara kualitatif untuk menemukan fitur linguistik pria dan wanita nya dalam percakapan karakter berdasarkan jenis gosipnya dan juga untuk menemukan fungsi gosip.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori dari Lakoff (1975) tentang fitur linguistik perempuan, Holmes (2000) tentang fitur linguistik pria, Nevo et al. (dikutip dalam Watson, 2012) tentang jenis gosip, dan Stirling dan Foster (2004) tentang fungsi gosip digunakan untuk menganalisis data. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa dari sepuluh fitur linguistik perempuan, semua diantaranya ditemukan selama sesi gosip pada karakter. Penggunaan intensifier adalah yang paling sering muncul selama percakapan. Dalam film ini, karakter pria cenderung menggunakan tata bahasa yang benar dan juga penggunaan kata yang tegas, yang membuat tata bahasa yang benar dan penggunaan kata yang tegas tidak menjadi fitur linguistik laki-laki maupun perempuan. Di sisi lain, fitur linguistik pria yang muncul hanya penggunaan bahasa tabu dan kata sumpah yang kuat, yang dinyatakan oleh seorang pria dan seorang wanita di film ini. Fungsi gosip yang muncul dalam sesi gosip karakter adalah pertukaran informasi, memperkuat persahabatan, dan mempengaruhi pendapat orang lain. Antara tiga jenis gosip, fitur linguistik perempuan ditemukan mendominasi sesi gosip dibandingkan dengan fitur linguistik laki-laki.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Pria, Wanita, Bahasa, Gosip</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language can be associated as a means for transmitting a message, information, or idea from speaker to hearer in a communication. In different social context an individual will speak in different ways, which is called stylistic variation (Coates, 1986:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">4) . In the way of using language as the medium to communicate, men and women share different styles of language. The linguistic features used by men and women in their speech would characterize their style of language. The differences of women’s and men’s languages are seen in the choice and frequency of lexical items, intonation and other patterns (Lakoff 1975: 49). Also, there is this issue where it is believed in our culture that gossip - an important part of our communicative and “social behavior that nearly everyone experiences, contributes to, and presumably intuitively understands” (Foster, cited in Al-Hindawi &amp;&nbsp;Mirza 2015: 73) - cannot be separated from men and women’s behavior. Therefore, this study tried to analyze the linguistic features or the characteristics of men’s and women’s language in their daily conversations, especially during their gossip session, and the functions of gossip that they used during the conversations among the characters in the chosen movie.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Since linguistic features are what characterize men’s and women’s language, some related theories such as one from Robin Lakoff (1975) which is about women’s linguistic features and by Holmes (2000) about men’s linguistic features were used to support the data. This topic was interesting because gossip is considered an activity that everyone contributes to and appears very often during people’s daily conversation and we all know how such a language that we use during our conversation can be powerful and convincing. Other than that, a word may represent how someone feels and think about something and such a word may have a hidden meaning behind it. The gossip session would show what relationships the characters have with the other. The data source was a comedy-romance genre movie entitled “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Confessions of a Shopaholic</span><span class="font1">” released on February 9, 2009, with the main character named Rebecca Bloomwood, a fun-loving woman who is really good at shopping. She would love to work at the city's top fashion magazine but, so far, has not been able to get her foot in the door. From this movie, the focus was to analyze the conversations, which are considered to be gossip, produced by the main character and some of her friends she has gossip with and match them with the linguistic features of men’s and women’s language theories and the functions of gossip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the explanation above about men’s and women’s language that comes from conversations that involved gossiping, two problems occurred in this study. The problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the characteristics of men’s and women’s language used in gossiping among the characters in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Confession of a Shopaholic”</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What functions of gossip appeared during the characters’ gossip session in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Confession of a Shopaholic”</span><span class="font1">?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This article is made for two aims:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to find out the characteristics of men’s and women’s language used in gossiping among the characters in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Confession of A Shopaholic”</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to find out the functions of gossip that appeared during the characters’ gossip session in the movie </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Confession of A Shopaholic”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data was a comedy, romance movie entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Confessions of A Shopaholic” </span><span class="font1">released in the U.S on February 9, 2009. This movie was directed by P.J. Hogan, and the movie script was written by Tracey Jackson, Tim Firth, and Kayla Alpert. The data were collected using the documentation method and it came in two forms; primary and secondary data. The primary data was the movie itself, and the transcription became the secondary data. The method used to analyze the data was the qualitative method. The analysis focused on the characters’ utterances and would be analyzed using related theories, mostly proposed by Lakoff (1975), Holmes (2000), Nevo et al. (cited in Watson, 2012), and Foster (2004).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Findings and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Information Gossip</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">Ryan, a worker at Successful Saving who is also a friend to Luke, was</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">playing an indoor golf in his office. Ryan called Luke to go to his office to discuss about how he could have brought Rebecca, the new journalist, to a finance seminar because Ryan thought Rebecca could damage the company by how honest she was to everyone. The conversation between Luke and Ryan will be shown below</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oh, yeah. Nice!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I just got a call from Jeff Kanter at Comintex.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">They're having their stockholders' meeting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yes, I sent someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yeah, you did.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A real find, actually, the girl I sent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">She's sparky, honest. Exactly the type that I was hoping to find (talking about &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rebecca that he took to the seminar with). I assume that's why</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Edgar West got &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you to recruit me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Damn it!</span><span class="font1"> (curses because his golf ball misses)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ooh. Slice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I hired you to fix the bottom line of this magazine, and we</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">know the key to that is advertising revenue.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, you hired me to create a product that sells, not to sell a product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What if I'm with Edgar West. We're playing golf, and he</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">just turns to me, </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sort of</span><span class="font1"> nonchalantly, and says, &quot;Hey, I'd like to know why Luke Brandon decided to hire a journalist &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who could damage the commercial</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">interests of Dantay- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;West.&quot; What do you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">think about that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I haven't, because she won't.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Page 25, no. dialogue (75)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ryan swore by using the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">damn it</span><span class="font1"> with high intonation. The swear word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">damn it</span><span class="font1"> was not addressed to Luke, but because he missed the golf ball. The swear word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">damn it</span><span class="font1"> is one of men’s linguistic features based on Holmes (2000) theory. Ryan probably felt that he was allowed to swear in front of Luke because the situation during the conversation was informal because it was between friends. Their relationship at work did not look like between a boss and an employee. The swear word was used to express his solidarity and maintain his social relationship with Luke. Other than that, Ryan also uttered the hedge </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sort of</span><span class="font1"> while talking to Luke to make Luke imagining of what would happen if their boss asked why they sent a journalist that could damage the company. The hedge </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sort of</span><span class="font1"> was identified as the women’s linguistic feature by Lakoff (1975), but it appeared that Ryan has also used it. It was probably because the hedge </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sort of</span><span class="font1"> was the best option for him to express his uncertainty about what he was imagining and saying to Luke.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation between Luke and Ryan was considered social information gossip which happened with no presence of the third party, Rebecca. The topic of their conversation was about how Rebecca could damage the company they worked at. Ryan felt anxious once he found out that Luke brought Rebecca to be a representative to a seminar and was being all innocent asking about stuff that were not supposed to be asked in front of the audience. Ryan feared that Rebecca’s innocence in that seminar could damage the reputation of the company. The function of gossip from Luke and Ryan’s conversation here is to strengthen their friendship in individual level. Individual level of friendship means gossip that can be a way of advertising one’s own advantages, as a friend, an ally or even a mate (De Vos, Dunbar, and Foster cited in Al-Hindawi &amp;&nbsp;Mirza, 2015).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(2)</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Luke and Rebecca have just attended a seminar together. In the seminar, Luke tried to make Rebecca to ask one of the speakers, who worked in a huge company, about their investment system. Luke made Rebecca ask a hard-hitting question on that</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">guy, which then he could not answer because it was considered to be a question that would reveal his company’s secret. When the seminar ended, Luke talked with Rebecca about how it went, and the conversation is shown below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OK. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You know why we did that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Some kind of cruel initiation right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Listen to this. Security can mean different things to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">different people. For some, it's going to a party wearing the right shoes. This might &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;leave you feeling secure for an evening, but have a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">crippling effect on you in later &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I wrote that.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Luke: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You wrote that.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Now, what firms like Comintex thrive on is an endemic lack of public understanding. They get away with murder because...</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Maisie with a root beer and a $200 investment portfolio, what does she know?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What does she actually know about what those guys are doing? What she's told.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And if the magazines she looks to for answers aren't asking the right questions, it &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;isn't good for Maisie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I want you to tell the truth in a way that Maisie can understand. Now, go home, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;write me an initial outline and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e-mail it to me by 3:00.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">OK?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Page 24-25, no. dialogue (73)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation between Rebecca and Luke as shown above showed that Luke used one of women’s linguistic features (Lakoff, 1975), which was the rising intonation on declaratives. Luke used it in his statement “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">OK</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You know why we did that?”.</span><span class="font1"> Luke stated that statement in order to get a confirmation from Rebecca on whether Rebecca knew the reason why Luke made her ask that hard, yet rude question in front of the audience of that previous seminar or not. After that, Rebecca was also seen to use the rising intonation in her statement “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Some kind of cruel initiation right?”</span><span class="font1"> in order to get a confirmation from Luke if she was getting an initiation in her new job or not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This conversation is considered a social information gossip because Luke and Rebecca mentioned social information referring to their job and also they talked about someone who was not present during the conversation, Maisie. Then, from the conversation that both Luke and Rebecca had, they could get new information, especially Rebecca, about how to work as a journalist for a saving magazine. They could also strengthen their friendship as colleagues by sharing information that one lacks of. Luke has also now influenced the way Rebecca thought about how business worked for the field they work in. Luke influenced Rebecca instructively (Dunbar cited in Al-Hindawi &amp;&nbsp;Mirza, 2015) by giving her some advice.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Achievement-Related Gossip</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(1)</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When Rebecca got the job at Successful Savings magazine, she went to tell her best friend, Suze. But Suze was surprised when she heard it because all this past time Rebecca only told her how she only wanted to get to a fashion magazine named Alette magazine. The gossip session between Suze and Rebecca is shown below.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Suze: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You took a job at a savings magazine?</span><span class="font1"> You?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I know it sounds bad, but it is, in fact, part of a </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font1"> structured plan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suze: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yeah, that's great, but then in a lot of ways it's kinda not great. What do</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">they call it when an animal rights person gets trampled to death by a cow? I don't think &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;there is a word for that.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Page 19, no. dialogue (57)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above showed the use of rising intonation and intensifier. When Rebecca told Suze that she took the job at Successful Savings, a saving magazine, Suze seemed not to believe what she had heard. Suze rose her intonation when she said “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">You took a job at a savings magazine?</span><span class="font1"> You?</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">”</span><span class="font1"> because she could not believe that her best friend would take a job at a saving magazine in which she had no experience and passion about. The rising intonation during Suze’s statement showed that Suze was seeking for a confirmation from Rebecca and also she underestimated Rebecca for getting a job which she had no experience about. There also occurred the use of intensifier in Rebecca’s statement. Rebecca used the intensifier </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">very</span><span class="font1"> to show the strong assertion. It matched Lakoff’s statement (1975) that intensifiers such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">so</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">very </span><span class="font1">were usually used to strengthen an assertion and to hedge on one’s feelings also to show strong emotions. The intensifier showed her strong emotion during stating her words, which she hoped that would make everyone believe in what she was saying.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This conversation between Rebecca and Suze as shown above is categorized as achievement-related gossip which fulfilled the requirement to be called gossip because they talked about every day details of someone. Rebecca and Suze were talking about Rebecca’s newest job. But Suze questioned it that Rebecca could get a job at Successful Savings magazine, which she has no experience about. This gossip session has the function of influencing others. Rebecca wanted to influence Suze competitively as Schmidt (2004) said that the influence of gossip can be called competitive when people “attempt to gain control in situations, purposefully influencing the attitudes and actions of others in a specific direction”. In this case, Rebecca wanted to make Suze think that she could control of the situation she was in.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physical Appearance Gossip</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(1)</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Successful Savings staff were now back from the conference in Miami. Rebecca was still feeling disappointed in Luke that he went out with Alicia last night. Rebecca did not like the fact that Luke and Alicia might have a special relationship. The next day, there would be a dinner meeting held by the Dantay-West management which invited some businessmen and businesswomen to it. Rebecca wanted to look good in that event, and also to impress Luke. Suze helped Rebecca choosing her best dress to wear.</span></p></li></ul>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Oh my gosh</span><span class="font1">, I forgot I even had this dress.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Suze:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">And Fluke would love you in that dress.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Don't talk about Fluke.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Suze:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Why? What happened?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Alicia </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bitch</span><span class="font1"> Longlegs is what happened.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Suze:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">I hate her. Who is she?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Rebecca:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">She's the girl with the perfect everything.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Suze:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Well, well, Luke is a raging </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">moron</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He's gonna be so bummed when you show up at the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ball looking like a total knockout in that dress.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">You're gonna be a total &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hottie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Page 46, no. dialogue (142)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above showed two words considered as the avoidance of strong swear word and also the use of taboo language or swear words spoken by Suze and Rebecca. The first avoidance of strong swear word, which was considered as women’s linguistic feature, was stated by Rebecca in her utterance “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Oh my gosh</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I forgot I even had this dress</span><span class="font1">”. The words </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Oh my gosh</span><span class="font1"> were considered as light swear words (Lakoff, 1975). They were considered to be equal as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">oh dear, my goodness.</span><span class="font1"> The second avoidance of strong swear word was uttered by Suze. Suze uttered the word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">moron</span><span class="font1"> which she referred to Luke, probably for paying more attention on Alicia, not Rebecca. Light swear words were believed to be used more often by women, to express their strong emotions towards something, than men. Men usually use stronger swear words like </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">damn, shit</span><span class="font1">, etc. After that, Rebecca was heard to use the strong swear word </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bitch</span><span class="font1"> to refer to Alicia, whom she hated. The use of swear words is considered one of men’s linguistic feature, but Rebecca used it too to express her strong emotion on Alicia. Rebecca hated Alicia very much for trying hard in getting Luke’s attention. Rebecca referred the word ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bitch</span><span class="font1">’ to Alicia when she gossiped about her with Suze. Rebecca felt free to use swear word around Suze, her best friend, to express her solidarity with Suze.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation above was considered gossip that refers to physical appearance (talking about clothes). The topic discussed about the possibility of personal affairs</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">between Luke and Alicia with absent third party and in intimate situation between two best friends. Suze and Rebecca were gossiping about someone named Alicia for always hitting onto Luke. From the gossip session they had, they could exchange information and strengthen their friendship. It is said to exchange information because Rebecca told Suze about how she felt about Luke at that moment, and in exchange, Suze told Rebecca that she hated Alicia from all the stories Rebecca had told her. From telling each other such information as mentioned before, they could strengthen their friendship individually level as best friends.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study discussed about the gossip session among the characters in “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Confession of a Shopaholic</span><span class="font1">” movie to find out the men’s and women’s language, and also to find the function of gossip in their conversation. The results of the discussion showed that the gossip session between the characters in the chosen movie were mostly categorized as social information gossip, with 15 (fifteen) conversations. The achievement-related gossip was found with five conversations, and lastly the physical appearance gossip with four conversations.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Between the three types of gossip as mentioned earlier, women’s linguistic features were dominating all of them. The men’s linguistic features that occurred during the gossip session between the characters were the use of taboo language and strong swear words that occurred in social information gossip and in physical appearance gossip. Meanwhile, the women’s linguistic features that occurred were ten out of ten, and the use of intensifier was the most often to appear in women’s conversations. The women’s linguistic features were also found in men’s dialogues especially for the hypercorrect grammar and the use of emphatic stress. This made hypercorrect grammar and the use of emphatic stress, which were once considered women’s linguistic features (Lakoff, 1975), became neither men’s nor women’s linguistic features because both women and men use it quiet frequently in this movie. The analysis has come up with only the three functions of gossip; the exchange of information, friendship, and to influence others.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Ahmed, Sara. 2010. “Analysing Women’s Talk and Gossip between Two Female Friends”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of School of English Studies</span><span class="font1">. Volume 3, page 114. Nottingham: The University of Nottingham.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Al-Hindawi &amp;&nbsp;Mirza. 2015. “A Pragmatic Study of Gossip in Richard Brinsely Sheridan’s The School for Scandal”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of English Linguistics</span><span class="font1">, Volume 5, Number 4.Canadian Center of Science and Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Astarini, Ni Nyoman Dwi. 2006. “The Analysis of Women Language in “Erin Brokovich”” (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beauvoir, Simone de. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Second Sex, trans.</span><span class="font1"> H. M. Parshley, New York: Vintage Books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Baumeister, R. L. Z., &amp;&nbsp;Vohs, K. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gossip as Cultural Learning</span><span class="font1">. In K. Douglas (Ed.), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Review of General Psychology</span><span class="font1">. Pennsylvania: Educational Publishing Foundations. Available from </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.111"><span class="font1">http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.111</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Coates, Jennifer. 1986. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men and Language: A Sociolinguistics Account of Sex Differences in Language</span><span class="font1">. New York: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fishman, Pamela. 1978. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Interaction: The Work Women Do</span><span class="font1">. U.K: Macmillan Education U.K.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foster, E. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Research on Gossip: Taxonomy, Methods, and Future Directions. In K. Douglas (Ed.), Review of General Psychology</span><span class="font1">. Pennsylvania: Educational Publishing Foundations. Available from</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.78"><span class="font1"> http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-</span></a><span class="font1"></span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.78"><span class="font1">2680.8.2.78</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hall, J.A. 2011. “Sex Differences in Friendship Expectations: A Meta-analysis”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Social and Personal Relationship</span><span class="font1">, Volume 28, page 723-747. Sage Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. Malaysia: Longman Group UK Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistic 2nd Edition</span><span class="font1">. New Zealand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. 2013. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men, and Politeness</span><span class="font1">. USA: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hymes, D. H. 1972.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">'Models of the interaction of language and social life'</span><span class="font1">, in J. J.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Gumperz and D. Hymes (eds) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp;&nbsp;Winston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lakoff, Robin. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Women’s Place</span><span class="font1">. New York: Harper and Row Publishers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muñoz,</span><a href="https://www.scribd.com/user/57107647/Jessa-Mae-Munoz"><span class="font1"> Jessa Mae. 2012. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">C</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">onfessions of a Shopaholic Script.</span><span class="font1"> Scribd Publisher. Available from </span><a href="https://www.scribd.com/document/184339382/Confessions-of-a-Shopaholic-Script"><span class="font1">https://www.scribd.com/document/184339382/Confessions-of-a-Shopaholic-Script</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford Dictionary, 4th Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pratiwi, Desak Putu Eka. 2007. “The Analysis of Women Language in Oprah Winfrey Talk Show” (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sari, I.G.A.B.P. 2006. “The Analysis of Men and Women’s Language Styles with Reference to Interview Articles of Seventeen and Cosmogirl Magazine” (undergraduate thesis). Denpasar: Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Schmidt, A. 2004</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. The Rhetorical Nature of Gossip: A Burkean Dramatistic Perspective.</span><span class="font1"> Platteville: University of Wisconsin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Watson, D. C. 2012. “Gender Differences in Gossip and Friendship”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sex Roles: A Journal of Research</span><span class="font1">. Volume 66, Number 1/2. Springer Science+Business Media</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yerkovich, S. 1977. “Gossip as a way of Speaking”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Communication</span><span class="font1">, Volume 26, page192-196. Available from</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1977.tb01817.x"><span class="font1"> http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-</span></a><span class="font1"></span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1977.tb01817.x"><span class="font1">2466.1977.tb01817.x</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">197</span></p>