---
layout: full_article
title: "NOUN PHRASE AND ITS TRANSLATION PROCEDURE IN THE FAULT IN OUR STARS"
author: "Ni Putu Desi Ratna Pertiwi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.2 Pebruari 2016: 66-72</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NOUN PHRASE AND ITS TRANSLATION PROCEDURE IN </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">THE FAULT IN OUR STARS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Desi Ratna Pertiwi<sup>1</sup>, Franciscus Made Brata<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Sedeng<sup>3 </sup>email: </span><a href="mailto:ratnapertiwi88@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ratnapertiwi88@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul Noun Phrase and Its Translation Procedure in “The Fault in Our Stars”. Pembahasan dalam skripsi ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis jenis frase benda dan prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan dalam menterjemahkan frase benda dari bahasa sumber ke bahasa sasaran. Khususnya, penulisan ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis bagaimana membentuk arti yang setara dari frase benda sebagai bagian dari bahasa dalam dua bahasa yang berbeda dimana keduanya memiliki karakteristik yang berbeda. Data yang dibutuhkan dalam skripsi ini diambil dari novel yang berjudul “The Fault in Our Stars”. Data yang diperoleh kemudian diidentifikasi and dianalisis berdasarkan jenis frase benda dan prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan. Data yang dikumpulkan tergolong kualitatif yang dianalisis menggunakan teori prosedur penerjemahan yang dikemukakan oleh Vinay dan Darbelnet (1958), mereka mengemukakan bahwa prosedur penerjemah dibedakan menjadi dua keategori yaitu penerjemahan langsung dan penerjemahan tak langsung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini menunjukkan bahwa frase benda dapat dikategorikan sebagai frase benda sederhana dan frase benda kompleks. Enam dari tujuh prosedur penerjemah dapat ditemukan dalam data yaitu, calque, literal translation, transposition, modulation, dan adaptation. Sedangkan, borrowing tidak ditemukan karena hanya dapat ditemukan di tingkat kata, bukan frase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Frase benda, Prosedur Penerjemah, Penerjemahan langsung, Penerjemahan tak langsung, Kesetaraan dalam penerjemahan</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The noun phrases used by the speaker of a language can be either simple or complex ones. As noun phrase is part of a language, it has particular rules in constructing it which can be different from one language to another. This can become a challenge when someone needs to translate certain noun phrase from source language into target language. He/she has to find words in the target language which is natural and represent the meaning of the source language. In doing so, translator has particular</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">techniques which he/she considers appropriate to be applied. It is interesting to see how English noun phrases, either simple or complex ones, are translated into Indonesian Language as both of the languages have different characteristics. They differ in terms of vocabulary and rules. Based on this phenomenon, this thesis was mainly conducted to find out the types of English noun phrases and how they are translated into Indonesian Language as the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of noun phrases are found in the novel of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What translation procedures are applied in translating the noun phrase found in the novel of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font2"> into Indonesian Language?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the types of noun phrases found in the novel of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the translation procedures applied in translating the noun phrases found in the novel of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font2"> into Indonesian Language.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Metodology</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are three important points regarding research methods. They are data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method of technique of analysing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data needed for this thesis were obtained from two novels entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars.</span><span class="font2"> The novels were taken from English and Indonesian version. The English version was written by John Green as a source language published in 2012 by Penguin Group in 318 pages. Furthermore, the Indonesian version was translated by Ingrid Dwijani Nimpoeno published in 2012 by Qanita in 422 pages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To obtain the data needed for the discussion, documentation method was applied with several techniques. The first technique is reading technique in which the novel was read from the beginning. The second technique is marking technique. Then, the data were classified using table that consists of several columns indicating the noun phrase of the source language, the noun of the target language, the types of noun phrase and the procedure applied in translating the source language into the target language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data that had been input into computer were analysed by applying qualitative method. The data were firstly analysed based on its types; the explanation of why a particular noun phrase is given by providing explanation on the modification possessed by the noun phrase itself. Then, the translation procedure applied were analysed by looking at the noun phrase and its Indonesian translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This section provides analysis of noun phrase and the procedure applied to translate it into the target language. To find out and explain the translation procedure used, theory proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958) was applied.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(01) </span><span class="font2">It occured to me why they call it </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">eye contact</span><span class="font2"> (Green, 2012)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the category of noun phrase, “eye contact” is categorised as simple noun phrase as it only consists of pre-modifier and head noun. In this phrase, ‘eye’ acts as the modifier; while ‘contact’ acts as the head of the noun phrase. Since the modifier precedes the head, it is called pre-modifier. It can also be noticed that the modifier is a noun. This means this noun phrase indicates noun that modifies another noun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the view point of the translation procedure, the translation procedure applied is direct translation procedure, particularly lexical calque. As direct translation, the data above show lexical parallelism, in which all elements of the source language can be appropriately translated in the target language. Specifically, by lexical calque, it means the target language borrows source language expression by translating its element literally. Furthermore, it can be seen that there is an adjustment in the case of the structure. In the source language, the modifier precedes the head; while in the target language it follows the head. In other words, there is a reverse structure happening in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">this case. This also indicates that the source language is translated by respecting the common structure recognized in the target language. Therefore, the category of calque occurs in this data is that of lexical calque.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(02) </span><span class="font2">I found </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">a bench surrounded by an Irish Gifts store</span><span class="font2">, the Fountain Pen Emporium, and a baseball-cap-outlet-a corner of the mall even Kaitlyn would never shop, and started reading </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Midnight Dawns</span><span class="font2">. (Green, 2012)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“a bench surrounded by an Irish Gifts store” is considered to be complex noun phrase since it consists of pre-modification, head, and post modification. The premodification is indicated by the determiner ‘a’ which is specifically belongs to indefinite article. The head of this noun phrase is the word ‘bench’. Meanwhile, the post modification is signified by ‘surrounded by an Irish Gift Store”. The constituent “surrounded by an Irish Gift Store” can be considered to be non-finite constituent: “which is surrounded by an Irish Gift Store” as it is not affected by the tenses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This phrase is translated literally into target language as “sebuah bangku yang dikelilingi toko cendera mata Irlandia”. The words in the source language can be appropriately represented by the words available in the target language. The article ‘a’ is translated into ‘sebuah’, ‘bench’ becomes ‘bangku’. Meanwhile, “surrounded by an Irish Gift Store” is translated into “yang dikelilingi toko cendera mata Irlandia”. This condition suggests that the meaning indicated in the source language can be expressed properly as the target language provides words that are considered to be the equivalence of the source language. Besides, the grammar, in this case the structure of the source language, can be considered parallel to that of the target language. It can be illustrated with the figure below</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;bench &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;surrounded by an Irish</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gifts store</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sebuah &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bangku &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;yang dikelilingi oleh toko</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">cendera mata Irlandia</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the figure above, it can be viewed that the source language text is translated grammatically and idiomatically appropriate in the target language. That is why the translation procedure applied is considered being direct translation, precisely literal translation procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis of the data in the previous chapter disclosed several essential inference deducted from this study. It can be concluded that both basic and complex types of noun phrasesare found in the data source of the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars</span><span class="font2">, although not each and every noun phrase discovered in the novel, either complex or basic is analyzed, all of which are taken as the samples here are the representatives that convey how a noun phrase is utilized. Due to the features of the basic noun phrase being much simplistic and unadorned, the occurence of the basic noun phrase themselves are much more common and frequent compared to the complex ones, which prevailed noticeably less. It is also noteworthy that the difference in frequency of occurence is quite significant in numbers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The noun phrases found are translated by using several procedures, they are: calque and literal translation which belongs to direct translation procedure and transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation which belongs to oblique translation. Direct translation procedure indicates there is parallelism in terms of either the lexicon or the structure or both of them. Thus, the translation can be made grammatically and idiomatically appropriate. Meanwhile, oblique translation procedure indicates the existence of gap between the source and target language which makes the translator has to do some efforts as adding additional information to make the meaning of the source language easier to catch or finding more idiomatic or natural expression in the target language to transfer the meaning indicated by the source language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that both the identification of the noun phrase as well as the analysis of translation procedures are both substantial keys necessary to exert in order to conduct a translation with acceptable equivalence and plausible accuracy. The analysis of both identification of the noun phrase and the procedures of translation had proven that the importance of neither could not be neglected. Slight changes of the translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">into the target language is sometimes unavoidable as translations went through the intricate steps and a plethora of process in order to find the equivalent meaning that is both culturally acceptable and comprehensively accurate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Arts and C. Meyer. 1995 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The verb in contemporary English: theory and description</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 203-217.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Asriyani, NOvia. 2010. An Analysis of Translation Procedures in the Novel Adventure of Tom Swayer by Mark Twain (Thesis). State Islamic University Syarif Hidayatullah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fawcett, P. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Language</span><span class="font2">. UK: St. Jerome</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Green, John. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars.</span><span class="font2"> Bandung: Qanita</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Green, John. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Fault in Our Stars.</span><span class="font2"> United States: Penguin Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hatim, B and J. Munday.2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Translation : an advanced resource book</span><span class="font2">. Cornwall: TJ International Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jaya, I NyomanPurnawan. 2009. The Analysis of English Noun Phrase Structures Found in Tropical Living Magazine and International Bali Post. Denpasar:Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, Mildred. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence Second Edition</span><span class="font2">. University Press of America</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Saputra, Dimas Erlangga. 2012. Adaptation and Shift Technique used to Translate Words, Phrase, and Idioms in Brown’s The Lost Symbol into Indonesian (Undergraduate Thesis). Denpasar :Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sari, JunitaRatna. 2013. Borrowing in Diary of a Wimpy Kid and its Translation in Diary Si BocahTengil. Denpasar :Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sari, K. Fachwinalia. 2009. An Analysis of Translation Procedures of Translating Computer Term in Andrew S. Tanenbaum 3<sup>rd</sup> Computer Networks into Bahasa Indonesia (Thesis). University of Sumatera Utara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Shakernia, Shabnam. 2011. Comparative Study of the Persian Subtitles of American Historical Drama and Romantic Comedy Movies with the Originals. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, Vol 1, No.6, pp 740-743. Finland: Academy Publisher</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Siewierska, A. 1997 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Constituent Order in the Languages of Europe: Eurotyp 20-1</span><span class="font2">. Berlin: New York: Mouton de Gruyter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sofiyani, Nelly. 2011. An Analysis of Translation Procedures in the Translated Business Terms of Ricky W Griffin’s Business Eight Edition in Bahasa Indonesia (Thesis). University of Sumatera Utara</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Vinay, Paul and Jean Darbelnet.2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Methodology for Translation</span><span class="font2"> in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font2">. Routledge : London and New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">72</span></p>