---
layout: full_article
title: "THE STRUCTURE AND MEANING OF DISCOURSE  ON THE JAKARTA POST’s  SPORTS ARTICLES"
author: "I Gede Pasek Suryadi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: 22-28</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE STRUCTURE AND MEANING OF DISCOURSE ON THE JAKARTA</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>POST’s SPORTS ARTICLES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">I Gede Pasek Suryadi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">email: </span><a href="mailto:paseksuryadi13@gmail.com"><span class="font3">paseksuryadi13@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">English Department Faculty of Letters and Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian iniberjudul&quot;</span><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Structure and Meaning of Discourse on The Jakarta Post’s Sports Articles”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menemukan elemen dari struktur wacana dalam artikel olahraga TheJakarta Post. Lebih khusus, hal ini dimaksudkan untuk menganalisis makna elemen dari struktur wacana dalam artikel olahraga The Jakarta Post.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini diambil dari The Jakarta Post, Selasa16 April 2013, koran berbahasa inggris yang dianalisis berdasarkan teori tanda oleh Dijk (1997). Data dianalisis untuk menemukan Makrostruktur, Suprastruktur, dan Mikrostruktur dari artikel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa makrostruktur dari artikel adalah &quot;WIN dan MATCH&quot;. The Suprastruktur membantu pembaca untuk mengetahui pengenalan, substansi dan kesimpulan, di mana bagian kalimat yang ditempatkan di awal, atau sebagian ditempatkan di akhir. Mikrostruktur menunjukkan kata atau kalimat yang sama yang mencakup aspek semantik atau sintaksis. Metafora dan ekspresi dalam mikrostruktur membantu pembaca untuk memahami apa yang dimaksudkan oleh penulis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Newspaper is one of mass media that has an important role to inform everything happening in the world to the readers. Sport news is one of the most valuable news that is interesting to be read everyday and it may become the reason why people read the newspaper. An article in the newspaper is a form of text that contains a lot of information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Dijk (1997) as suggested above, such discursive influence may be due to context as well as to the structures of text and talk themselves. Contextually, control derives from the fact that people understand and represent not only text and talk, but also the whole communicative situation. Thus, CDA typically</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">studies how context features (such as the properties of language users of powerful groups) influence the ways members of dominated groups define the communicative situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">A text is characterized as pragmatically meaningful if it is coherent and significant. There are two problems that are discussed in this paper:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the elements of the structure of discourse found in sports articles of The Jakarta Post?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the meaning of the elements structure of discourse in sports articles of The Jakarta Post?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Generally, this study is aimed to apply the discourse theory purposed by Dijk (1997) as the basic theory in analyzing the sport articles. The analysis of the English text in the sport articles in The Jakarta Post is aimed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find the elements of the structure of discourse in sports articles of The Jakarta Post.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning of elements of the structure of discourse in sports articles of The Jakarta Post.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Elements Structure of Discourse</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Macrostructure</span></p></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The theme of article 1 is “WIN”, and the words that evidence in this research will be analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the first paragraph two words were found “Outclassing and Jubilant” according to the theme and the topic of article 1.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the fifth paragraph two words were found “Revelry and Exuberant” according to the theme and the topic of article 1.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superstructure</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence that contains overall meaning subject or object, which part is placed at the beginning, or which part is placed later will analyze as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the first paragraph, the sentence which is organized by conventional schemata and has arrangement as introduction of the article is “Manchester United, resumed its charge to the Premier League title by Outclassing stoke 2-0 on Sunday”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the fourth paragraph, the sentence that is organized by conventional schemata and has arrangement as substance is “United restored its 15-point gap at the top over Manchester city”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the fourteen paragraph, the sentence that is organized by conventional schemata and has arrangement as conclusion is “It was relief but it was an important time in the game, said Van Persie”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Microstructure</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The use of sentence using Semantic and Syntactic aspect will be analyzed as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the first paragraph a sentence using semantic and syntactic meaning was found, that is “resumed it’s charge to the premier league”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the third paragraph the sentence that using </span><span class="font3">semantic and syntactic meaning is “It was a great celebrations as it brought the emotion of the player and the fans together”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the fifth paragraph the sentence that was found using semantic and syntactic meaning is “who celebrated all three spectacular goals in his teams”.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The Microstructure also has elements such as Metaphor and Expressions. And the example of word or sentence will describe as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.3. 1 Metaphor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence that contains Metaphor will be described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The title of the first article has including Metaphor “Man United Resumes title surge with Win at Stoke”, because in the sentence that use word that has a lot of meaning and this word also can compare with the other word.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the first paragraph the sentence that evident containing Metaphor is “resumed its charge to the Premier League”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the fourth paragraph the sentence that evident including Metaphor is “United restored its 15-point gap at the top over Manchester City”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4.1.3. 2 Expressions</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence that evident containing Expression will be describe as bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the third paragraph the sentence that containing Expressions is “He nearly killed me – he forget I’m 71!a smiling Fergusson said”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the seventh paragraph the sentence that including Expressions is “It’s the second pair of trouser I’ve lost – but I would like to lose my trousers every weekend”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of the Elements of the Structure of Discourse</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Articles 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Man United resumes title surge with win at Stoke</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Manchester United resumed its charge to the Premier League title by outclassing Stoke 2-0 on Sunday</span><span class="font3">, with Robin van Persie ending his twomonth goal drought on a day of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">jubilant </span><span class="font3">celebrations involving managers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Netherlands striker hugged manager Alex Fergusson and lifted him into the air after converting a 66<sup>th</sup> –minute penalty to wrap up a dominant win, sparked by Michael Carrick,s early goal at Britannia Stadium.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">He nearly killed me– he forget I’m 71!” a smiling Fergusson said</span><span class="font3">. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">It was a great celebrations as it brought the emotion of the player and the fans together</span><span class="font3">. We really did celebrate it.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">United restored its 15-point gap at the top over Manchester City</span><span class="font3">, which plays Chelsea in the FA Cup semifinals later on Sunday. The leaders need a maximum seven points from their remaining six games to claim a 20<sup>th </sup>championship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">revelry </span><span class="font3">of Van Persie and Fergusson was nothing compared to that of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">exuberant </span><span class="font3">Sunderland Manager Paolo Di Canio, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">who celebrated all three spectacular goals in his teams </span><span class="font3">vital 3-0 win at Northeast rival Newcastle with show-stopping theatrics on the sidelines.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">By delivering repeated first pumps, sliding on his knees and joining in group hugs after goals by Stephane Sessegnon, Adam Johnson and David Vaughan, Di Canio demonstrated the passion and enthusiasm he’s been asked to instill in players for the run-in.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">It’s the second pair of trouser I’ve lost – but I would like to lose my trousers every weekend</span><span class="font3">. I would lose all my money, to be honest,” said Di Canio, who won his first match as Sunderland Manager after opening with a loss at Chelsea last weekend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The situation at the bottom is getting increasingly tight. Reading and Queens Park Ranger are all but Relegated and Wigan is third from bottom, three points below Sunderland, Stoke and Aston Villa but having played two games fewer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Its another story at the top.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The way it is heading, United is likely to be celebrating a 13<sup>th</sup> Premier League title either at Home to Aston Villa on April 22 or away at Arsenal on April 28 and is on </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">course to match or beat Chelsea’s record haul of 95 points </span><span class="font3">from the 2004 – 05 season. United has 80.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The win over Stoke was United’s 26<sup>th</sup> in 32 games and was never in doubt from the moment Carrick prodded in from close range </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">in the fourth minute after a spot of pinball on the penalty area following Van Persie’s in-swinging corner</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">With Wayne Rooney prompting play in the unusual position of central midfield</span><span class="font3">, United always carried a threat but needed Van Persie’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">penalty to finally see off Stoke, which has now won just one of its last 14 games.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">It was relief but it was an important time in the game,” said Van Persie</span><span class="font3">, who had gone nine games without a goal stretching back to Feb.10. “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I had to score that one and thank-fully it went in</span><span class="font3">. The relief of a couple of weeks came out I would say.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to the theory propose by Van Dijk (1997:18), Critical Discourse Analysis can be divided into three types such as Macrostructure, Superstructure, and Microstructure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">From the analysis of the data in the elements of the structure of Critical Discourse Analysis found in sport articles of the Jakarta Post and the meaning of Elements structure of Critical Discourse Analysis in sport articles of the Jakarta post, there are some conclusions that can be formulated which are relevant as the answer to the problems of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The meaning of elements structure of Discourse in sport articles of the Jakarta Post is described as follows: Macrostructure helps the readers understand the theme or topic of the newspaper focused on global meaning. Superstructure helps the readers know the introduction, substance and conclusion, which is part of the sentence which is placed at the beginning, or what part are placed later on the newspaper. Microstructure helps the readers understand similar word or sentence that includes semantic or syntactic aspect. Therefore the metaphor and expressions in the microstructure help the readers understand what the writer means. All of the aspect of Microstructure is presented as the theory for analyzing the data source.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Amin, Musthafa. 2009. A Critical Discourse Analysis of Gender Stereotyping in IT’S A BOY THING Movie thesis</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Malang : English Letter and Language Department Faculty of Humanities and Culture The State Islamic University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dijk, Teun A. Van. 1997. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ideology and Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font3">. Ideology Symposium Oxford, September 2004.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eriyanto. 2001. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Wacana</span><span class="font3">. LKiS Yogyakarta Gambiran UH V/48 A, Yogyakarta 55161</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Echols, M. John. Dan Shadily Hassan. 2008. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An English-Indonesian Dictionary. </span><span class="font3">Jakarta : PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Faradila, Fisma. 2008.A Critical Discourse Analysis of Gender Bias in Mona Lisa Smile Film. Malang :English Letter and Language Department Faculty of Humanities and Culture The State Islamic University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">HajiMohammadi, Ali. 2011. Critical Analysis of Women’s Representation in TV Advertisements from a Cultural Studies Perspective</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Iran :PhD Candidate, Cultural and Media</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday, M.A.K. and Ruquiya Hassan. 1985: 53.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Text, and Text Social Semantic Perspective.</span><span class="font3"> Victoria : Deakin University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kholishoh,Lilik Nur. 2010. A Critical Discourse Analysis on Valkyrie</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> Malang : EnglishLetters and Language Department Facultyof HumanismandCulture The State Islamic University Maulana Malik Ibrahimof Malang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rosidi. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Meaning of Discourse is not Limited to The Meaning of its Words and Sentences</span><span class="font3"> : A Reactionary Ideological Variation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Approach to Discourse.</span><span class="font3"> USA : Main Street Cambridge, Oxford OX4 1JF</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wodak, Ruth. 1970. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Critical Linguistics and Critical Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font3">. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publ. Co</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">28</span></p>