---
layout: full_article
title: "GLOBAL-LOCAL ENVIRONMENT CERTIFICATION AT FIVE STAR HOTELS  IN TOURISM AREA OF NUSA DUA, BALI"
author: "Ni Gst Nym Suci Murni, AAN Anom Kumbara, I Nyoman Sirtha, I Gede Mudana"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-9117 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-9117"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-9117"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">GLOBAL-LOCAL ENVIRONMENT CERTIFICATION AT FIVE STAR HOTELS IN TOURISM AREA OF NUSA DUA, BALI</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Gst Nym Suci Murni<sup>a,b</sup>, AAN Anom Kumbara<sup>b</sup>, I Nyoman Sirtha<sup>b</sup>, I Gede Mudana<sup>a </sup></span><span class="font0"><sup>a</sup>Tourism Department, State Polytechnic of Bali <sup>a,b</sup>Cultural Studies Doctoral Program of Udayana University </span><a href="mailto:sucimurnign@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font0">sucimurnign@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The research aims to examine the various form of environment certification, ideology behind the practice of green tourism (global award) and Tri Hita Karana (local award), and the implication of environment practice at five star hotel in Nusa Dua tourism area. The data of the reserach was assessed by postmodern critical theory (theory of discourse regarding power/knowledge, hegemony theory, practice theory, and theory of deep/shallow ecology. The method used in this cultural studies is the qualitative one, where the data collection were obtained through direct observation, in-depth interviews, and related documentation. The sample used 6 five star hotels which practise green award, of 14 established five star hotels (some hotel is not in full operation).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results showed that (1) there are some variation of environment practice in five star hotel, (2) ideology working behind these practices can be seen from global ideology in the form of sustainable development deriving </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">green tourism</span><span class="font0">, and the local ideology, in the form of Tri Hita Karana (THK) used in THK award, (3) implication of global-local invironment practice in tourism area and surrounding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: global-local, environment certification, five star hotel, tourism area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Globalization affects all areas at least five scapes accoding to Arjun Appadurai (Urry, 2002) including tourism business. One component of tourism is accommodation/hotel in achieving requirement to follow the market trends in order to get the desired profits on the one hand and environmental and socio-cultural attention on the other. Implemented environmental practices or discourses are influenced by environmental issues followed for the sake of saving the planet which is wrapped in sustainable development.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nusa Dua Bali Tourism area is one of the best examples in the world's tourism regions targeted in practice because on the one hand the environment is an area where the international five-star hotel with international management chain owned by foreign capitalists, and on the other, is located in a cultural environment of Bali. Environmental practices at a five-star hotels in the area of tourism Nusa Dua are inseparable with BTDC as developer and manager of the area, where it represents the government in regulating and directing the hotel and other facilities in order to provide economic benefits to the government and do not damage the environment and culture of the community around it. Environmental practices are implemented at a five-star hotel and it can not be separated from the effects of global environmental ideology in the form of certification sold to an international hotel chain owned by capitalist. Global certifier will choose hotels that care about the environment to be targeted certification. In addition to the ideological hegemony of global environmental issues, local ideology THK also participated in environmental issues by using THK philosophy as the award given to the entire hotel and tourism components for the sustainability of Bali as a tourism destination, and in order to maintain the natural environment of Bali remain stable and steady.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This present study was intended to identify the form of environment practice, the ideology behind the practice, and the implication of environment practice. It is theoretically and practically significant. Theoretically, it was expected that the results of the study would justify and enrich the episthemology of cultural studies especially green tourism (global) and THK Award (local) at five star hotel. Practically, it was expected that the result of the study could be used as the basis for the components of the tourism industry, especially entrepreneurs (owners) of the property of a five-star hotel business, as a guideline in implementing policies related to the utilization of human resources and natural resources. People who are involved directly and indirectly, especially people around the tourist areas, in order to understand and take into account any development dynamics associated with the construction of hotels in the region and globally to save the environment around the area of tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESEARCH METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The method used is the interpretative-qualitative method, where the data collection were obtained through direct observation at five star hotels, in-depth interviews addressing to the expert of environment, tourism (hotel), and culture, and supported by related documentation (company report, company profile). The sample of this research used six of five star hotels which practising green award (globally and locally), of 14 established five star hotels in tourism area of Nusa Dua.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results show three things. First, the forms of green tourism practices and award THK implemented in the area of Nusa Dua tourism can be seen from the notion of green tourism practices and THK Award including shallow ecology in practice of green tourism as an area manager BTDC. The focus is on practice variations, including the types of certification/award achieved by both global and local award. The global award covers EarthCheck and asean green hotel standards. The local one includes national green award hotel and THK award which is in accordance with the criteria set by the certifier. THK green tourism practices and award at a five-star hotel, viewed from the theory of deep ecology/shallow turns to indicate shallow ecology as a hotel company seeking profit from the economic point of view, concerning environmental issues and social culture for sustainability investments. It occurs hegemony and counter-hegemony in the discourse and THK green tourism award.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second, the ideology behind the green tourism practices and award THK ideology can be divided into global and local ideologies that accompany the practice regarding environment. Ideology which begins with that of global environmental and sustainable development discourse always be relied upon in any development consisting of ecological sustainability, social sustainability and economic sustainability, in addition to green tourism. As part of the local ideology, the ideology of the government may also corporate hegemony, the community, by legitimizing passing laws and regulations and the establishment of destination tourism area, which includes the enclave Nusa Dua tourism area, BTDC as an area manager, and the establishment of a strategic area of national tourism (KSPN), manufacture of EIA, hotel classification, formation of associations IHRA. Local ideology in the context of Bali was instrumental in practising environment. In this case, the ideology of THK is a concept that implies three causes of alignment or harmony, which consists of elements </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font0"> (God)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, pawongan</span><span class="font0"> (human creature), and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font0"> (physical environment) (Kaler, 1983). Local ideology was transformed into THK Award initiated by Team THK Award of Bali Travel News belonging to Bali Post Media Group (KMB/Bali Post Group).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Third, the implications of the practice of green tourism and THK Award at a five-star hotel can be seen from the implications of environmental, economic and business implications, and social implications of the communities around the area. Environmental implications in question is a spiritual environment (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font0">), social environment (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font0">), and physical environment (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font0">) around the hotel. Implications and THK green tourism award against the spiritual environment at a five-star hotel is the place of worship in the form of temples in each hotel as a holy place for employees (to do worshipping) who are mostly Hindus. It ideally keeps the existence of spiritual activities conducted at each hotel. Social relations that occur in very well established hotel, namely the relationship among employees from different faiths, and work together in completing the work of the hotel. For the physical environment at the hotel, with the presence of environmental certification, the hotel became more organized, efficient use of energy and water, waste management, handling of hazardous and toxin waste, the use of local products, and environmental regulation in general. Implications for economic and business at a five-star hotel can be seen from the marketing and investment security, in addition to the positive effects obtained by the local community in the form of jobs and a better social life. Social relationships with the surrounding community is also going well because the hotel through its CSR (company social responsibility) has contributed to the community in the form of scholarships, house building, a village bale banjar building, construction of temples, youth organisation, and help others spontaneously. Besides the three implications of the above there were also hegemony and counter-hegemony as a result of the application of the two different awards.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this research, there are a few things that are new findings that is, the first global certification form eartcheck and asean green hotel, load the man's relationship with man, and man's relationship to the physical environment that can be sorted into three pillars (economic, social, and environmental). Meanwhile, a local certification THK Award includes green national standards practiced in a five star hotel, man's relationship with God, man with man, and the man with the environment (theology, sociology, ecology). When viewed from a different pillar construction does not seem to be implemented in the same realm. But in reality, both globally and locally, the different awards, which can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">run together in the interests of saving the environment, is discursive (a discursive formation).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Secondly, there is a general view of globalization and modernization associated with the homogenizing and destroying local traditions as expressed by many modernization theorists, not entirely acceptable. Conversely environmental practices in the area of Nusa Dua, in this case the global implementation of the award does not eliminate local award could still running to this day. Additionally proved from the beginning before the five-star hotel built with international investment, have been encouraged to use the local drafts on any tourism development, namely the concept of THK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the results of this study, it can be suggested as follows. First, the five-star hotel in Nusa Dua tourism area should be more open up to researchers who wish to obtain more detailed information with respect to corporate data. Do not just give a chance to the nota bena vocational training can help the company's operations. The company does not have to be afraid redundant with the data given because the researchers will sort them according to the ethics and emic of research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second, for developers and business in this area BTDC (state company) which is suggested to be more attentive to the environment of the island of Bali, Nusa Dua especially into land development. The Garden of Bali which became the slogan of the environment in the area of development, should be maintained in the field, on an ongoing basis not only decorate brochure and leaflets. Since it is very easy to change with the function of seeking economic benefits, in addition to its function as well as developers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Third, to the researchers in the field of tourism and cultural studies, especially concerning the ideology of global and local (environmental, economic, social/cultural), since there are many gaps that have not been completed, it is advisable to research more about the environmental practices, both in the area of Nusa Dua tourism and in other areas of Bali. Because there are many issues that can be raised in connection with the implementation of environmentally labeled highly discursive especially involving threefolding (according to Perlas, 2000), they are (1) government as local authorities (political), (2) investors (economic), and (3) the host society (social/cultural).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">We would like to thank the Rector of Udayana University, the Director of Postgraduate Studies of Udayana University, Head and Secretary of the Doctorate</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Program of Cultural Studies Udayana University for the opportunity provided to the writer to attend the doctorate program. Our gratitude also extended to Bali State Polytechnic through Research and Community Service which was funded this research. The management and staff of five star hotel at Nusa Dua Tourism Area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Althusser, Louis. 2010. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tentang Ideologi: Marxisme Strukturalis, Psikoanalisis, Cultural Studies</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Eagleton, Terry. 1991. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ideology: Introduction</span><span class="font0">. London. Verso.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kaler, I GK. 1983. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Butir-butir tercecer tentang adat Bali</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Bali Agung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Murni, G.N. Suci. 2014. “Green Tourism dan Tri Hita Karana Award pada Hotel Bintang Lima di Kawasan Pariwisata Nusa Dua Bali”, disertasi, Program Doktor, Program Studi Kajian Budaya, Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Perlas, Nicanor. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Shaping Globalization Civil Society, Cultural Power and Three Folding,</span><span class="font0"> New York: CADI and Global Network for Social Threefolding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Urry, John. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Consuming Places</span><span class="font0">. London: Routledge.</span></p>