---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF MAIN AND SECONDARY CHARACTERS IN “47 RONIN” MOVIE IN TERMS OF METHOD OF CHARACTEIZATION AND THREE DIMENSIONS OF CHARACTERS"
author: "Kadek Adi Wirawan"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 15.2 Mei 2016: </span><span class="font0">100</span><span class="font1">-</span><span class="font0">104</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ANALYSIS OF MAIN AND SECONDARY CHARACTERS IN “47 RONIN” MOVIE IN TERMS OF METHOD OF CHARACTEIZATION AND THREE DIMENSIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">OF CHARACTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kadek Adi Wirawan email: </span><a href="mailto:kadekadiwirawan@gmail.com"><span class="font2">kadekadiwirawan@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Letters and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Judul makalah ini adalah “Analysis of Main and Secondary Characters in “47 Ronin Movie in Term of Method of characterization and Three Dimensions of Characters”. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk dua poin. Yang pertama adalah untuk menganalisis metode yang digunakan oleh penulis untuk menyajikan karakter. Yang kedua adalah untuk menganalisis dan menggambarkan karakter utama dan sekunder disajikan dalam tiga dimensi karakter.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berfokus pada unsur-unsur intrinsik sastra. Data tersebut diambil dari film berjudul 47 Ronin. Pengumpulan data melalui metode observasi dengan menonton, membaca, dan mencatat. Kemudian dikategorikan berdasarkan pada teori. Data yang dikumpulkan dan diklasifikasikan secara kualitatif dan deskriptif dianalisis berdasarkan teori sastra yang diusulkan oleh William Kenney (1966), Lajos Egri di Sukada (1987), Karl Bernhardt (1953) di samping ada beberapa teori pendukung yang berkaitan dengan penelitian ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan hasil analisis, ditemukan bahwa Kai adalah karakter utama dan Oishi adalah karakter sekunder dalam film. Penulis menggunakan dua metode karakterisasi dalam film ini. Mereka metode dramatis dan metode karakterisasi karakter pada karakter lain. Dan ada tiga dimensi karakter tokoh utama dan sekunder. Dari aspek psikologis dari karakter utama dan sekunder tidak banyak ditunjukkan di film ini, dari aspek fisiologis karakter utama adalah misterius, pintar, baik hati, lembut, rendah hati, memiliki kemampuan supranatural, bertanggung jawab dan lain-lain Dan karakter sekunder seorang pemimpin yang baik, semangat tinggi, tidak mudah untuk percaya, menghormati, cerdas, bertanggung jawab dan lain-lain Dari aspek sosiologis karakter utama adalah darah campuran, pencari jejak, samurai, dan ronin. Dan karakter sekunder adalah pemimpin samurai, seorang ayah, suami, samurai dan ronin. Kata kunci: Karakter, Karakterisasi, Metode karakterisasi, Tiga Dimensi Karakter.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Based on Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary</span><span class="font2"> (1995;427) the literature is the writing that is valued as work of art, especially fiction, drama, and poetry. According to Warren and Wallek (1986:107), literature is the form of human creativity consisting idiom, idea, feeling, spirit, and experience using the language as the media and having positive impact to life. According to Dryden, drama is a just and lively image of human nature, representing its passions and humors, and the changes of fortune to which it is subject, for the delight and instruction of mankind. Character is the figure that participates in the action or the people who play role in a story and it is expected to be natural or lifelike to make the story interesting. The study is interesting to be analyzed because the main and the secondary characters in movie can make some improvement on the other aspects, like the method of characterization and the three dimensions of character. This movie starring by Keanu Reaves make the analysis more interested.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What methods are used by the author to present the characterization of the main and secondary character in “47 Ronin”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the main character and secondary character were presented based on physiological, psychological and sociological aspects?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first is to analyze the methods used by author to present the character.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The second is to analyze and describe of the main character and secondary presented in terms of physiological, psychological and sociological aspects.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are many elements can be analyze in a film in this discussion is focused on the description of the physiological, psychological and sociological aspects of main character and secondary character and methods characterization used by the writer. In producing scientific writing, there must be systematic steps called research method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Research method in this analysis is categorized into three; they are: Data Source, Method and Technique of collecting data, and Method and Technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This part presents an analysis of 47 Ronin movies focusing on its intrinsic aspect specifically on characters in terms of physiology, psychology and sociology dimensions and the analysis of method of characterization. That can find out that the main and the secondary character of the “47 Ronin” movie they are Kai as main character an Oishi as the secondary character. Kai who controls the way a story goes and usually given a greater chance to covey his vision in solving problem. Kai is a character who takes the greatest portion of illustration or always become focus of the movie and the character who takes most frequency of appearance in the whole of the movie and Oishi as the secondary character who plays the important role and gives influence to the main character, he helps the main character to form the terms of story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to (Kenney, 1966: 24) in presenting the character in his or her story, the author uses some methods in this analysis there are two method of characterization used for the main character. They are Dramatic method and Character on other characters. And there is only one method used for the secondary character. It is the Dramatic method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Lajos Egri in Sukada (1987:135) he state that character has three dimensions as its fundamental structure such as physiological, psychological, and sociological aspects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In physiological aspect of main and secondary characters, which are Kai as main character and Oishi as the secondary character are not much showed in this movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In psychological aspect of main character which is Kai as main character was describe as quiet person, calm, smart, full of mystery, has a supernatural spirit. Kai actually had a good heart and great love. He has a strong determination to protect Ako and everyone he loved Kai also has respect and high gratitude. Oishi as the secondary character was leader of samurai and protector of king Asano with hard spirits, not easy to trust, he had great respect for King, he has much loved with Riku (Oishi wife). He was a leader with a strong determination, smart, spirited knight, responsible, and he had well responsible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In sociological aspect of the main Kai as the main character was describe as a half-breed from an English sailor and a peasant girl however his loving mother abandoned threw Kai in forest Tengu. He was raised by Lord Tengu. Kai escaped from forest Tengu and king Asano found him lost in the forest then accepted him into his household. Kai make a good relationship with Mika, king Asanos daughter, Kai is king Asano’s tracker. Kai is uncommunicative figure, he is a good person, helper, brave, and willing to sacrifice for something that he loves and he respected despite Kai being scorned by samurai due to his lowborn status and mixed ancestry. Oishi as the secondary character in describing of Oishi’s family reveals that Oishi’s social status is father of Chikara and husband of Riku, Oishi lived in Ako. He is a gentleman for his family, good father for Chikara and good husband for Riku. Oishi is a leader of samurai he is right-hand man of king Asano, he is a good leader for his men, Oishi’s live and death is for king Asano and for Ako, he was the person with responsible and reliable for king Asano.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the analysis, it is found that Kai is the main character and Oishi is the secondary character in the movie. The author used two methods of characterization in the movie. They are dramatic method and character on other characters method of characterization. And there are three dimensions of character of main and secondary character. From the psychological aspects of the main and secondary character not much showed in the movie, from the physiological aspects of the main character is mysterious, smart, good sense, gentle, humble, has supernatural ability, responsible and etc. And the secondary character is a great leader, strong spirited, not easy to believed, respect, smart, responsible and etc. From the sociological aspect the main character is a half breed, tracker, samurai, and ronin. And the secondary character is the leader of samurai, a father, a husband, samurai and ronin.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Advanced Learner's Dictionary of International. 1995. New student Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">London: Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">John Dryden. 1665. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Drama definition. zinearticles.com/?Drydens-Definition-of-Drama</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to analyze fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sukada, Made Drs. 1987</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Beberaa Aspek Tentang Sastra</span><span class="font2">. Penerbit Kayumas dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yayasan Ilmu dan SeniLesbia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Warren Austin and Wellek Rene. 1962. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of literature.</span><span class="font2"> New York: Harvest Book.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">104</span></p>