---
layout: full_article
title: "SCENIC DESIGN IN “PRINCESS OF CHINA” MUSIC VIDEO OF “MYLO XLOTO” ALBUM OF COLDPLAY"
author: "Ida Bagus Adhi Sukma"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SCENIC DESIGN IN </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“PRINCESS OF CHINA”</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>MUSIC VIDEO OF </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“MYLO XLOTO”</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ALBUM OF COLDPLAY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IDA BAGUS ADHI SUKMA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Musik merupakan bagian hidup dari kehidupan makhluk hidup, terutama kehidupan manusia. Semua orang pasti akan mencari satu hiburan yang tidak terlalu berat. Tidak hanya bahasa saja yang digunakan untuk berkomunikasi, terkadang musik juga digunakan sebagai alat komunikasi, dengan kata lain musik merupakan satu kesatuan yang tak dapat terpisahkan dari kehidupan manusia. Berdasarkan hal tersebut, dari musik, orang-orang juga berpikir bagaimana membuat musik itu sendiri menjadi lebih mewah dan elegan, salah satu caranya dengan membuat musik video klip. Dengan musik video klip ini, sebuah lagu akan terlihat benar-benar berkomunikasi dengan para penonton, salah satu penyanyi yang memliki video klip yang begitu menarik ialah Coldplay. Dalam musik video klip dari Coldplay ini, mereka menggunakan video klip yang menarik untuk berkomunikasi secara tidak langsung dengan para penonton yang melihat video klip mereka. Dalam hal ini terdapat dua musik video klip yang sangat menarik untuk diteliti, yaitu Prinncess of China (2012). Adapun tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui apa isi dan arti dari lagu tersebut dalam hal ini menggunakan teori scenic design yang diusulkan oleh Lynn Pecktal (1975). Setelah melakukan analisis, hampir semua elemen scenic design terdapat di musik video klip Princess of China dari Coldplay, baik itu dari segi tema, tempat, status sosial dan waktu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci: Musik, Musik Video Klip, dan Coldplay</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are huge genres of music, namely pop, rock, jazz, swing, country, alternative, R&amp;B, rap, folk, dance, blues, and etc, when a person is feeling sad and happy, they could show their feeling by chanting of phrase of music. Music is not merely expressing a feeling, it can express feeling through music video clips, the intent and the message could be carried up to the audience. Some of us may find difficult to interpret the intent of the places used in these video clips and a few</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">expressions in the video and the audiences more understand about the meaning of that music video clips from scenic design</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background mentioned above, the problem of the study is formulated, as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">What elements of scenic design are commonly used to support the representation in music video of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Princess China”</span><span class="font1"> by Coldplay?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In according to problem of study, the aims of this study are finding out the kinds of scenic design used in Coldplay’s music video clips and knowing the meaning of this music video thorough the music video and scenic design.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This part of study consists of three elements. They are data source, method and techniques of collecting data, and method and techniques of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">YouTube</span><span class="font1"> which was directly downloaded </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Princess of China”</span><span class="font1"> of music video clips from British band, Coldplay from that application. The process of choosing the video clip was determined by terms of song content. This study was needed to analyze the music video of Coldplay, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Princess of China”</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As a music video clip used as the data source, observation method was applied. This method was chosen because data were observed. Meanwhile, the observation method in this study was done by watching Coldplay’s video clip to get the visual communication and scenic design by Coldplay’s music video clip.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data was analyzed qualitatively based on the semantic theory of sign and meaning. The theory used is the theory proposed by Lynn Pecktal (1975); it is about the elements of scenic design.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Scenic Design in Music Video of </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Princess of China”</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> by Coldplay</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are eight scenic design elements used in this music video clip Princess of China which can be presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Place and Locale</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The place and locale of the music video clip is a palace in a country in China. The palace is little bit dark when in several scenes, full of decoration and architecture about China, such as, when the princess dances in front of the warrior and it represents the meaning from the song and seems more dramatic when the atmosphere is tense and the place in the palace. It seems additional real and dramatic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Time and Period</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The time and period of this music video clip is the year 1600-1650, and that is in China Dynasty. It can be seen from the dress of the main artist and the supporting artist. It is more traditional dress. And the music video clip is taken in summer, but sometime turns into rainy seasons. The design time of day in this music video clip is evening time and sometimes in several scenes are midnight. It is seen when the princess and the warrior are fighting each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theme</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The theme of this music video clip </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Princess of China</span><span class="font1"> is war and love. The war between the warrior and another warrior from the palace, and the war between the princess and the warrior to get the palace from the princess and they are using traditional weapons to fight. It is a sword.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mood</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The emotional tones that can be seen in this music video clip are anger, happiness, and sadness. These expressions strongly appear in the whole of this music video clip </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Princess of China.</span><span class="font1"> It is seen during in this music video clip. When the princess is dancing, the warrior and the princess are fighting each other, until the warrior sits in the royal chair.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scenic Style</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The scenery that is used in this music video clip Princess of China is realistic but in several scenes, it is natural but a few things of imaginative. All architecture and furniture in this music video clip are natural. The condition of the setting sets to be like in China, red background, traditional dance, weapon, music instruments. From that, they represent the mood of sadness, happiness, and fighting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Status and the Characters</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The social status and characters in this music video clip are played by the singer and the models. The singer is a princess and the warrior. The warrior is from another place and he plays the characters as a poor guy and strong guy. It is seen from the clothes. He wears casual and jeans clothes in the beginning of scene. The princess is like a princess of China, it is seen from the furniture around her and from the clothes and hair. She wears a light color for her clothes. It shows that she is a royal princess. She plays the characters as a wealthy princess.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Movements and Positions of the Actors</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The positions of the warrior in this music video clip as the good and evil. It is seen from the warrior when he wants to fight with the princess and they are kneeling together and bowing before they fight. It describes that the warrior begins to fall in love with her, and when the warrior wants to enter the palace, he has to fight with the guard in the palace. The movement in this music video clip is from the princess. The princess is lying in the royal chair and when the warrior begins to enter the palace, the princess is directly preparing herself to be a dancer and dance with the dancer in the palace.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Changing of the Scenery</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The music video clip Princess of China is divided into nine scenes. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">identifications of the scenes are described as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;First Scene: The warrior walks into the palace. The warrior wears jacket and casual jeans into the palace. He wants to meet the princess; therefore he is going to the palace. This represents the face serious to fight the princess.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Second Scene: The princess is lying in the royal chair and waits for the warrior. She wears the traditional dress and unique hair. This represents that the princess shows the sadness of expression.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Third Scene: The warrior walks on the bridge into the palace. It is shooting on the back camera angle and he passes the guard, but the guard just stays calm. This represents the warrior really wants to meet the princess with full of faith.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">D. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fourth Scene: The warrior is fighting with the guard in the palace and the background turns into the blue. He fights with a traditional weapon such as a sword and wears the traditional costume like ninja. This represents that the warrior wants to meet the princess but he has to fight with the guard.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">E. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fifth Scene: This is showing that the princess is dancing with the dancer and the background turns into red background and the setting is full of the lamp and furniture from China. The princess dances the traditional dance from China. She wears the traditional dress the color is black. This represent that the princess wants to show that how gracefully she and dancers are with their dance.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">F. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sixth Scene: The warrior and the princess are fighting together in the sky, but they are fighting in the night, the background also changes with blue. They are using a sword and in this music video clip, the warrior wears the blue traditional clothes and the princess is also changing her dress too into the white dress and lengthens her hair. This represents that they are serious to start the fight to get something from the outcome of the fight.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">G. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seventh Scene: This scene shows that the warrior and the princess are kneeling and bowing each other in the desert of China and in the sunset. This represents that they want to start to fight with that ways.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">H. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seventh Scene: This scene is the beginning of the fight between the warrior and the princess. They are starting to fly and while brings the sword in their hand. They are fighting in desert with bad condition. It is cloudy and thunder weather in the evening.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eighth Scene: The princess is dancing in front of the followers in her palace; including the dancers and the guards. This represents that the princess has already failed with the warrior. Therefore, the princess dances in front of him.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">J. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ninth Scene: The warrior is sitting in the royal chair to watch the princess’s dance. This represents that she lost the fight with the warrior and dancing alone without the dancers in the specially floor.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this video, there were eight elements of scenic design based on the theory of Lynn Pecktal. They are Place and Locale, Time and Period, Theme, Mood, Scenic Style, Social Status of the Characters, Movement and Position of the Actors and Changing of the Scenery. The eight elements of scenic design of the video clip are to be more creative and meaningful on this way, audiences truly understand the intent of this song through the music video and scenic design.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Pecktal,Lynn. 1975. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Designing and Painting for Theatre</span><span class="font1">. United State of America </span><a href="http://creativedisc.com/reviews/artist-of-the-month/november-2011-artist-of-the-month-coldplay/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://creativedisc.com/reviews/artist-of-the-month/november-2011-artist-of-the-</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://creativedisc.com/reviews/artist-of-the-month/november-2011-artist-of-the-month-coldplay/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">month-coldplay/</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Uw6ZkbsAH8"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Uw6ZkbsAH8</span></a></p>
<p><a href="http://www.shsu.edu/~lis_fwh/book/other_notable_genres/Video%20Clips2.htm"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.shsu.edu/~lis_fwh/book/other_notable_genres/Video%20Clips2.htm</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.answers.com/topic/music-video"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.answers.com/topic/music-video</span></a></p>