---
layout: full_article
title: "Compound Word Formation in Matilda"
author: "Jenny Novita Sidupa"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">COMPOUND WORD FORMATION IN “MATILDA”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">JEANNY NOVITA SIDUPA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURE UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keberadaan sebuah kata berkembang seiring dengan berkembangnya bahasa karena kata-kata baru banyak ditemui dalam kehidupan sehari-hari dan masuk ke dalam pikiran kita. Morfologi adalah cabang linguistik yang membahas tentang pembentukan kata pada penggunaan dan konstruksi di dalam sebuah konteks ujaran. Proses pembentukan kata yang paling umum dalam penggunaan bahasa adalah gabungan kata. Gabungan kata terdiri dari dua kata yang membentuk suatu kata baru. Gabungan kata dapat ditemukan di berbagai tempat seperti majalah, koran, buku dan percakapan sehari-hari. Pembicara bahasa Inggris sebagai bahasa kedua dapat menemukan kesulitan untuk mengartikan atau menggunakan gabungan kata tersebut di dalam sebuah konteks ujaran karena sebuah gabungan kata dapat memiliki arti yang berbeda dari arti masing-masing kata yang membentuknya. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis tipe-tipe dan komponen gabungan kata berdasarkan teori pembentukan kata oleh O ’Grady dan Guzman. Dalam penelitian ini, data yang digunakan adalah gabungan kata yang ditemukan di dalam buku cerita “Matilda” karya Roald Dahl. Setelah melakukan analisis, dapat disimpulkan bahwa tipe gabungan kata endosentris adalah gabungan kata yang lebih banyak ditemukan dibandingkan tipe gabungan kata eksosentris. Komponen gabungan kata yang ditemukan adalah gabungan kata benda, gabungan kata sifat dan gabungan kata kerja</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: proses morfologi, pembentukan kata, gabungan kata</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to O’Grady, morphology is a branch of linguistics which studies the categories and rules in word formation of a language (1996:132). There are various processes of word formation, they are: affixation, internal modification, suppletion, cliticization and compounding. Compounding is the most common word formation process since it creates new word by combining lexical categories; noun, adjective, verb, or preposition (O’Grady, 1996:43). Compound word can be found in both spoken and written language. The data used in this study are from Roald Dahl’s literary work entitled “Matilda” which present many examples of word formation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the study above, the research problems are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">What type of compound word formation occurs in English children story book? And what is the component of compound word formation found in English children story book?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Specifically this research has two aims, they are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">To describe the type of compound word formation and analyze the component of compound word which occurs in English children story book.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The methodology in this research is categorized into three. They are data source, method and techniques of collecting data, and method and techniques of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study were taken from English children story book “Matilda ” (1988) written by Roald Dahl. This data were used because such book is a real proof of productivity of compound word formation. The stories were analyzed by the type and the component of compound word formation in the story book.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As a book used as the data source, documentation method was applied. Documentation is a method of collecting data through which data are collected from a source and noted systematically. The data in this study were collected by choosing an English children story book, the data were found by reading carefully the book to find the compound word formation of the text and noted down and classified the data according to the problems and theories which related to the compound word formation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this story were analyzed descriptively based on the theory of morphology concerning in word formation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Compound Word Formation in “Matilda”</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Compound Word</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the point of view of its ‘head’, compound word is classified into endocentric and exocentric compound.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endocentric compound</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Endocentric compound is a construction of compound that the meaning of the head is parallel to the modifier. The endocentric compound words that found are; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sunlight, newspaper, armchair, sawdust, bedroom, cloakroom, superglue, thundercloud, fireplace, bathroom, handbag, tablespoon, classroom, bedbug, bootlace, blackberries, saucepan, teapot, daylight, lunchtime, underclothes, washbasin, cornflakes, outside, playground, Frenchman, eyeballs, awestruck, overhanging, overshadowing, doorway, cowshed, housework, cardboard, hairbrush, lifetime, newcomer, headmistress, mileage, hairdresser, handiwork, underestimated, sunbaked, woodcutter, outhouse, watchmaker, toothbrushes, terror-struck, pop-eyed, wide-eyed, understatement, afternoon, middle-aged, extraordinary, overstuffed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exocentric Compound</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Exocentric compound is a construction of compound that the meaning of its constituents is opaque and have no parallel to each other. The exocentric compound words found are; </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">offspring, washout, pigtails, underworld, grasshopper, highwayman, greengrocer, blackbird, grapefruits, bloodthirsty, blackboard, cupboard, bluebottle, browbeaten, homesick.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Components of Compound Words</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Katamba classifies components of compound word into compound noun, compound adjective and compound verb.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun Compound</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun + Noun : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sunlight, grasshopper, newspaper, armchair, bedroom, sawdust, watchmaker, mileage, cloakroom, thundercloud, fireplace, bathroom, hairdresser, washbasin, cupboard, toothbrushes, cornflakes, handbag, tablespoon, classroom, headmistress, bedbug, grapefruits, pigtails, doorway, daylight, cowshed, housework , woodcutter, saucepan, teapot, cardboard, hairbrush, lunchtime, lifetime, playground, eyeballs.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adjective + Noun : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">superglue, handiwork, newcomer, blackboard, highwayman, greengrocer, blackboard, bluebottle, blackberries, Frenchman</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preposition + Noun : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">understatement, underworld, afternoon, underclothes, outhouse, outside, offspring.</span></p></li></ul></li><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compound Adjective</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun + Adjective : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awestruck, middle-aged, homesick, bloodthirsty, terror-struck, sun-baked</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adjective + Adjective : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wide-eyed, extraordinary</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preposition + Adjective : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">overhanging</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Verb + Adjective : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pop-eyed</span></p></li></ul></li><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compound Verb</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preposition + Verb: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">underestimated, overstuffed, overshadowing</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Noun + Verb : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">browbeaten</span></p></li></ul></li><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Other Combination : </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">washout</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are two types of compound words that are found, they are endocentric and exocentric compound. Based on the analysis, it shows that endocentric compound is the most used compound word in English children story book, “Matilda” . Exocentric compound on the other hand, found in a smaller number of cases. There are several forms of compound words found in the story book, they are: compound noun which is formed by combining (noun + noun), (adjective + noun), and (preposition + noun). The second form is compound adjectives which are formed by combining (noun + adjective), (adjective + adjective), (preposition + adjective) and (verb + adjective). Third is compound verb, which are formed by combining (preposition + verb) and (noun + verb). The combination of (verb + preposition) wasn’t found in the story book. In addition, the writer found a compound word where the constituents do not belong to the same word class and the last element doesn’t determines the class of the compound. It is considered a rare case and it is evident that the rightmost element (head) of the compound can belong to different word class than the resulting compound.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Katamba, Francis. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology: Modern Linguistics Series</span><span class="font2">. New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mathews, P.H. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Morphology: Second Edition</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">O’Grady, William &amp;&nbsp;Guzman, Videa. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Morphology: The Analysis of Word Structure ”, in Contemporary Linguistics: An Introduction</span><span class="font2">. United Kingdom: Longman.</span></p>