---
layout: full_article
title: "Analysis of Conflict in Movie Script A Cinderella Story"
author: "Ni Putu Ayu Jaya Safitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 14.3 Maret 2016: 70-74</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Analysis of Conflict in Movie Script </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">A Cinderella Story</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>by</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Ayu Jaya Safitri email:</span><a href="mailto:dlestarixx@gmail.com"><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> dlestarixx@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> English Department, Faculty of Letter and Culture, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini berjudul “Analysis of Conflict in Movie Script A Cinderella Story”. Makalah ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis jenis – jenis konflik dan strategi yang digunakan oleh karakter dalam penggambaran konflik dan juga untuk menganalisa konflik yang terjadi pada karakter utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Data yang digunakan dalam makalah ini berasal dari teks film A Cinderella Story. Data – data dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode penelitian kepustakaan. Metode kualitatif digunakan dalam analisa data – data yang terkumpul. Dan dalam menjelaskan analisa, metode penggambaran yang digunakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori yang digunakan merupakan teori konflik dari William Kenney. Dia menyatakan bahwa konflik dalam cerita terbagi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">menjadi konflik dalam dan konflik luar </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">serta teori psikologi dari Karl S. Bernhardt untuk menganalisa psikologis dari karakter utama yang terbagi menjadi attitude, feeling-emotion, dan motivation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Berdasarkan peran karakter dalam cerita, Sam digambarkan memiliki kehidupan yang sama dengan Cinderella yang tinggal dengan ibu tiri dan saudara tirinya ketika ayahnya telah meninggal. Sam selalu disiksa oleh Fiona yang tidak pernah menyayanginya seperti anaknya sendiri. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Konflik internal dari Sam Montgomery adalah dia tidak memiliki kebebasan untuk hidupnya</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> dan setiap orang selalu mencari masalah terhadap dirinya. Di film ini, kita akan menemukan konflik diantara </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Sam dengan Fiona, Austin, Brianna-Gabriella, dan Shelby sebagai konflik eksternal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Karater utama, konflik dalam, konflik luar.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In a literary work, for example, movie conflict plays a very important role. Conflict is the central in every story in literary works. Conflict is defined as an incompatibility of goals or values between two or more parties in a relationship, combined with attempts to control each other and antagonistic feeling toward each</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">other. The conflict or conflicts in a literary work are usually reflected or accompanied by the internal and external action. He also states that conflict is a struggle between internal and external forces in a literary work</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Kenney in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How To Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2"> (1966: 19), the conflicts with which fiction is concerned itself are of many kinds. A story may deal with a conflict within a single man, a conflict between men, a conflict between man and society, a conflict between a man and nature, and so on.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>2.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, there are certain problems which are interesting to be discussed in this paper. The problems are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How are the main character’s internal and external conflicts portrayed in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Cinderella Story</span><span class="font2"> movie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How did the main character overcome her conflict?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the main character’s internal and external conflict portrayed in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Cinderella Story</span><span class="font2"> movie.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out how the main character overcome her conflict.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis and Result</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Samantha’s internal conflict</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be proved by explanation in example as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">“I lost my best friend that day. From then on, the only fairy tales in my life were the ones I read about in books. Since my father didn’t leave a will, my step mother got everything. The house, the restaurant and to her dismay, me.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the above statement, we can seen Sam’s life was changed after her father died. Because of Sam had not anything, she must lives with her 71</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">stepmother, Fiona who never loves her. Sam always doing everything that was commanded by Fiona included works seven days a week at restaurant. Fiona never cares about Sam’s study at school or Sam’s happiness because Fiona really loves to exploit Sam to get much money for she owns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Samantha’s external conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be proved by explanation in example as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fiona : Did you finish your errands? Because I need you to head the restaurant and take the night shift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Tonight’s my night off and it’s the Halloween party at school,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">so—</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fiona : I know, but you need to stop being so self-centered and start thinking of others. Others need you to go the restaurant and mop the floors tonight.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: But, I really need to go to this dance, Fiona. I have to.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fiona &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You need to earn your tuition money for college. You gotta bus</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a lot of tables.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I’m a straight-A student. I work seven days a week and I’m</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">taking extra AP classes. I never asked you for anything. Please let me go to this party.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fiona : Sweetheart, now that you’re old enough…There’s something I’ve always wanted to tell you, and I think you’re ready to hear it. You’re not very pretty, and you’re not very bright. I’m so glad we had that talk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the above conversation between Fiona and Sam, it may be concluded that disagreement of Fiona with all things that makes Sam happy. But how lucky Sam, she still has Rhonda as her truly godmother. Rhonda always helps Sam whatever happened and also supports her to never give up.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of Samantha’s internal conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sam overcomes the problem by started to open her mind. She was very tired of all drama that was made by her step family. She finally moving to Rhonda’s house and started her new life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution of Samantha’s external conflict</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Sam conflicts with her step mother end up since Sam found a hidden will from her father in her fairy tale book and finally she got everything and her stepfamily could not to torment her again.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the classification and analysis of conflict in the previous chapter, the conclusions can be made as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Internal conflict means the conflict inside the person who has the conflict that interrupts her mind. Samantha Montgomery and the character Fiona tell that there is life story experience about the life she chooses and about conflict among the characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">External conflict is conflict affecting two or more parties in the physical world. External conflict is divided into three types: Man vs. Man, Man vs. Society and Man vs. Nature. In this movie Sam external conflict can be classified into four types of conflicts. On Sam’s external conflict, the source of conflict between Fiona as her step mother, Austin Ames as her friend in the school, Brianna and Gabriella as her step sisters and Shelby Cummings as Austin’s ex girlfriend and Sam’s friend in the school.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the conflict analysis above, it can be concluded that conflict is a natural part of human relationship. Conflict of main character is resolved with resolution whether it is right or wrong.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Antara, Ida Bagus Agung. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Conflict in Movie Script Avatar by James Cameron</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernhardt, Karl S.1953. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pratical Psychology</span><span class="font2">. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Booth, Wayne C. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Craft of Research Second Edition</span><span class="font2">. Chichago &amp;&nbsp;London: The University of Chicago Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nykon, Bryan Paul. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The feature Film as a Principles of Conflict Resolution</span><span class="font2">: Universitat Oberta de Catalunya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Puspita, Ni Made Kajeng Martha. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Conflicts of The Main Character in Steel’s Mirror Image</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rosman, Mark. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Cinderella Story Movie Script</span><span class="font2">. (Available from http/www. awesomefilm.com/acinderellastory).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Soebiakto, Edo. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Conflict of Robert Langdon in Brown’s Angles and Demons</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">74</span></p>