---
layout: full_article
title: "Directive Illocutionary Acts Performed On Alex’s Dialogue In Movie Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted"
author: "I Gusti Bagus Aristra Vaundra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 86 - 92</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DIRECTIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS PERFORMED ON ALEX’S</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DIALOGUE IN MOVIE MADAGASCAR 3</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: EUROPE’S MOST WANTED</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I GUSTI BAGUS ARISTRA VAUNDRA<sup>1*</sup>, I MADE NETRA<sup>2</sup>, SANG AYU ISNU MAHARANI<sup>3</sup></span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">123</span></p>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty Of Letters And Culture Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0"><sup>1</sup></span><a href="mailto:aristravaundra@gmail.com"><span class="font1">[</span><span class="font4">aristravaundra@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font4"> <sup>2</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:madenetra@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">madenetra@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font4">] <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:isnu.maharani@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font4">isnu.maharani@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font4">]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">*</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Corresponding Author</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini diutamakan pada studi pragmatik yang dimuat lebih detail dalam lingkup tindak tutur dan difokuskan pada tindak ilokusi bersifat direktif yang merupakan bagian dari tindak tutur. Penelitian ini berjudul “Directive Illocutionary Acts Performed on Alex’s dialogue in Movie Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted”. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengidentifikasi makna yang bersifat direktif dari tindak ilokusi yang ditemukan dalam film Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted dan menjelaskan konteks situasi yang mendukung tindak ilokusi bersifat direktif dialog Alex dalam film Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini diambil dari sebuah film animasi berjudul Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted yang merupakan film komedi 3D.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam penelitian ini dua teori yang digunakan, pertama teori oleh Searle (1969) adalah taksonomi tindak ilokusi yaitu: asertif, direktif, komisif, ekspresif, dan deklaratif. Kemudian yang kedua teori mengenai konteks situasi untuk mendukung analisis dengan kosep konteks situasi oleh Halliday (1985).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini menunjukan bahwa (1) makna implicit pada tindak ilokusi direktif yang dibentuk oleh kalimat penjelas, kalimat perintah dan kalimat tanya. Kemudian, (2) konteks situasi sangatlah berkaitan dengan tindak tutur, konteks situasi yang mendukung munculnya tindak ilokusi direktif adalah; field (medan), tenor (pelaku) dan mode (sarana).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: film, makna implicit, tindak tutur, ilokusi, direktif, konteks situasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Speech act is the utterance that occurs and act refers to an action. That is the reason why people have to interpret the meaning of communication or language through speech acts. Speech act occurs on the process of the meaning in how the communication</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">occurs and how the listener perceives the aim.In many times, people not only saying but also forcing the hearer to do something. When the hearer is doing an act, it means that he or she is doing illocutionary act.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Speech act, thennotonlyusedtodesignatesomething, actuallydosomething. If thespeech actis successful,the receiverwill understand whatthe speakermeant. Those kinds of actions performed through utterance are generally refers to the three kinds of acts performed simultaneously. Austindistinguishesspeech actanalysisintothree parts: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Locution, Ilocutions, and Perlocutions</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One of the important aspect mostly occurred in movie is the dialogue (conversation) among the characters. The characters speak each other and there will be illocutionary act.Illocutionary act has some different types. The classification of illocutionary speech acts as five subdivisions. They are: representatives, directives, commissives, expressive, and declaratives. Each type has different context and meaning. However, this study only concerned with those five illocutionary acts among those categories of speech acts, and the focus of this study were the implicit meaning of directive of illocutionary acts that occurred on Alex’s dialogue in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted</span><span class="font4">andthe context of situation that supports the types of illocutionary acts used in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This study involves an exciting analysis enabling to describe the implicit meaning of the illocutionary acts performed by the speakers through their utterances. The analysis is also connected with the illustration of the existing contexts of situation underlying the emergence of those utterances in a particular kind of circumstance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the implicit meanings of directive of illocutionary acts are used on Alex’s dialogue in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are context of situationsthat support the directive of illocutionary acts on Alex’s dialogue in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The aims of this study were;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the intended meanings of directive of illocutionary acts are found in the movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the context of situation that supports the directive of illocutionary acts on Alex’s dialogue in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data of this study were taken from ananimated movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted</span><span class="font4"> is a 2012 American 3D computer-animated comedy film, produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Paramount Pictures.It is the third installment of the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar</span><span class="font4"> series, a sequel to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa</span><span class="font4">, and it is the first in the series to be released in 3D.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It was taken as data source because it contains many utterances indicating those types of illocutionary acts performed exclusively in some pieces of its dialogue.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The data was taken by observing the movie. All the dialogues as data related to illocutionary acts were noted down and classified based on type of illocutionary acts by Searle (1969). Next, the data which had grouped and bold-typing has further classified into the types of illocutionary acts by Searle, weather the data is classified into directives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This study was conducted by using descriptive qualitative design which consist of watching the movie and read the movie script of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted</span><span class="font4">. The data is analyzed by using two main theories, the first is to classify the type of illocutionary acts into directives illocutionary acts and the second is to analyze the context of situation that supports the directive of illocutionary acts on Alex’s Dialogue in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted</span><span class="font4"> based on the theory of context of situation proposed by Halliday (1989).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In this analysis, the implicit meanings are found in the three forms; declarative form, imperative form and interrogative form. In this analysis will be explained indetailabout the implicit meaningin thedirectiveillocutionaryactinthethree forms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Implicit Meaning of Directive Illocutionary Act (DU/Dec-1/12)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(ALL SCREAMING)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Okay, Marty, we lost her!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Maybe you can slow down now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The focus of the conversation above is on the Alex utterance when uttering; “Okay, Marty, we lost her! Maybe you can slow down now.” This utterance is direct illocution produced by the speaker. The speaker uses declarative form in his utterance, it used for suggesting. However, it is not merely a declarative sentence or utterance but also a suggesting to the hearer and the first utterance which include punctuation mark. At the time, the hearer understood with the suggesting of the speaker, but the situation is not support the hearer to do what the speaker wants.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context of Situation</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Field</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This dialogue occurred in the car. It occurred after they lost from the animal control. The participants in the conversation are talking about Marty’s driving way too fast. But the speaker, Alex, is very afraid. But the hearer can grasp the implicit meaning of utterance. They are talking about the car they drive is no breaks, it can be considered as the field or the topic of the conversation above.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Tenor</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Two characters are talking in the conversation above, Alex and Marty.AlexandMartyhad been friends fora long time,he is a zebra which lived at the Central Park Zoo, and a good friend of Alex. Because of this study is focus on directive illocutionary act produce by the Alex, so he is considered as the speaker, while Alex is referring his utterance to Marty is the hearer in the conversation above.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Mode</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Directive illocutionary act is used through the utterance produced by Alex when he suggesting Marty to slow down. He tells Marty to slow down to driving because he just lost from the animal control and he feels afraid because Marty is driving too fast. The speaker gives the hearer suggesting being careful when driving the car. Therefore, it can be conclude that of the utterance is one a suggesting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The implicit meaning of direct illocutionary act used when the participants are performing direct illocution utterances there were meaning behind the utterance that actually the speakers meaning says, and find out what actually the speaker meaning says and in this study we can show the meanings that were behind it in actually meaning says by the participants.Several types of directive illocutionary acts were found in the movie dialogues. The types of directive illocutionary act found are; ordering, inviting, requesting, suggesting, commanding and advising framed by declarative, imperative and interrogative form.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context of situation is related to the speech act conditions, it influences the appearance of those acts. The context of situation which supports the appearance of directive acts are; field of situation, tenor of situation and mode of situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Allan, Keith. 1986. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Meaning (Vol.2).</span><span class="font4"> London Routledge&amp;Keangen Paul Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 1989. Language, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Context, and Text: Aspect of Language in a Social-Semiotic Perspective.</span><span class="font4"> Victoria: Deakin University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Searle, J.R. 1979.</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts. </span><span class="font4">Cambridge: University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Searle, J.R. 1969.</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Languages.</span><span class="font4"> Cambridge: University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">92</span></p>