---
layout: full_article
title: "THE CONNOTATIVE MEANING OF VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGN ON NIKE SPORT SHOES ADVERTISEMENTS"
author: "Desak Ayu Agung Ratna Komala"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE CONNOTATIVE MEANING OF VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGN ON NIKE SPORT SHOES ADVERTISEMENTS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">By</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DESAK AYU AGUNG RATNA KOMALA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ABSTRAK</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makna konotatif terdapat pada setiap iklan, yaitu makna verbal and makna visual. Yaitu slogan dan gambar. Makna verbal dibuat dalam bentuk kalimat singkat namun menarik. Hal ini dimaksudkan agar masyarakat tertarik melihat iklan tersebut. Selalu ada pesan tersembunyi dibalik makna konotatif yang ingin disampaikan oleh perusahaan. Sedangkan untuk makna visual ditambahkan untuk mendukung makna verbal. Dengan menggunakan gambar (visual) akan lebih efektif untuk menarik lebih banyak perhatian masyarakat. Misalnya iklan sepatu olahraga dari Nike yang sudah sangat terkenal akan iklan – iklannya yang selalu unik dan menarik perhatian. Terdapat dua iklan yang bisa dijadikan sumber data yaitu iklan Nike Air Max Torch+6 dan Nike Eco yang terdapat di situs resmi Nike yaitu </span><a href="http://www.nike.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.nike.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. Adapun dari kedua iklan tersebut terdapat makna konotatif yaitu makna verbal dan makna visual. Kedua makna tersebut saling melengkapi dan mendukung satu sama lain sehingga dapat mengantarkan pesan yang dimaksud oleh perusahaan kepada konsumen dengan baik tanpa meninggalkan kesan ambigu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : iklan, makna konotatif secara verbal dan visual</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Nowadays advertisements become one of our daily needs. We can find many things from advertisement, such as products, jobs, services, etc. An advertisement itself is a form of communication used to encourage or persuade an audience to continue or take some new action. There are a lot of interesting commercial advertisements out of there with connotative meaning. Commercial advertisements are chosen to be analyzed because nowadays people cannot find anything without advertisements; they are really helpful to fill our need every time, that is why advertisement usually uses connotative meaning to attract the customers. By knowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the connotative meaning in the commercial advertisements, we will be easier to understand the purpose of the advertisement and explain the ambiguity.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to the background above, this study has some problems, they are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the connotative meanings of the verbal sign and visual sign on Nike Sport Shoes advertisements?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How do the verbal sign and visual sign to relate each other on Nike Sport Shoes advertisements?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of The Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aim of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the connotative meanings of verbal sign and visual sign on Nike Sport Shoes advertisements.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the relationship between verbal and visual sign on Nike Sport Shoes advertisements.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data source of this study was taken from the official website of Nike company; </span><a href="http://www.nike.com"><span class="font2">www.nike.com</span></a><span class="font2">. Those shoe products were chosen because they produced the advertisements that contained verbal sign and visual sign that had connotative meaning and used English in their presentation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Documentation and observation methods were used in this study. In collecting data, the data were used as the samples of this research that were taken from internet and it was printed. The advertisements were observed by</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">reading them; later data were classified based on the words and pictures. And then the data were selected, followed by some note taking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The sign in the advertisement was divided into verbal and visual sign. Verbal sign was identified based on the structure of advertisement based on Leech and Saussure theory then the visual sign was analyzed using Berger and Dyer theory, after the meaning of verbal and visual sign was found and analyzed by the signifier. The last one was the relationship between verbal and visual signs in creating connotative meaning was analyzed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Connotative Meaning of Verbal and Visual Sign on Nike Sport Shoe Advertisements</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Verbal Sign on Advertisement 1</span></h1></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Table 1. Analysis of Verbal Sign on Advertisement 1</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Components</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signs</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signified concept</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Headline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">STRIKE LIKE LIGHTNING</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A statement about the quality of the product that can support your sport activity.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Body Copy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">JUST DO IT</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">A slogan that give an explanation about the feeling of the customers when using this product.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Signature &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Line</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(Logo)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">AIR MAX TORCH+6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Represent the name of the product.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Standing Details</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><a href="http://WWW.NIKE.COM"><span class="font2">WWW.NIKE.COM</span></a></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">The information about website address.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Visual Sign on Advertisement 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the statements of headline, body copy, signature line, and standing detail were written down in different sizes. The biggest size is the headline “STRIKE LIKE LIGHTNING” and body copy “Just Do It”. They were written down in big size in order to attract people’s attention. According to Sibagraphic.com, purple referred to power, luxury, and ambition. It means that the product bring the powerful feeling with luxury appearance for the customer. The white highlight is the color of goodness, purity, and cleanliness. It means that this product has a goodness point with good quality. The image of the shoes resemble the product in reality. And Nike symbol represents the identity of the company.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Relationship between Verbal Sign and Visual Sign on Nike Sport Shoes Advertisements.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The message of the verbal sign in the picture is something named Air Max Torch+6 from Nike Company that would satisfy the audience with its strength and look. The visual sign supported it. The picture showed a pair of shoes with sporty and elegance appearance that will support any kind of sports. In this case the relationship of both sign is logic and supports each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Verbal Sign in Advertisement 2</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Table 2. Analysis of Verbal Sign in Advertisement 2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Components</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signs</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Signified</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Headline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Grow Green with Nike Eco</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">A statement to persuade to start a healthy life with shoes named Nike Eco.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>5.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Visual Sign on Advertisement 2</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The size of the letters on the headline in advertisement 4 was written down with medium size. It is because the advertiser wanted to show the product and the background more than the headline. In this advertisement</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">there are two dominating colors, they are green and brown. Green means nature, safety, and hope. It means that the product is safe to use. Brown means stability and natural. It means the advertiser wants give comfortable scene in represent his product. A shape in the picture of advertisement 2 is a single shoe and natural scene with some tress as the background. It referred that the product can support our sport activities as part of healthy life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Relationship between Verbal and Visual Sign on Nike Sport Shoes Advertisements.</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There was relation between verbal sign and visual sign. In this case, both of them indicate that concept of Nike Eco sport shoes is healthy life. The verbal sign can present the product with visual sign that can create connotative meaning and can attract the audience. Both sign can support each other with logic and clear message without creating an ambiguous feeling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The conclusions are the connotative meaning of verbal sign in Nike Sport Shoes advertisements can be found through the structure of advertisements including headline, body copy, signature line, and standing detail. The connotative meaning appears in simple and short sentence or slogan to attract the audience attention. Commonly, people are more interested in simple ones, because they are easier to remember. On the other hand, the use of connotative meaning of visual sign in printed advertisements especially in Nike Sport Shoes advertisements can be found in term of size, colors, shape, contrast, and spatiality. The combination of colors in the advertisements can describe the characteristics and the advantages of the product advertised. The picture was used to lead the eyes to the written text because of its attractiveness. The verbal sign and visual sign are always related to each other. The visual sign always matches the verbal sign and supports each other in order to deliver the message to audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Anonim. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Meaning of &nbsp;&nbsp;Colors</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;Available from:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.sibagraphics.com/colour.php"><span class="font2">http://www.sibagraphics.com/colour.php</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Berger, Arthur Asa. 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sign in Contemporary Culture</span><span class="font2">. New York &amp;&nbsp;London: Longman Inc</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hidayat, Felisia .2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Connotative Meaning of Verbal and Visual Sign on Car Advertisements.</span><span class="font2"> Unpublished undergraduate thesis. Denpasar: English Department Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kartika Sari, Komang. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Meaning of Sign in Advertisements of Accessories in Woman’s Magazines</span><span class="font2">. Unpublished undergraduate thesis. Denpasar: English Department Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wikipedia. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)</span><span class="font2">’.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiotic_elements_and_classes_of_signs_%28Pi"><span class="font2">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiotic_elements_and_classes_of_signs_%28Pi</span></a><span class="font2"> erce%29</span></p>