---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE USED IN PRINTED ADVERTISEMENTS ON VOGUE MAGAZINE AND WOMEN’S WEEKLY MAGAZINE"
author: "I Nyoman Adi Putera Mahardika"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE ANALYSIS OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE USED IN PRINTED ADVERTISEMENTS ON VOGUE MAGAZINE AND WOMEN’S WEEKLY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">MAGAZINE</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I Nyoman Adi Putera Mahardika</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak :</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Di dalam iklan banyak digunakan bahasa figuratif dengan terdapat makna tersirat yang dapat diungkapkan dengan cara mengetahui jenis bahasa figuratifnya terlebih dahulu. Tulisan ini mengklasifikasikan jenis-jenis bahasa figuratif yang terkandung di dalam iklan-iklan yang terdapat dalam Majalah Vogue dan Women’s Weekly. Juga menjelaskan fungsi dari setiap bahasa figuratif yang terdapat dalam iklan-iklan tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci </span><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font1">iklan, figuratif, dan fungsi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Advertising is one of the most complex processes of communication because it involves persuasion that is a phenomenon with many implications for both the sender and the receiver of the message. The complexity of an advertisement might be measured by questions such as: who says what? to whom? by what means? to what effect? The answers will demonstrate that language is only one component of the advertisement and that, although it seems simple, advertising is an intricate process where each word is carefully selected for maximum effect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">One of many ways advertising achieved maximum effect is by employing figurative language. The figurative language requires special interpretation since it is an unorthodox type of language, according to Leech (1966, p.181- 2). Acording to Liberman &amp;&nbsp;Foster (1968), &quot;the strength of figurative language lies in an evocative rather than denotative power and in an ability to deal suggestively with feelings and qualities in contexts where scientific literality would be incomplete, inaccurate, or misleading.&quot; In this sense figurative language is used in advertising as a creative device which catches people's attention and persuades them to buy products or services.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems </span><span class="font2">of Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems can be formulated as follows :</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of figurative language are used in advertisements found in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the purpose of using figurative language in advertisements found in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problem above, the aims of this study can be divided into:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of figurative language in advertisements found in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the purpose of using figurative language in advertisements found in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The research method in this study deals with the data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing and presenting the analysis.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Data Source</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this study that are in the form figurative language were taken from Vogue magazine October 2008 edition and Women’s Weekly magazine, July 2008 edition. This magazine was chosen as the data source because it was two of best magazines and it had a lot of advertisements that use figurative language.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected through a library research, which means that the data source was read repeatedly to identify the advertisements that contain figurative language. Then the note taking method was used by making notes of various types of figurative language found in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, qualitative methods were applied. The data were recorded, classified and analyzed descriptively. Firstly, they were classified on the basis of the figurative language type based on the theory proposed by McQuarrie and Mick (1996). Secondly, the analysis was on the purpose of the figurative language by using a theory proposed by Perrine (1982).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Advertisement 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Headline : Special Delivery From 10022-SHOE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illustration: Postcard that serves as platform for headline and body copy and assortment of shoes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Body Copy : Saks Fifth Avenue's designer shoe salon - so big it has its own &quot;ZIP Code&quot;</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Signature Line : Saks Fifth Avenue and Giuseppe Zanotti</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Standing Details : saks.com</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This advertisement has a figurative language in its body copy. The sentence &quot;Saks Fifth Avenue's designer shoe salon - so big it has its own &quot;ZIP Code&quot;&quot; contains a hyperbole. The phrase &quot;so big it has its own &quot;ZIP Code&quot;&quot; is a hyperbole since it exaggerates the size of Saks Fifth Avenue's designer shoe salon. Based on Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, the word &quot;zip code&quot; means a number you put below the address on an envelope to help the post office deliver the mail more quickly. A zip code usually covers a wide area, more than a district or severals blocks. Saks Fifth Avenue's designer shoe salon in New York occupies only a floor in Saks building, so saying that Saks Fifth Avenue's designer shoe salon has its own zip code is clearly an exaggeration or hyperbole.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The hyperbole is used in this advertisement to add emotional intensity to otherwise merely informative statements. The hyperbole &quot;it has it's own ZIP Code&quot; add emotional intensity to the word &quot;big&quot;.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Advertisement 2</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Headline : The replenishing power of Pro-Xylane Absolutely voluptuous lips Illustration: Face of a beautiful girl</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Body Copy : New L'ABSOLUTE ROUGE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Advance Replenishing &amp;&nbsp;Reshaping Lipcolor Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup> SPF 12 Sunscreen</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the first time, Lancôme brings Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup>, its most complete and powerful replenishing molecule, to a lipcolor.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Deep hydration pampers lips for 8 hours. the creamy, luscious formula plumps out fines lines from within for visibly fuller and smoother lips.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rich, satiny, saturated color wraps lips in luxury. Lasting color precisely defines contours.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Signature Line : LANCÔME PARIS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Standing Details : shop at lancome-usa.com</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This advertisement has several figurative languages in its headline and body copy. The headline of this advertisement, &quot;The replenishing power of Pro-Xylane Absolutely voluptuous lips&quot; contains three kinds of figurative languages, namely metaphor, hyperbole and ellipsis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Metaphor in the headline can be found in the phrase &quot;the replenishing power of Pro-Xylane&quot; since in this phrase the characteristic of deep hydration of ProXylane is explained in other way by using the phrase &quot;replenishing power. Hyperbole can be found in the phrase &quot;Absolutely voluptuous lips&quot; since it contains exaggeration of the lips by the adjective phrase &quot;absolutely voluptuous&quot;. Based on Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, the word &quot;voluptuous&quot; means expressing strong sexual feeling or sexual pleasure; and it is further enhanced by the adverbial &quot;absolutely&quot;. While ellipsis, a gap or omission that have to be completed can be found in the combination of the above-mentioned phrases that construct the headline: &quot;The replenishing power of Pro-Xylane Absolutely voluptuous lips&quot;. There should be a word that connects the phrase &quot;The replenishing power of Pro-Xylane&quot; and the phrase &quot;Absolutely voluptuous lips&quot;. The omission of this connecting word can be categorized as an ellipsis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The body copy of this advertisement: &quot;For the first time, Lancôme brings Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup>, its most complete and powerful replenishing molecule, to a lipcolor.; &quot;Deep hydration pampers lips for 8 hours. The creamy, luscious formula plumps out fines lines from within for visibly fuller and smoother lips.; and Rich, satiny, saturated color wraps lips in luxury. Lasting color precisely defines contours&quot; contains 5 personifications. The personification in the first part of the body copy:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">&quot;For the first time, Lancôme brings Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup>, its most complete and powerful replenishing molecule to a lipcolor&quot; is in the phrase &quot;Lancôme brings Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup>&quot;, the Lancôme is assigned a human activity in which it &quot;brings&quot; the Pro-Xylane<sup>TM</sup>. The activity &quot;brings&quot; is assigned to Lancôme, a cosmetic producer, a non human. The personifications in the second part of body copy: &quot;Deep hydration pampers lips for 8 hours. The creamy, luscious formula plumps out fines lines from within for visibly fuller and smoother lips&quot; contains 2 personification. The first personification is in the sentence &quot;deep hydration pampers lips for 8 hours&quot;, the deep hydration is assigned a human activity in which it &quot;pampers&quot; lips for 8 hours. The activity &quot;pampers&quot; is assigned to &quot;deep hydration&quot; a non-human. The second personification is found in the sentence &quot;The creamy, luscious formula plumps out fines lines from within for visibly fuller and smoother lips&quot;, the creamy, luscious formula is assigned a human activity in which it &quot;plumps out&quot; lips for 8 hours. The activity &quot;plumps out&quot; is assigned to &quot;the creamy, luscious formula&quot; that is a nonhuman. The personifications in the third part of the body copy: &quot;Rich, satiny, saturated color wraps lips in luxury. Lasting color precisely defines contours&quot; contains two personifications. The first personification is in the sentence &quot;Rich, satiny, saturated color wraps lips in luxury&quot;, the color is assigned a human activity in which it &quot;wraps&quot; lips in luxury. The activity &quot;wraps&quot; is assigned to &quot;color&quot;, which is a non-human. The second personification is found in the sentence &quot;Lasting color precisely defines contours&quot;, the lasting color is assigned a human activity in which it &quot;defines&quot; contours. The activity &quot;defines&quot; is assigned to &quot;lasting color&quot; that is a non-human.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use metaphor and hyperbole in this advertisement is aimed to add emotional intensity to otherwise merely informative statements; the use of phrase &quot;replenishing power&quot; and adjective phrase &quot;absolutely voluptuous&quot; give more emotional intensity to the sentence. The personifications in this advertisement are used to bring additional imagery to the sentence to make abstract concepts such as how the product works more concrete. The using of the words &quot;brings&quot; &quot;pampers&quot; &quot;wraps&quot;, &quot;plumps out&quot; and &quot;defines&quot; make it easy for the readers to imagine how the product works.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Advertisement 3</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Headline : GEOX the shoe that breathes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illustration: GEOX products</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Body Copy : INTERNATIONAL PATENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">By combining a microperforated rubber sole and the breathable waterproof membrane, the Geox system lets foot perspiration go out through the sole thus keeping your feet dry and healthy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Signature Line : -</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Standing Details : 575 MADISON AVENUE - NY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ALSO AVAILABLE AT GEOX SHOPS NATIONWIDE 1-877-280-GEOX - GEOX.COM</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This advertisement contains a metaphor in its headline. The headline &quot;GEOX the shoe that breathes&quot; contains a metaphor; the GEOX system that uses a microperforated rubber sole and the breathable waterproof membrane is said in other way by using the word &quot;breathes&quot;. The metaphor in this advertisement is used to bring additional imagery and giving idea on how the product works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">6. Conclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The cases of figurative languages usage that are found in advertisements in Vogue magazine and Women’s Weekly magazine can be classified as follow: personification, hyperbole, metaphor, rhetorical question, ellipsis, parison, rhyme, antitheses, and anaphora</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The purposes of using figurative language in advertisements found in the study are three purposes. The first one is bringing additional imagery into the sentence and making the abstract concrete. The second one is adding emotional intensity to otherwise merely informative statements and the last is saying much in brief and compact. The dominant purpose is bringing additional imagery into the sentence and making the abstract concrete.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>References</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Dyer, Gillian. 1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font2">. England: Clays Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey N. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">English in Advertising: A Linguistic Study of Advertising in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Great Britain</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, Geoffrey N. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic</span><span class="font2">. Auckland: Penguin Book</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G.N. &amp;&nbsp;Short, M. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Style in Fiction</span><span class="font2">. London, Longman, 1981.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Liberman, M.M. &amp;&nbsp;Foster, E.E. 1968. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Modern Lexicon of Literary Term</span><span class="font2">s. Glenview, Scott Foresman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McQuarrie and Mick. 1996. The Journal of Consumer Research Vol.22 No.4. 424-438 (serial online). Available from htttp://www.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Perrine, L. 1982. Sound and Sense. An Introduction to Poetry. Sixth Edition. USA: Harcourt Brave Jovanovich.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pugsley, M. 1990. The Use of Figurative Language in Advertising. Fragmenta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sapir, Edward. 1949. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech,</span><span class="font2"> New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novayanti, Putu. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Interpretation Of Figurative Language in The Song Entitled Bohemian Rhapsody</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pradnyani, Ni Made. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis Of Lexical Choice And Language Functions Used In Printed Advertisements</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yulianingsih, Luh Gede. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Comparison Of Figurative Language Used in Women And Men Fashion Advertisement On Elle And FHM Magazine</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Faculty of Letter Udayana University</span></p>