---
layout: full_article
title: "Politeness Strategies in Delivering Commands in the Movie Entitled “The Social Network”"
author: "Ni Wayan Mustiari, I Ketut Tika, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol 19.1 Mei 2017: 268-274</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Politeness Strategies in Delivering Commands in the Movie Entitled “The Social Network”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Mustiari<sup>1*</sup>, I Ketut Tika<sup>2</sup>, Ni Made Ayu Widiastuti<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font1"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts – Udayana University <sup>1</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:mustiari@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> mustiari@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font1"> <sup>2</sup>[email:</span><a href="mailto:ketut_tike@yahoo.com"><span class="font1"> ketut_tike@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font1"> <sup>3</sup>[</span><a href="mailto:ayufsb@gmail.com"><span class="font1">ayufsb@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">] </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">*Corresponding Author</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam berkomunikasi, manusia terkadang melakukan tindakan yang dapat mengancam citra diri seseorang, oleh karena itu diperlukan penggunaan strategi kesopansantunan untuk mengurangi kemungkinan ancaman tersebut. Penelitian ini berjudul “Strategi kesopansantunan yang digunakan untuk menyampaikan perintah di film The Social Network”. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisis data adalah teori dari Penelope Brown dan Stephen Levinson (1987) tentang tipe– tipe kesopansantunan dan juga faktor yang mempengaruhi dalam menggunakan strategi tersebut. Data yang dikumpulkan dianalisa menggunakan metode deskriftif kualitatif. Strategi kesopansantunan yang digunakan oleh para karakter untuk menyampaikan perintah di film The Social Network ada tiga tipe, diantaranya bald on record, positive politeness, dan negative politeness. Tipe bald on record yang digunakan adalah cases of nonminimization of the face threat. Tipe positive politeness yang digunakan adalah offer / promise, be optimistic, dan include both speaker and hearer in the activity. Tipe negative politeness yang digunakan adalah be conventionally indirect. Faktor yang mempengaruhi karakter dalam menggunakan strategi tersebut ada dua, yaitu payoffs: a priori consideration dan the circumstances. Dalam the circumstances, ada dua sub tipe, diantaranya social distance dan the relative power.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Politeness Strategies, Commands, Movie</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language has the core function in our social life in order to communicate with others. The interaction between people will be difficult without language because it can express our feeling, opinion, and willing. In expressing our feeling to others, we have to be polite to maintain harmonious communication. According to Leech (1983:23), politeness is a form of behavior which is aimed at the establishment and maintenance of comity. There are some strategies that can be used in communication to achieve the goal or desire of harmonious relationship between the speaker and the hearer. Those strategies are called the politeness strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The employment of politeness strategies means that the speaker is required to consider about the face (self-image) of the hearer. However, according to Brown and Levinson (1987:65-68) there are some acts, which can threat other person’s face called FTA (Face Threatening Acts). Those acts may occur regularly in everyday interaction, for example, commands are viewed to threaten primarily the hearer’s face. Good communication between the speaker and the hearer can be maintained if both speaker and hearer try to reduce the possibility of damaging each other’s face by choosing the strategy. Therefore, the politeness strategies such as bald on-record, off-record, positive politeness, and negative politeness are employed to minimize the risk of damaging the face.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of politeness strategies are used to deliver commands by the characters in the movie entitled “The Social Network”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors influencing the choice of politeness strategies in delivering commands by the characters in the movie entitled “The Social Network”?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the type of politeness strategies used by the characters to deliver commands in the movie entitled “The Social Network”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the factors that influence the choice of politeness strategies used by the characters in movie entitled “The Social Network”.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, the data were taken from the conversation between or among characters that contain commands with politeness strategies in the movie entitled The Social Network. The movie was directed by David Fincher and written by Aaron Sorkin. There were some sample conversations between or among characters that were analyzed in this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Since the data were obtained from dialogues among the characters in the movie entitled “The Social Network”, the documentation method was applied in order to obtain the data. The process of collecting data was done by watching and listening to the conversation among the characters of the movie for several</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">times. In addition, the movie script also contributed as reference in finding the utterances. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;movie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;script &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;was &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;downloaded &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="http://flash.sonypictures.com"><span class="font1">http://flash.sonypictures.com</span></a><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the method of analyzing data, the descriptive qualitative method was employed. Descriptive means that the data are analyzed by explaining them in words or sentences descriptively. According to Creswell (2003: 43) qualitative research is an inquiry process of understanding based on distinct methodological traditions of inquiry that explore a social human problem. The data were analyzed with the theory of politeness strategies and factors influencing the choice of the strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>4.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Presenting Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Sudaryanto (1993), there are two methods of data analysis presentation which are formal and informal. In formal method, the data is presented using symbols, tables, or graphs which is aimed to describe the data more easily. On the other hand, in informal method the analysis is descriptively presented in the forms of words and sentences. Since this study applied qualitative method, the data analysis was presented informally in descriptive sentences rather than symbols.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed based on the theories of Penelope Brown and Stephen Levinson; and Janet Holmes. Holmes’s theory was applied in order to find out what type of form of directives which include commands in it used by the characters when delivering their commands. Then, Brown and Levinson’s theory of politeness strategies are used to find out what types of politeness strategies are used by the characters in delivering commands. In addition, Brown and Levinson’s theory are also used to analyze the factors that influence the character in using certain strategies to deliver commands.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bald on Record</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>a. Cases of non-minimization of the face threat.</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 1:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: These guys know people and I need their e-mails.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo &nbsp;&nbsp;: Sure.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Good. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Give me the mailing list.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo &nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><a href="mailto:jabberwock12.listserv@harvard.edu"><span class="font1">jabberwock12.listserv@harvard.edu</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: The command was delivered by Mark to Eduardo. Mark is the founder of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook</span><span class="font1">, so he had a slight higher position than Eduardo. “Give me the mailing list” is a direct imperative, which has </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">base form of verb form</span><span class="font1">. He used bald on record strategy, which is cases </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">of non-minimization of the face threat</span><span class="font1">. He spoke in a maximum efficiency because the email was needed immediately. As a result, Eduardo took his device and gave the email that Mark needed and after that, the site was launched for the first time. The factors that influence Mark in using the strategy was the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">relative power</span><span class="font1">. Mark is the founder of Facebook, he had a slight higher power than Eduardo as the co-founder and CFO, so he used his power to command him to give the email address that he needed.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">Example 2:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo : They’re saying we stole TheFacebook from Divya Narendra and the Wink-</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I know what it says.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo &nbsp;&nbsp;: Did we?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Did we what?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Eduardo &nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Don’t screw around with me now. Look at me.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">(Mark looks at Eduardo)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: The command was delivered by Eduardo to Mark. In this situation, Mark and Eduardo were friends and business partner. He directly commanded Mark not to screw around with him and seriously give his full attention to him. “Don’t screw around with me now. Look at me” is a direct imperative, which has </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">base form of verb form</span><span class="font1">. It was used by Eduardo to make Mark give his full attention to him and not screwing around again. It can be seen from the utterance that the type of politeness strategy employed by Eduardo is bald on record </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cases of non-minimization of the face threat</span><span class="font1">. He spoke clearly in a maximum efficiency to get Mark’s attention because they were talking about something crucial that was dealing with the law. The factor that influenced Eduardo in using the strategy is close </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">social distance</span><span class="font1">. It</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">happens due the fact that they are close friends and that relation makes a bond between them, so there was no awkwardness when they were communicating.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Positive Politeness</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 10: Offer, promise</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: We’re gonna need a little start-up cash to rent the servers and get it</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">online.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">We’ll split it 70-30</span><span class="font1">. 70 for me 30 for you for putting up the thousand dollars and handling for everything on the business end. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You’re CFO.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo : Let’s do it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: He gave an offer to Eduardo that they would split the future revenue of the company which is 70% for Mark as the founder and 30% for Eduardo for putting the money as the first company fund. And then, Mark commanded Eduardo to be the CFO of the company they would build. The command delivered by Mark was a direct declarative command which has ‘embedded agent’ form. It can be seen from the utterances that the type of politeness strategy used by Mark in delivering his command is positive politeness; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strategy 10: Offer, promise</span><span class="font1">. Mark gave an offer to Eduardo to split the future company outcome, and made him the CFO. The factor that influenced Mark in using the strategy is the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">relative power</span><span class="font1"> and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">payoff; a priori consideration</span><span class="font1">. Mark used the strategy to safe Eduardo’s positive face, by including the addressee and himself as the benefiters of the offer that he gives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 11: Be optimistic</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">But, you gotta come back. Somewhere around the end of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">November/early December. </span><span class="font1">Peter wants to throw us an amazing party when we hit a million members, it’s gonna be out of control. </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">You’ve gotta come back for it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo &nbsp;&nbsp;: A million members.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yeah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: The command delivered by Mark is a direct imperative command which has </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘you + imperative’</span><span class="font1"> form. The politeness strategy used by Mark in delivering his command is positive politeness; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strategy 11: Be optimistic.</span><span class="font1"> He commanded Eduardo to come back because they would hold a party to celebrate a millionth members of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook,</span><span class="font1"> so it means that Mark was so optimistic that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook</span><span class="font1"> would reach that number of members. That success would be good for both of them as part of the company. The factor that influenced Mark in using the strategy is close </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">social</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">distance</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">relative power.</span><span class="font1"> Mark and Eduardo had very close relation, because they were best friends. Besides, Mark is the CEO of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook</span><span class="font1"> which means that he is Eduardo’s superior</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 12: Include both speaker and hearer in the activity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Eduardo : You said you’ve come up with something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mark &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yeah. I think I’ve come up with something.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Come outside. Let’s talk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: Mark gave a command to Eduardo to speak outside in private. Mark delivered his command by saying ‘Come outside. Let’s talk’; it is a direct imperative which has </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘base form of verb’</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">let + first person pronoun</span><span class="font1"> forms. ‘Let’s’ stands for ‘let us’, so ‘us’ here has the position as the first person pronoun. It can be seen from the utterance that Mark used positive politeness; strategy 12: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Include both speaker and hearer in the activity</span><span class="font1"> to deliver his command. He commanded Eduardo to go outside to talk with him. He said ‘let </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">us </span><span class="font1">talk’, it already meant that the activity included both of them. He considered Eduardo’s positive face by including the addressee and himself equally as participants in the command. The factor that influenced Mark in using the strategy is close </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">social distance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negative Politeness</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1: Be conventionally indirect</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Tyler &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Start another project? Like we’re making a diorama for the science fair?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Summers &nbsp;: And if you have a problem with that, Mr. Winklevoss,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cameron : We’ve never asked for special treatment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Summers : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The courts are always at your disposal. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(pointing his hand to the door)</span><span class="font1"> Is there anything else I can do for you?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cameron : Thank you very much for your time sir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Description: President Harvard Larry Summers delivered a declarative indirect command to Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss. He implicitly commanded the twins by saying </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“the courts are always at your disposal”</span><span class="font1"> while pointing his hand to the door. It means that he had no interference and it was not his job to handle their problem and he wanted them to get out from his office. It was also added by his gesture which was pointing his hand to the door, which also means that he wanted them to leave his office. The form of command used by Mr. Summers to deliver his command is </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">hints. </span><span class="font1">He used negative politeness; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Strategy 1: Be conventionally indirect.</span><span class="font1"> There was a</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">social distance between Mr. Summers as president of Harvard and Winklevoss twins as the students of Harvard. Mr. Summers used negative politeness to safe Winklevosses’ negative faces by maintaining the social distance and avoid the face treat or the potential face loss, by going conventionally indirect. He was also maintaining his image as president of Harvard by going as polite as possible to whom he was speaking. The factor that influenced Mr. Summers in using the strategy are the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">relative power</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">social distance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that there are three types of politeness strategies employed by the characters in the movie entitled “The Social Network” in delivering their commands. The strategies included bald on record, positive politeness, and negative politeness with their sub-strategies. The type of bald on record used by the characters is cases of non-minimization of the face threat. In addition, the type of positive politeness strategies used by the characters are as follows: offer / promise, be optimistic, and include both speaker and hearer in the activity. Furthermore, the type of negative politeness strategies used by the character is be conventionally indirect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are some factors that influenced the characters in using certain politeness strategies. They are payoffs: a priori consideration and the circumstances. In the circumstances, there are two types of factor that influenced the characters in using the strategies including the social distance and the relative of power.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Brown, Penelope and Levinson, Stephen. (1987). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness, Some Universals in Language Usage</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Holmes, Janet. (1992). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font1">. England: Longman Group UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey. (1983). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. London and New York: Longman Group United.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Richards, J.C. &amp;&nbsp;Schmidt, R. (1983). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Communication.</span><span class="font1"> Harlow: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. (1993). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan secara Linguistis.</span><span class="font1"> Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">274</span></p>