---
layout: full_article
title: "INDIRECT ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS USED IN FRANCINE PASCAL NOVEL “FORBIDDEN LOVE”"
author: "Ida Ayu Trisna Prasitha"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol 15.3 Juni 2016: 70-75</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>INDIRECT ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS USED IN FRANCINE PASCAL NOVEL “FORBIDDEN LOVE”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Ayu Trisna Prasitha email: </span><a href="mailto:trisnaidaayu@rocketmail.com"><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">trisnaidaayu@rocketmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department Faculty of Letters and Cultures, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul</span><span class="font1"> “Indirect Illocutionary Act Used in Francine Pascal Novel “Forbidden Love” </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bertujuan mengidentifikasi ekspresi dan bertujuan untuk mengetahui makna dari tindakan ilokusi tidak langsung, dan menggambarkan konteks situasi. Data penelitian ini diambil dari novel berjudul Cinta Terlarang oleh Francine Pascal. Teori Searle diaplikasikan untuk mengidentifikasi ekspresi dan makna dari tindakan ilokusi tidak langsung digunakan oleh karakter dalam novel. Konteks situasi yang menentukan bahasa yang digunakan oleh peserta dalam situasi tertentu dianalisis berdasarkan teori situasi konteks yang diusulkan oleh Halliday.Analisis menunjukkan bahwa dalam komunikasi sehari-hari, terutama berdasarkan percakapan dari &quot;cinta terlarang&quot; Novel, karakter yang digunakan beberapa cara yang berbeda untuk menyampaikan pesan mereka. Beberapa dari mereka digunakan bentuk langsung, atau mereka lebih memilih untuk berbicara secaratidaklangsung. Ilokusi tidak langsung ditemukan dalam novel dalam bentuk deklaratif, interogatif, dan imperatif. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa konteks situasi termasuk lapangan, tenor, dan modus dapat menentukan bahasa yang digunakan oleh peserta dalam situasi tertentu. Ucapan ilokusi tidak langsung yang diucapkan oleh karakter dalam novel digunakan untuk menghindari kekasaran karena statusnya adalah antara rendah ke tinggi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: tindak tutur tidak langsung, tindakan ilokusi, konteks situasi</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Communications consist of full intentions in our daily life, People have their own ways in communicating their minds, so that the hearers are able to get the intended meaning of those utterances. In order to achieve the goal, someone chooses to say a certain utterance than the other utterance (Searle, l979:30) The term ‘utterance’ is ambiguous as between a process-sense and a product-sense. The term ‘utterance’ can be used to either to the process (or activity) of uttering or to the products of it. Utterances in the first of these two senses are commonly referred as speech acts; utterances in the second sense may be referred to - in a specialized sense of the term - as inscriptions (Lyons, 1995: 235).It is very simple to find out the meaning in which the speakers utter a sentence and means exactly and literally what he says. But it is not the case if in uttering it the speaker means what he says and means something more. However, sometime an utterance could mean more than it is actually uttered, for example, when a person says; “I am in no mood for conversation”. This utterance means that the speaker wants the hearer to leave him/her alone and the speaker does not want to talk anyone at the time. This utterance can be interpreted as an indirect request to do something which influence the hearer to leave him/her alone. To avoid being rude, the speaker chooses to use indirect illocutionary act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the previous explanation, there are two problems appeared to be discussed:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What expressions of indirect illocutionary acts are used in Forbidden Love novel by Francine Pascal?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the context of situation of the indirect illocutionary acts?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the intended meanings of indirect illocutionary acts that are used in Francine Pascal Novel Forbidden Love ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the expressions of indirect illocutionary acts that are used in Francine Pascal novel Forbidden Love.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">b) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the context of the situation of indirect illocutionary acts that are used in Francine Pascal Novel Forbidden Love</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">c) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the intended meanings of indirect illocutionary acts that are used in Francine Pascal novel Forbidden Love.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Methodology is the set of methods that are used as the steps in doing the scientific writing in obtaining this data. The methodology of this paper is made of some parts: there are data sources, method and technique of collecting data and the last one is method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter presented Indirect illocutionary act found in the Francine Pascal novel entitled Forbidden Love. However,there were seventeen utterances which indicated to indirect illocution acts were analyzed in this study.This chapter includes the sypnosis of the novel, findings and analysis of indirect illocutions found in the data source, a novel entitled Forbidden love by Francine Pascal. The indirect illocutionary acts used were analyzed by Halliday theory. The data analysis presented of 1 utterance from 17 utterances as the following:</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Indirect Illocutionary Acts of Declarative</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">A declarative sentence states a fact or an argument and ends with a full stop use declarative to describe other things that make a definite statement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data 1</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">“We were just talking about Michael,” said Jessica .“</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I’m staying with Elizabeth today and we need a babysitter “.</span><span class="font1"> “ Yeah it’s unfair ,” said Elizabeth . “My father and Jessica’s parents are going to the VTO party dance that should use a fancy dress and we have to stay at home with the world’s strictest babysitter .”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“fancy dress?” suddenly Maria looked interested . that sounds great “. “Nah, you’d hate it , “ said Jessica . “ it’s just a load of parents getting drunk and dancing with teachers to really old songs.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Good.” As soon as possible Mariaorder the ticket?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Expression and Intended Meaning of Indirect Illocutions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation in data 1 occurred when Jessica and Elizabeth are walking outside of the gate towards Elizabeth’s house. The speaker,Jessica, makes a declarative utterance by uttering “ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I’m staying with Elizabeth today and we need a babysitter”. </span><span class="font1">Through this utterance , the speaker means more actually says . it is not only declarative utterance which has meaning that Jessica and Elizabeth need a babysitter to look after them at that night when their parents are going to the VTO party. But at the same time he also performs another kind of indirect illocutionary act, the act of requesting .the speaker by his utterance requests the hearer. To look after them while their parents are going to VTO Party because they do not like Helen .The strictest baby sitter who will be look after them as long as their parents are going to the party.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Context of Situation of Data 1</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The conversation in data 1 occurred when Jessica and Elizabeth are walking outside of the gate towards Elizabeth’shouse. At the same time , they saw a familiar figure was sitting on a wall across the road from the school , she was Maria. Based on the statement made by Jessica when stating indirectly that she and her friend , Elizabeth needs a babysitter to look after them at night when their parents are going to the VTO Party , it clears that their desire to have a babysitter is the field of the conversation in data 1.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the conversation in data 1, there are three participants , they are ; Jessica, Elizabeth and Maria. Jessica as the speaker of indirect illocution when uttering </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I’m staying with Elizabeth today and we need a babysitter “,</span><span class="font1"> Elizabeth as the first hearer when uttering ““ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Yeah it’s unfair ,” said Elizabeth. “My father and Jessica’s parents are going to the VTO party dance that should use a fancy dress and we have to stay at home with the world’s strictest babysitter .”</span><span class="font1"> , and Maria as the second hearer when uttering “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fancy dress .that sounds great</span><span class="font1"> “. The people who</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">are in the conversation above can be considered as the tenors or the participants of the conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Declarative are used in the conversation of data 1 to make a request in order to make Maria wants to be either baby sitter. All of her friends talk about Maria and Michael, actually they have a secret theirengagement .between the two families had a huge argument that made their relationship forbidden each other. Actually all of friend like Maria very much because she is nice,pretty,friendly and she can sing she has a really great voice , her voice can entertain them. The politeness is the reason why the speaker uses the indirect illocution,Elizabeth and wish in order to Maria understands about their declarative utterance which has the intended meaning . But evidently , she does not understand about it , on the contrary she look interested in the VTO party , we can see from her utterance ; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Fancy dress?that sound fun”. </span><span class="font1">Although Jessica give disagreement by her utterance when uttering; </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Nah, you’d hate it. It’s just a load of parents getting drunk and dancing with teachers to really old sixties songs”</span><span class="font1">, Maria still does not understand and still interested in joining the party.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the data analysis that is presented previously, there are three points that can be concluded related to the problems formulated as follows: In communicating in the daily life, especially based on the conversation obtained from the novel entitled Forbidden love by Francine Pascals, the participants in the novel used different ways to convey their messages. Some of them used direct form, or they prefer to speak by means of something else or indirectly. There are seventeen expressions of indirect illocutions. Eleven utterances are in the declarative form; Five utterances are the interrogative form, one utterance is the imperative form and some of them two utterances contains declarative and interrogative forms, and one utterance contain imperative and declarative form.The intended meaning of Indirect Illocutionary acts when the participants are performing indirect illocutionary utterances there were</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">meaning behind the utterance that actually the speakers meaning says, and find out what actually the speaker meaning says.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">A Barker, Stephen. 2002. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The study about Illocutionary acts and sentence. </span><span class="font1">“Meaning”. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication</span><span class="font1">. Available from:</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">URL:http://www.proquest.com/pqdweb</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Akram, Muhammad. 2008. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts:</span><span class="font1"> AContrasive Study of speech Actin Urdi and English “.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Aesthetics and Art Critism</span><span class="font1">.First volume. Available from: URL: </span><a href="http://www.wiki.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.wiki.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Austin,J.L. (1962). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Do Things with Words</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Francine Pascal. Sweet Valley High,1964.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Forbidden Love</span><span class="font1">. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K. and RuqaiyaHasan. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context, and Text: Aspect of Language in a social-Semiotic Perspective.</span><span class="font1"> Victoria: DeakinUniversity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jayanti, PutuAyudewi. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Direct and Indirect Illocutionary Act Used in “The Duchess”Movie”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech,G. 1989. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Principle of Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Levinson, C.Stephen . 1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle, J.R. 1969.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts: An Essay in the philosophy of Language. </span><span class="font1">Cambridge: University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Searle,J.R. 1979.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Expression and Meaning</span><span class="font1">: Studies in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Theory ofSpeech Acts</span><span class="font1">. Cambridge: University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Trisnaputri, Ary Devi. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“The Analysis of Dirrectives Illocutionary in the Radiotelephony of Air Traffic Area”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar: Faculty of LettersUdayanaUniversity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiweka, Ida Ayu Krisnha. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Indirect Illocutions in Nothing Hill”</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar:Faculty of Letters Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yule, George. 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font1">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">75</span></p>