---
layout: full_article
title: "METHOD OF CHARACTERIZATION AND THREE DIMENSIONAL ASPECTS OF MAIN CHARACTER IN BRONTË’S JANE EYRE"
author: "Komang Alit Sawitri"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>METHOD OF CHARACTERIZATION AND THREE DIMENSIONAL</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>ASPECTS OF MAIN CHARACTER IN BRONTË’S </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">JANE EYRE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Komang Alit Sawitri</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul skripsi ini adalah Method of Characterization and Three dimensional Aspects of Main Character in Brontë’s Jane Eyre. Judul tersebut dipilih untuk mengetahui karakter tokoh utama dalam novel terutama metode apa yang digunakan penulis untuk menunjukkan karakter tokoh utama dan pengaruh tiga aspek dimensi dalam membentuk karakter tokoh utama. Data dikumpulkan melalui penelitian pustaka. Metode yang digunakan dalam menganalisis karakter adalah metode deskriptif. Dalam menganalisis karakter menggunakan teori dari William Kenney (1966) dan teori pendukung yang diperkenal oleh Lajos Egri dalam buku I Made Sukada (1978).Metode yang digunakan penulis untuk menggambarkan karakter tokoh utama dalam novel Jane Eyre adalah mixing method yaitu perpaduan dramatic method dan character on other character. Tiga aspek dimensi yaitu dimensi fisik, dimensi sosial, dan dimensi kejiwaan dipergunakan oleh penulis untuk membentuk karakter dari tokoh utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Metode karakteristik, tiga aspek dimensi, and tokoh utama.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Prose can be divided into two classes, fiction and non-fiction. Novel is one of those literary works which belongs to fiction. It is a story long enough to fill a complete book, in which the characters and events are usually imaginary (Hornby, 2006:999). Novel has two elements; they are intrinsic and extrinsic element. The intrinsic elements of novel are theme, setting, plot, character, point of view, style and tone, structure and technique (Kenney, 1966) The extrinsic elements include history, biography, society, psychology, ideas and arts. The extrinsic elements is needed in order to learn the external aspects of prose which bear relationship to its creation process, such as biography of his writer, his idea, the feelings and etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Character, as a part of intrinsic elements, is one of important aspects because it carries the author’s message that can bring various values in human life such as morality, education, and many others. In order to understand the character’s attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and behavior, it is important to understand physiology, psychology, and sociology aspect of the character itself. However in this study sociology and psychology of the main character are give more emphasize. Sociology is the study of human beings in their group relationship.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this writing, “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre”</span><span class="font1"> was chosen to be analyzed because it was one of famous novels by Charlotte Brontë in Victorian era. Charlotte Brontë, an English female author, who was regarded as an author whose works were mostly written based on her life and experiences. Her first published novel, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre</span><span class="font1"> in 1847. The novel is a reflection of the author’s life. It has a strong main character from naughty and uneducated became an independent woman, educated and smart although unpretty. This study was focused on Jane Eyre as the main character. The reason in analyzing the main character was it takes an important part in the story and appears continually from the beginning until the end of the story which makes it occupy the central position in the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study was emphasized on the sociology and psychology of the main character in the novel. By analyzing them, the sociology and psychology condition could be seen the writer present the main character Besides, this study analyzed the method of characterization used by the author to present the main character in the novel because the main character could build such atmosphere that affected the emotion and the feeling of the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background, there are two problems which were analyzed in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What methods of characterization were used by the author to present the main character?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the writer present the main character in term of three dimensional aspects?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In general, the aim of study was to fulfill the requirements of S1 degree. Based on the problems mentioned previously, the aim of the study can be formulated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the methods of characterization used by the author to present the main character in the novel </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre</span><span class="font1"> by Charlotte Brontë.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the main character in term of three dimensional aspects.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method is the scientific research to produce a good writing. There are three aspects of the methodology, which is required; there are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data source refers to the object from which the data are taken, for example: book, novel, and various kinds of documents. The data were taken from an English novel by Charlotte Brontë entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre.</span><span class="font1"> In this study, the novel’s “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre” </span><span class="font1">by Charlotte Bronte was chosen to be analyzed. It was one the famous novels which was published in 1847.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study used library research to collect the data by note taking. The working procedure was divided into several steps. The first step was reading the novel repeatedly and intensively to understand the content of the novel. Then, the second step was reading the theory book and browsing to the internet, in order to get more information that are relevant to the topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The technique of analyzing data is the process to find and arrange the data systematically, by organizing the data into categories, describing the data into units, arranging the data into pattern, and making conclusion. Qualitative method was used in the analysis and it was descriptively presented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In analyzing the data, a research needs theory. The collected data of his study was analyzed using the theories of characterization, how the main characters in novel are presented based on the categories of methods of characterization, proposed by Kenney (1966) in order to find out how the description the three dimensions of the main character. However this analysis emphasized sociological and psychological condition that shaped the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data collected from the data source through the data collection was analyzed by using the theory of William Kenney “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyzed Fiction”</span><span class="font1"> (1966). The supporting theory is three dimensional aspects proposed by Lajos Egri in Sukada </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra”</span><span class="font1"> (1987). Three dimensional aspects are physiological, sociological and psychological dimension.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Characterization</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The main character for the novel is Jane Eyre. Since she was a child she got careless treatment from her family. After she was an adult, she could be an independent woman and find her true love Mr. Rochester. They love each other. The author used mixing methods of characterization; the combination of dramatic, in which the main character imparts her own characteristics through the thing she said and did, and character on other character methods, in which the main character’s characteristics are revealed by other characters in the story. The analysis is as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dramatic Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the dramatic method, the characterization of the main character, Jane Eyre, is presented through her own words, thoughts and actions. These quotes about Jane’s economic life shown through dramatic method:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I availed myself fully of the advantages offered me. In time I rose to be the first girl of the first class; then I was invested with the office of teacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Brontë,1847:115-116)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">School rules, school duties, school habits and notions, and voices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, and antipathies: such was what I knew of existence. (Brontë,1847:117)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwarded a copy of it to Mrs Fairfax, and got that lady’s reply, stating that she was satisfied, and fixing that day forthight as the period for my assuming the post of governess in her house. (Brontë,1847:121)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Character on Other Character Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The characterization of the main character, Jane Eyre, is presented through what other characters say or think about her. These quotes about Jane’s economic life shown through character on other character method:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘If J.E. who advertised in the-shire Herald of last Thursday,possesses the acquirements mentioned; and if she is in a position to give satisfactory references as to character and competency; a situation can be offered her where there is but one pupil, a little girl, under ten years of age; and where the salary is thirty pounds per annum. J.E. is requested to send references, name, and address, and all particulars to the direction: “Mrs Fairfax, Thornfield, near Millcote, -shire.” (Brontë,1847:120)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘It is a village school: your scholars will be only poor girls-cottagers’ children-at the best, farmers’ daughters. Knitting, sewing, reading, writing, ciphering, will be all you will have to teach.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Brontë,1847:381)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lowood was a charity school for orphans like her. After Jane graduated from</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lowood School, she worked as a teacher and stayed there. She taught in the school for two years. As a teacher, she had to fulfill her duties in teaching her pupils and obeying the school’s rules. Then Jane resigned from Lowood, she worked for Mr. Rochester to teach Adèle in Thornfield Hall. She also became a teacher in a Vilage School in Morton in which taught girl from poor family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Physiological Dimension</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Physiological dimension of a character is observed through sex, age, physical appearance such as shape of body, whether or not a person is beautiful or handsome, color of skin and hair. From that aspect, the reader can imagine how the character looks like and what clothes he or she wears to help to convey the personality, (Sukada, 1987:65). Hence, the physiology of the main character was analyzed on the physical appearance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">A. Physical Appearance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Jane Eyre’s physical appearance is presented through the application of mixing methods; the “dramatic” and “character on other character” methods. There are quotes from the novel, as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dramatic method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the dramatic method, the characterization of the main character, Jane Eyre, is presented through her own words, thoughts and actions. These quotes about Jane’s physical appearance shown through dramatic method:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I sometimes regretted that I was not handsomer: I sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks, a straight nose, and small cherry mouth: I desired to be tall stately, and finely developed in figure; I felt it a misfortune that I was so little, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Brontë,1847:130)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Character on other character method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the character on other character method, the characterization of the main character, Jane Eyre, is presented through what other characters say or think about her.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">He stood considering me some minutes; then added, ‘She looks sensible, but not all handsome.’ ‘She is so ill, St. John.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">‘Ill or well, she would always be plain. The grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features.’ (Brontë,1847:366)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The quotes above show that the main character in the novel, Jane Eyre, was unpretty with a plain faced woman, thin figure and so small. She wished that she was</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">a beautiful girl with pretty cheeks and a nice little mouth and tall because she felt that she was not beautiful and regret about that.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Sociological Dimension</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">.....that my father had been a poor clergyman; that my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends..... that after my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent; then my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month of each other. (Brontë,1847:58)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bronte creates her main character as a poor orphan girl. Jane’s father is a poor clergyman. Her mother is the Reed’s daughter that come middle class family. A year after their marriage, Jane’s father caught typhus while visiting the poor in a large manufacturing town and both of her parents soon died within a month of each other and left Jane orphaned.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Psychological Dimension</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Child in Gateshead Hall</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Jane was a child got harmed from her family in Gateshead Hall. It made Jane become a rude girl. Her cousins always disturb her; however, she got the punishment from her aunt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Wicked and cruel boy!” I said. “You are like a murderer-you are like a slave-driver-you are like the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Roman emperors!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“What! What!” he cried. “Did she say that to me? Did you hear her, Eliza and Georgiana?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!” (Brontë,1847:43)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Young Woman in Moor House, Whitcross</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After Jane leave the Thornfield Hall. She became hard worker, responsibility to her job, and independent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“You would not like to be long dependent on our hospitality. You desire to be independent of us?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“I do: I have already said so. Show me how to work, how to seek work. I will be dressmaker; I will be a plain-workwoman; I will be a servant, a nurse girl, If I can be no better,” I answered. “Right,” said Mr. St. John, quite coolly. “If such is your spirit, I promise to aid you, in my own time and way.”(Brontë,1847:374-375)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the problems, the author used a mixing method to present the main character. They are dramatic method and character on other character. The author describes the character of Jane by her mind. Besides that comments from other characters also affect the character of Jane in the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the second problem, the three dimensional aspects could shape the main character in the novel. But the analysis gives more emphasize on sociological and psychological dimension. Jane Eyre, physiologically, was unpretty with a plain faced woman, thin figure and so small. She wished that she was a beautiful girl with pretty cheeks and a nice little mouth and tall because she felt that she was not beautiful and regret about that. Sociologically, there are many things related to this character. They are socialization and personality, cooperative, competition, and conflict. Jane was a poor orphan girl. Jane’s father is a poor clergyman. Her mother is the Reed’s daughters that come from middle class family. Jane’s father caught typhus while visiting the poor in a large manufacturing town and both of her parents soon died within a month of each other and left Jane orphaned. Jane’s character describes a social life indicated by helping people, she also has a great responsibility for his job, Jane loved Mr. Rochester even though she knew she had to compete with Miss Ingram. Jane’s life when her childhood was fill of conflicts with her family, it made Jane become mature and forgive their mistakes. Psychologically, the elements analyzed in psychological aspect was human motivation such as attitude, wants, emotion as motives, feeling and attitude and feeling and emotion since Jane was a child until young woman. It analyzed using influence of setting time and place to determine the mental development of Jane. When Jane was a child she got harmed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">from her family in Gateshead Hall. It made Jane became a rude girl. Her cousins always disturbed her. However, she got the punishment from her aunt. After she studied in Lowood School, she was polite to other people. While Jane was young woman, Jane struggled to fulfill every duty, she became work hard and it made proud people in her surrounding. Jane became independent woman after Jane worked in Thornfield Hall and Whitcross because there she found her loved, Mr. Rochester and her family, Diana, Maria and St. John.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Adhiguna, I Made Surya.2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of the Main Character in Terence RattiGan’s “The Winslow Boy” Based On Psychology and Sociology”.</span><span class="font1">Skripsi Sarjana, Denpasar: Faculty of Letter, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Anonim, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2008. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Victoria &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Era.</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cited</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">from:URL:</span><a href="http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/bronte/cbronte/brontbio.h"><span class="font1">http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/bronte/cbronte/brontbio.h</span></a><span class="font1"> tml</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bernhardt, Karl S. 1953. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology.</span><span class="font1">Canada: Mc.Graw-Hill Book Company,Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bronte, Charlotte. 1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jane Eyre.</span><span class="font1"> London: Penguin Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, A.S. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary Seventh edition. </span><span class="font1">Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction.</span><span class="font1"> New York: Monarch Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pratiwi,L. Putu Ika. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Maria as the Main Character of Coelho’s Eleven Minutes (A Study on the Psychological Aspects).</span><span class="font1"> Skripsi Sarjana, Denpasar: Faculty of Letter, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Roucek, Joseph S. and Rolland L. Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sociology An Introduction. </span><span class="font1">New Jersey: Littlefields, Adams, and Co Paterson</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Suardana, I Ketut. 2008. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Psychological Analysis of the Main Characterin “The Shawshank Redemption.</span><span class="font1"> Skripsi Sarjana, Denpasar: Faculty of Letter, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sukada, Made.1987. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Beberapa Aspek Tentang Sastra.</span><span class="font1">Denpasar:Penerbit Kayumas dan Yayasan Ilmu seni Lesiba.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ventura, Thomas.2002. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Psychoanalysis”.</span><span class="font1">psychology: Vol.14,iss.8;april.,pg.32,6 pgs(cited 2008 Sep. 14 Available from: </span><a href="http://allpsych.com/psychology101/psychoanalysis.html"><span class="font1">http://allpsych.com/psychology101/psychoanalysis.html</span></a><span class="font1">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene, and Austin Warren. 1966. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font1"> London: Cox and Wyman, Ltd</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_______,</span><a href="http://www.shmoop.com/jane-eyre/summary.html"><span class="font1">http://www.shmoop.com/jane-eyre/summary.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p>