---
layout: full_article
title: "VIOLATION OF CONVERSATION MAXIM ON TV ADVERTISEMENTS"
author: "Desak Putu Eka Pratiwi"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14131 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-14131"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-14131"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">ISSN: </span><span class="font0">2442-7586</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Vol. 9. NA.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">e-Journal of Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">VIOLATION OF CONVERSATION MAXIM ON TV ADVERTISEMENTS</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Desak Putu Eka Pratiwi</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:eka_mambal@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">eka_mambal@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">STIBA Saraswati Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">N.L. Sutjiati Bertaha, M.A.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:sutjiati58@gmail.com"><span class="font5">sutjiati58@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Linguistics, School of Graduate Studies, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">I Nengah Sudipa </span><span class="font5">e-amil: </span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font5">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Linguistics, School of Graduate Studies, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">I Ketut Darma Laksana </span><span class="font5">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:darmalaksana27@yahoo.com"><span class="font5">darmalaksana27@yahoo.com</span></a><span class="font5"> </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Study Program of Linguistics, School of Graduate Studies, Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Maxim is a principle that must be obeyed by all participants textually and interpersonally in order to have a smooth communication process. Conversation maxim is divided into four namely maxim of quality, maxim of quantity, maxim of relevance, and maxim of manner of speaking. Violation of the maxim may occur in a conversation in which the information the speaker has is not delivered well to his speaking partner. Violation of the maxim in a conversation will result in an awkward impression. The example of violation is the given information that is redundant, untrue, irrelevant, or convoluted. Advertisers often deliberately violate the maxim to create unique and controversial advertisements. This study aims to examine the violation of maxims in conversations of TV ads. The source of data in this research is food advertisements aired on TV media. Documentation and observation methods are applied to obtain qualitative data. The theory used in this study is a maxim theory proposed by Grice (1975). The results of the data analysis are presented with informal method. The results of this study show an interesting fact that the violation of maxim in a conversation found in the advertisement exactly makes the advertisements very attractive and have a high value.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font5">violation, maxim, advertisement</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Introduction</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Advertisement uses language as the main tool to give a description of a reality. Language is used, in this matter, for two purposes. First, language is used as a means to describe the reality of goods (products) that are advertised. Secondly, after the description of the goods is given, language is also used to form an image of the product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Language of advertisement is a very rich language, both its style and its words. Attracting attention, triggering imagination, and making something easy to remember are the main functions of the language of advertisement. Unusual words and simple sentences are easy to remember. This causes the mind of many people to be filled with brands, slogans, mottos, rhythms and rhymes, alliterations, a fragment of a song or poem, and of course noending repetitions. Advertisers really make use of the language because there are more advantages from making strange and controversial statements than from simple statements. Advertisement producers like to play with words and manipulate or change the actual meaning of the words. They violate grammatical rules to get a certain effect, use out-ofcontext words, and even create new words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Advertisers often use conversations to deliver messages of advertisement in order to make it more interesting and interactive. Due to limited duration the conversation in advertisement is sometimes brief but has many messages to convey. This makes the messages in advertisement unclear. In advertisement, some conversations are easy to understand while some others are difficult to understand, or even confusing and very provocative. The most important thing in a conversation is conversational coherence, relevance and meaningfulness of a conversation. A conversation is coherent when it is in a good order and makes sense to its speakers. Creating coherence in a conversation may sound easy but in fact it is very difficult and can not be understood simultaneously by the speakers. Conversational maxims developed by Grice are often used in examining a conversation in order to understand the relationship in the conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Maxim is a principle that must be obeyed by the participants when interacting, both textually and interpersonally, in order to make communication process go well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Advertisement is also one of communication media between advertisers and the public (potential buyers). But the fact is that the conversational maxims are often neglected by advertisers. Violation of the maxims of conversation will result in awkward impressions. The example of violation is the given information that is redundant, untrue, irrelevant, or convoluted. Advertisers often deliberately violate the maxims to create unique and controversial advertisements. This phenomenon is very interesting to deeply examine. This study aims to examine the violation of conversational maxims on TV advertisements.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Theoretical Background</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">The main principle of Grice (1975), which is to understand the relationship in a conversation is cooperation. Cooperation is a fundamental assumption in constructing a meaning or a purpose the speaker and the listener wish to indicate. Grice stated that in the principle of cooperation, a speaker must obey the four maxims. Maxim is a principle that must be obeyed by the participants when interacting, both textually and interpersonally, in order to make communication process go well. The four maxims of conversation are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quality: in a conversation, try your best to state facts.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of quantity: give sufficient information and do not give anything that is not necessary.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of relevance: state what is useful or relevant only.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maxim of manner: do not state anything that is not clear, do not state anything that is ambiguous, speak briefly and specifically.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">In his book &quot;Logic and Conversation&quot; Grice (1975), regarding cooperative principle, states that violation of the cooperative principle can occur in a conversation when the information to be conveyed by the speaker to the listener is not delivered properly. Violation of the maxim of conversation can result in an awkward impression. The example of violation is the given information that is redundant, untrue, irrelevant, or convoluted. Advertisers often deliberately violate the maxims to create unique and controversial advertisements. This awkwardness is usually used by the advertisers to create persuasive, controversial, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">bombastic statements to show their products’ excellence. According to Grice, there are four types of violations of the maxim in cooperative principle. The violations are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Violation of Maxim of Quality</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">This violation occurs when a speaker tries to give information, which is likely to be untrue or a lie, to his speaking partner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Violation of Maxim of Quantity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">This violation occurs when a speaker gives unclear or exaggerated information to his speaking partner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Violation of Maxim of Relevance</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">This violation occurs when a speaker gives an answer that is not related to the previous topic or tries to change the topic being discussed in a conversation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Violation of Maxim of Manner</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">This violation occurs when a speaker gives information to his speaking partner in a disorganized way and unclearly.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Methodology</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">The data in this study were taken from TV commercials. There are 10 commercial advertisements used in this study and they are all food advertisement. The advertisements are; </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sedaap Cup Noodle, Tango Wafer, Fitbar, Energen Cereals, Sambal ABC, Special Chicken Noodle Sedaap, Sasa, Magic Delicious, Jacob's Crackers,</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Bango soy sauce</span><span class="font5">. Food ads are selected as the source of data in this study because they have the largest market segmentation of all products. Food products advertisement can reach the most people. They are different from such advertisement as cosmetics and sanitary napkin whose targets are women, cigarettes and condoms whose target are adult males, or cars whose target are limited to middle and upper class. Based on this, food advertisement is considered the most representative to see the language phenomenon, especially the violation of maxims. The method used to collect the data was observation method conducted with recording, listening and note-taking techniques. The data were, then, analyzed based on the theory of Grice's</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">maxims (1975). The results of data analysis are presented with informal method through sentence compositions, phrases and technical terms in order to provide explanation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Violation of Maxim of Quality</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Maxim of quality is the maxim which obliges the participants to give factual formation. By implementing the maxim of quality in cooperative principle the participants is expected to give a completely true information. This violation occurs when a speaker tries to give information, which is likely to be untrue or a lie, to his speaking partner. A speech that is not based on reality and not supported by clear and concrete data, and cannot be accounted for, violates the maxim of quality. There are four advertisements that violate the maxim of quality, they are advertisement of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Wafer Tango, Fitbar, Sasa, and Jacob's Crackers</span><span class="font5">. Below are the analysis of violation of the maxim of quality in food advertisement.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Data A1:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Dulu hidup gue basi banget. (2) Kalo kata kucing gue ‘</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kudate-kudate</span><span class="font5">’.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tapi sekarang gue </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup date</span><span class="font5">. &nbsp;(4) Makan Mie Sedaap Cup baru. (5)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Pertama kali ni, mie </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> dengan rasa yang </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. (6) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cup date</span><span class="font5"> itu mie </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> yang isinya banyak. (7) Ada bal-balnya. (8) Hmmm pingin gue pacarin. (9) Rasanya sensasinya </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. (10) Pecah enaknya. (11) Ini baru mie cup berkualitas, rasanya berkelas. (12) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">So update</span><span class="font5"> rasa lu. (13) Cuma Mie Sedaap Cup baru.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In the speech above the speaker violates the maxim of quality because the speaker tries to provide information that is not true. This can be seen in the second speech, “Kalo kata kucing gue </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ʻkudate-kudate’</span><span class="font5">” and &quot;Hmmm pingin gue pacarin&quot;. In the second speech the speaker says that the cat said, &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kudate-kudate</span><span class="font5">&quot;. This information is definitely not true and contradicts with the reality because the cat cannot speak like human. In speech (8), the speaker says that he wants to date with Sedaap Cup Noodle. This cannot happen in reality and does not make sense at all because it is impossible for a human to date with inanimate objects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Data A2:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Tango disukai selera lokal dan internasional. (2) Tango juga kenalkan bebek dan Blackberry. (3) Astronot dan asongan pun akrab karenanya. (4) Tango satukan </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">shuffling</span><span class="font5"> dan siskamling. (5) Nikmatnya tango satukan semua perbedaan. (6) Tango… (7) Berapa lapis? (8) Ratusan…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">There is a violation of the maxim of quality in the advertisement above. This can be seen in speech 2, 3, and 4. In these speeches the speaker says that Tango introduces Duck to Blackberry, astronaut to peddler, and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">shuffling</span><span class="font5"> to </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">siskamling</span><span class="font5">. How could duck be acquainted with Blackberry, astronauts with peddlers, and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">shuffling</span><span class="font5"> with </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">siskamling</span><span class="font5">? These speeches violate the maxim of quality because there is no truth in each of them. They are not based on reality and do not have supporting data that prove the information stated in them. The information is not only untrue but also does not relate to each other.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Data A3:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">P1: “(1) Biasanya jam segini ni jamnya ngemil. (2) Dulu suka </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5"> nimbun kalori dan kolesterol. (3) Untung sekarang ada Fitbar. (4) Nggak bikin </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5">, enak lagi.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: “(5) Habis bakar kalori masak nimbun kalori lagi? (6) Sejak ada Fitbar nggak perlu </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5">. ”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(7) Fitbar, kalori terjaga nol kolesterol.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: “(8) Ganti cemilanmu dengan Fitbar.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(9) Fitbar, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">snacking with no worry</span><span class="font5">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The Advertisement above violates the maxim of quality because some utterances are not supported by concrete evidence that can prove what is stated in the speech. This can be seen in speech 7, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Fitbar, kalori terjaga nol kolesterol</span><span class="font5">”. The advertiser does not provide supporting data to prove the product free from cholesterol.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Data A7:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Indonesia negeri seribu satu kuliner tapi hanya Sasa yang menyatukannya jadi satu kelezatan. (2) Satu nusa satu Sasa, semua pakai Sasa. (3) Maknyus. (4) Bagaimana dengan anda?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Violation of the maxim of quality is also found in the advertisement above. The violation can be seen in the speech 2, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Satu nusa satu Sasa, semua pakai Sasa</span><span class="font5">”. In the speech the speaker provides information whose accuracy cannot be accounted for. The speaker claims that all Indonesian people consume </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sasa</span><span class="font5">, but the information is not based on clear evidence and it is, therefore, not verified.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Data A8:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">P1: “(1) Bang… Cakue…!!! Bang… Siomay…!!!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: “(2) Masakan ibu nggak kalah enak.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(3) Saatnya beraksi. (4) Magic Lezat lebih komplit. (5) Ayam, bawang, dan bumbu-bumbu semua ada di sini. (6) Nggak perlu nambahin mecin. (7) Kaldu gurihnya terasa banget. (8) Masakan biasa jadi luar biasa.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P3: (9) “Nasi goreng…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (10) “Wahhhh…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P4: (11) “Siomay….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (12) “Huhhh…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: (13) “Enak masakan ibu kan?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (14) “Masakan ibu </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">magic</span><span class="font5">!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: (15) “Magic Lezat, lezatnya manggil…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Trans TV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The violation of the maxim of quality is also found in the advertisement above. It is seen in speech 8, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Masakan biasa jadi luar biasa</span><span class="font5">”. The speech is not based on concrete evidence. There are no data that can prove </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Magic Lezat</span><span class="font5"> able to make an ordinary cooking into an extraordinary one. Besides, what is meant by &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">luar biasa</span><span class="font5">&quot; in the speech is also not clear. Another example can also be seen in speech 15, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Magic Lezat, lezatnya manggil…”</span><span class="font5">.This speech violates the maxim of quality because the speaker provides information that cannot be proven. In reality, it is not possible for inanimate objects (</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Magic Leza</span><span class="font5">t) to be able to literally &quot;call&quot; someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Data A9:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">L: “(1) Ikan belum makan, PR anak kebanyakan, beban! (2) Baru ingat beras habis, kulkas bocor, bos sadis, pembantu pulang, mertua datang. (3) Aduh beban-beban!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(4) Beban nggak terasa kalo badan fit. (5) Baru Jacob’s crackers lezat. (6) Kaya nutrisi gandum asli, susu, dan sayuran. (7) Jacob’s pilihan sehat nikmatmu.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: RCTI, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">At the beginning while humming the speaker is saying “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ikan belum makan, PR anak kebanyakan, beban! Baru ingat beras habis, kulkas bocor, bos sadis, pembantu pulang, mertua datang</span><span class="font5">. Then the speaker implicitly says that by eating Jacob's all the burdens can be alleviated. This violates the maxim of quality because the speaker provides information that is not based on the facts. How can a single cookie can provide sufficient energy intake to cope with all the burdens of a housewife who is also a career woman. In fact, a man needs a wide variety of food intake in order to get enough energy to do all his activities.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Data A10:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Ini anak kami. (2) Ada juga yang di kebun, namanya Malika. (3) Malika itu kedelai hitam dari Bango yang saya besarkan sepenuh hati seperti anak sendiri. (4) Hasilnya kedelai hitam pilihan untuk membuat kecap Bango yang hitam dan kental. (5) Rasa masakan jadi benar-benar lezat. (6) Karena rasa tak pernah bohong.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Global TV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The violation of maxim of quality can be seen in speech 5, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Rasa masakan jadi benar-benar lezat</span><span class="font5">”. The speech cannot be proven. Advertisers do not provide concrete data that prove </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kecap Bango</span><span class="font5"> able to make food very delicious. How can the audience believe something that has no evidence.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Violation of Maxim of Manner</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">The maxim of manner in Grice's cooperative principle requires every participant to always speak with each other directly and clearly. The message should not be ambiguous or</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">obscure. This violation occurs when the speaker gives information disorderedly or unclearly to his speaking partner. There are three advertisements that violate this maxim, namely </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Wafer Tango, MagicLezat,</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kecap Bango</span><span class="font5">. Below is the analysis of violation of maxim of manner.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Data A1:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Dulu hidup gue basi banget. (2) Kalo kata kucing gue ‘</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kudate-kudate</span><span class="font5">’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(3) Tapi sekarang gue </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup date</span><span class="font5">. (4) Makan Mie Sedaap Cup baru. (5) Pertama kali ni, mie</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> dengan rasa yang </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. (6) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cup date</span><span class="font5"> itu mie</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> yang isinya banyak. (7) Ada bal-balnya. (8) Hmmm pingin gue pacarin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(9) Rasanya sensasinya </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. &nbsp;(10) Pecah enaknya. (11) Ini baru mie</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">cup berkualitas, rasanya berkelas. (12) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">So update</span><span class="font5"> rasa lu. (13) Cuma Mie Sedaap Cup baru.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Maxim of manner requires, as stated previously, each participant to express all his thoughts clearly. What is meant by &quot;clear&quot; is the use of right words, which does not contain hidden meaning. Clear information is the one that does not cause multiple interpretations to emerge. The advertisement above violates the maxim of manner because the speaker uses some words that have vague meanings. This can be seen from such words as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kudate, cup date, bal-bal,</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pecah enaknya</span><span class="font5">. These words have vague meanings and they cause the speaker to interpret their meanings themselves. Thus, the speech can lead to different interpretations.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Data A2:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Tango disukai selera local dan internasional. (2) Tango juga kenalkan bebek dan Blackberry. (3) Astronot dan asongan pun akrab karenanya. (4) Tango satukan </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">shuffling</span><span class="font5"> dan siskamling. (5) Nikmatnya tango satukan semua perbedaan. (6) Tango… (7) Berapa lapis? (8) Ratusan…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Violation of maxim of manner occurs when the speaker uses words whose meanings are ambiguous and unclear. This happens in the advertisement above. Advertisers use words that are ambiguous. This is seen in speech 2-4, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tango juga kenalkan bebek dan Blackberry</span><span class="font5">, </span><span class="font2">109</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Astronot dan asongan pun akrab karenanya, Tango satukan shuffling dansiskamling</span><span class="font5">”. These utterances have hidden meanings, and therefore violate the maxim of manner. The speech has vague meanings because the speaker does not express his thoughts directly and clearly.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Data A4:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Nggak sempet makan? (2) Bisa gawat, perut keroncongan. (3) Ganjel aja dengan Energen! (4) Susu, sereal, oats yang kaya nutrisi. (5) Siap dalam semenit. (6) Energen, nutrisi praktis untuk keluarga. (7) Energen, minum makanan bergizi.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In the advertisement above violation of maxim of manner is seen when the speaker makes utterances that are ambiguous or contain unclear information. Speech 7 says, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Energen, minum makanan bergizi</span><span class="font5">”. This speech is ambiguous because the words are confusing. What is meant by &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">minum makanan</span><span class="font5">&quot; is not clear. The listeners become confused of whether it is a food product or a drink product. However, the advertisers must have already considered every word that appears in the advertisement so that it can be concluded that the advertisers have a certain purpose that makes them create &quot;weird&quot; expressions. The aim is none other than creating a unique and interesting advertisement in order to make the known public more quickly.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Data A8:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">P1: “(1) Bang… Cakue…!!! Bang… Siomay…!!!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: “(2) Masakan ibu nggak kalah enak.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(3) Saatnya beraksi. (4) Magic Lezat lebih komplit. (5) Ayam, bawang, dan bumbu-bumbu semua ada di sini. (6) Nggak perlu nambahin mecin. (7) Kaldu gurihnya terasa banget. (8) Masakan biasa jadi luar biasa.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P3: (9) “Nasi goreng…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (10) “Wahhhh…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P4: (11) “Siomay….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (12) “Huhhh…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: (13) “Enak masakan ibu kan?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (14) “Masakan ibu </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">magic</span><span class="font5">!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: (15) “Magic Lezat, lezatnya manggil…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The advertisement above violates maxim of manner because the speaker uses words whose meanings are not clear. This is seen in speech 14, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Masakan ibu magic!”</span><span class="font5"> in which the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">magic</span><span class="font5"> has a vague meaning. It is not clear what is meant by &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">masakan yang magic</span><span class="font5">&quot; in the advertisement. Does it mean 'magic' performed by a magician? or maybe the product can turn awful food into delicious food, or it has another meaning. Thus, speech 14 raises confusion and make audience think hard to understand what the speech actually tries to express.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Data A10:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Ini anak kami. (2) Ada juga yang di kebun, namanya Malika. (3) Malika itu kedelai hitam dari Bango yang saya besarkan sepenuh hati seperti anak sendiri. (4) Hasilnya kedelai hitam pilihan untuk membuat kecap Bango yang hitam dan kental. (5) Rasa masakan jadi benar-benar lezat. (6) Karena rasa tak pernah bohong.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Global TV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Violation of maxim of manner is found in the advertisement above. It is seen in speech 1 and 2, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ini anak kami, Ada juga yang di kebun, namanya Malika</span><span class="font5">…”. According to maxim of manner the speaker should not say anything unclear and ambiguous. The speaker should speak briefly and specifically. In speech 1 and 2 speakers provides ambiguous statement. Speakers make their speaking partners confused with their statements about &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Malika</span><span class="font5">&quot;. The Ambiguous statements of the speakers could make their speaking partners wonder whether or not &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Malika</span><span class="font5">&quot; is one of the speakers’ children. In fact, &quot;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Malika</span><span class="font5">&quot; is black soybean in their garden. This shows that in terms of maxim of manner, the speakers provide unclear and confusing information.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Violation of Maxim of Quantity</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Based on maxim of quantity, speakers in conversations should provide necessary contribution to their speaking partners. In maxim of quantity a speaker is expected to deliver messages or information which is sufficient and as informative as possible to other speakers. Violation of maxim of quantity occurs when a speaker gives too much information to his </span><span class="font2">111</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">speaking partner. There are five advertisements that violate maxim of quantity. They are advertisement of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Fitbar, Energen Sereal, Sambal ABC, Kopi Kapal Api,</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Fruitea</span><span class="font5">. The analyses of the violations are provided below.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Data A3:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">P1:“(1) Biasanya jam segini ni jamnya ngemil. (2) Dulu suka </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5"> nimbun kalori dan kolesterol. (3) Untung sekarang ada Fitbar. (4) Nggak bikin </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5">, enak lagi.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: “(5) Habis bakar kalori masak nimbun kalori lagi? (6) Sejak ada Fitbar nggak perlu </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry</span><span class="font5">. ”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(7) Fitbar, kalori terjaga nol kolesterol.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: “(8) Ganti cemilanmu dengan Fitbar.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: “(9) Fitbar, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">snacking with no worry</span><span class="font5">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">It is found that the advertisement above violates maxim of quantity because there is information that is redundant and repetitive. This can be seen in speech 4, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Nggak bikin worry, enak lagi</span><span class="font5">”; in speech 6, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sejak ada Fitbar, nggak perlu worry</span><span class="font5">”; and in speech 9, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Fitbar, snacking with no worry</span><span class="font5">”. The Advertisers repeatedly use the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">worry,</span><span class="font5"> combined with </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">nggak bikin</span><span class="font5">, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">nggak perlu</span><span class="font5">, dan </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">with no</span><span class="font5">, even though it contains the same meaning and information. With this, the advertisement violates maxim of quantity because the principle of the maxim of quantity is to provide necessary information and not to say anything unnecessary. However, since the advertisers have a specific purpose, they deliberately violate maxim of quantity. They want to emphasize that the advertised product is safe and consumers do not have to worry about being obese.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Data A4:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Nggak sempet makan? (2) Bisa gawat, perut keroncongan. (3) Ganjel aja dengan Energen! (4) Susu, sereal, oats yang kaya nutrisi. (5) Siap dalam semenit. (6) Energen, nutrisi praktis untuk keluarga. (7) Energen, minum makanan bergizi.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">This advertisement also violates maxim of quantity. The Advertisers repeat the same information in two different speeches. This can be seen in speech 5 “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Siap dalam semenit</span><span class="font5">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">and in speech 6 “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Energen, nutrisi praktis untuk keluarga</span><span class="font5">”. The phrase </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">siap dalam semenit</span><span class="font5"> is synonymous with the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">praktis.</span><span class="font5"> This means that it is unnecessarily repeated.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Data A5:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (1) “Asikkkk…… yahhhh kurang menantang….”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: (2) “Hhhmmmm…. Hhaaaa…..Yakin…???”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N: (3) “Temukan sensasi baru sambal terasi ABC. (4) Sekali coba sensasi pedasnya, akan tertantang terus, terus, dan terus. (5) Dibuat dengan cabai segar dan terasi pilihan.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1: (6) “Coba dulu, baru tahu rasanya.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2: (7) “Dengan ABC, ibu selalu bisa.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: SCTV, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The advertisers violate maxim of quantity because, in the conversation, the speaker provides redundant information. This is observed in speech 4, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sekali coba sensasi pedasnya akan tertantang terus, terus, dan terus</span><span class="font5">”. In this speech the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">terus</span><span class="font5"> is mentioned three times. It is exaggeration because for the listeners, the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">terus</span><span class="font5"> needs to be stated only once to understand.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Violation of Maxim of Relevance</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">To build a good cooperation between speaker and hearer, each of them has to, according to maxim of relevance, give relevant contribution to something that is being talked about. A speech can be said to obey maxim of relevance when the speech and responses are related to each other. Violation of maxim of relevance occurs when a speaker gives an answer that does not relate to topic of conversation or tries to change the topic of the ongoing conversation. There are six advertisements that violate maxim of relevance. They are advertisement of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mie Sedaap Cup, Mie Sedaap Ayam Spesial, The Botol Sosro, Fruitea, Nu Greentea, and Frestea.</span><span class="font5"> The followings are the analysis of the violations of relevance maxim.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>Data A1:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">“(1) Dulu hidup gue basi banget. (2) Kalo kata kucing gue ‘</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kudate-kudate</span><span class="font5">’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(3) Tapi sekarang gue</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup date</span><span class="font5">. &nbsp;(4) Makan Mie Sedaap Cup baru. (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Pertama kali ni, mie</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> dengan rasa yang </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. (6) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cup date</span><span class="font5"> itu mie</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cup</span><span class="font5"> yang isinya banyak. (7) Ada bal-balnya. (8) Hmmm pingin gue pacarin. (9) Rasanya sensasinya </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">up to date</span><span class="font5">. (10) Pecah enaknya. (11) Ini baru mie cup berkualitas, rasanya berkelas. (12) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">So update</span><span class="font5"> rasa lu. (13) Cuma Mie Sedaap Cup baru.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Trans 7, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In some speeches in the advertisement above the speaker violates maxim of relevance. This can be seen in speech 1-4, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Dulu hidup gue basi banget</span><span class="font5">”, “</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kalo kata kucing gue ʻkudate-kudate’”, “Tapi sekarang gue cup date”, “Makan Mie Sedaap Cup baru</span><span class="font5">”. In the speeches the speaker told that his life used to be &quot;stale&quot; (boring /not fun), but after eating </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mie Sedaap Cup</span><span class="font5"> his life turned into &quot;up to date&quot;. The speech does not have any relevance or any cause-and-effect relationships. In reality, it is impossible for noodles to be able to change someone's life.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>Data A6:</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (1) “Adi saying banget sama ayam-ayamnya.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (2) “Nek, aku sekolah ya.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (3) “Sore itu…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (4) “Nenek, ayam-ayamku mana?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (5) “Udah, makan dulu sana ada mie ayam special tu.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (6) “Hmmmm enak… Kaldunya asli… Ayamkuuuuuuu…???”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P2 : (7) “Bukan Di, ini Mie Sedaap baru. Dari kaldu ayam asli.(8) Rasanya pok pok pok pok.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: (9) “Jadi, ayamku?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">P3 : (10) “Mie Sedap Ayam Spesial, asli ayamnya.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Sumber: Indosiar, Oktober 2013)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Violation of maxim of relevance occurs in the advertisement above. This can be seen in conversation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Adi : “Nenek, ayam-ayamku mana?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Nenek : “Udah, makan dulu sana ada mie ayam spesial tu.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In this conversation it is clear that the grandmother tries to divert conversation to make Adi forget his chickens. There is no relevance between the question asked by Adi and</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">the answer given by his grandmother. Adi asked about his chickens to his grandmother, while his grandmother even asks Adi to eat without answering his question first.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">As has been mentioned above, there are four maxims that must be followed by the participants when interacting so that the process of communication, maxim of quality, maxim of quantity, maxim of relevance, and maxim of manner, can go well. From all the data analysis it is found that violation of the four maxims occurs in the advertisements on TV. This means that most of the advertisements do not follow the rules of conversational maxims. The data show that 70% of advertisements violate maxim of quality. Violation of maxim of manner covers 50% of advertisements, violation of maxim of quantity 30%, and violation of maxim of relevance 20%. The high percentage of violation of maxim of quality shows that the advertisers try to give information that is likely to be incorrect or untrue to their audience. Meanwhile, the high degree of violation of maxim of manner shows that advertisers tend to present disordered or unclear information to their audience. The violations of maxim of quantity and maxim of relevance show that the advertisers provide respectively redundant and irrelevant information to their audience. Although there are many violations of conversational maxims found on TV ads, the advertisements can still be understood, and they are even made more interesting and unusual by the violations. This suggests that interesting advertisements do not have to adhere to the principles of maxim proposed by Grice. The language of advertisement is not bound with the principles of maxim because the more unique the language, the more attractive the advertisement. Such violations can elicit a sense of humor which is fresh and very entertaining. It can be concluded, then, that the violation of maxims in food advertisements does not disrupt the message to be conveyed. On the contrary, it makes the advertisements become more unique and interesting to see.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Accreditation:--</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Bungin, B. 2010. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kuantitatif</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta: Kencana Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Bungin, B. 2010. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta: Rajawali Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Cook, G. 1992. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">The Discourse of Advertising</span><span class="font5">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Danesi, M. 2010. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Memahami Semiotika Media</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Danesi, M. 2010. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pesan, Tanda, dan Makna</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Grice, H. P. 1975. “Logic and Conversation.” In: </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech Arts</span><span class="font5">. Eds.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Cole, Peter and Jerry L. Morgan. New York: Academic Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sudaryanto. 1993. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa</span><span class="font5">. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">3 772442 7ΞBDDS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">116</span></p>