---
layout: full_article
title: "CONTEXT OF SITUATION AND CONJUNCTION FEATURES IN ENGLISH PRINTED ADVERTISEMENTS"
author: "I Gede Putra Permana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">CONTEXT OF SITUATION AND CONJUNCTION FEATURES IN ENGLISH</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">PRINTED ADVERTISEMENTS</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I Gede Putra Permana</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Konteks situasi dan kata penghubung memiliki peran didalam menentukan gambaran pemetaan makna dari sebuah iklan tertulis. Teori yang di gunakan berasal dari dua buku yang dikarang oleh Halliday and Hasan yang berjudul Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-Semiotic Perspectiv dan buku kedua berjudul in the book Cohesion of English (1976). Temuan yang didapat dari penggunaan teori diatas mendasar pada unsur-unsur konteks situasi dan jenis kata penghubung yang di gunakan dalam iklan tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : iklan tertulis, konteks situasi dan kata penghubung.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1 . Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">English printed advertisement as a media has become very important and it is commonly used not just in verbal message but also contains visual information to emphasize or to support the verbal message. Learning about interpreting the verbal and the visual messages of advertisements in the English printed advertisement by looking at its context of situation and conjunction in order to find the meaning contained in the advertisement itself is a quite interesting. The theory about Context of Situation proposed by Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan in their book entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in social-semiotic perspective</span><span class="font0"> is used in this paper. There are three features of situational context, namely: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">field, tenor</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and mode.</span><span class="font0"> . The second theory by Halliday and Hasan in their book entitled; </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font0"> (1976) was used in this journal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this journal there are two theories proposed by Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan wich were used to analyze the phenomena above could be formulated the context of situation and conjunction in three English printed advertisements.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The aims of this journal were focused to apply the Discourse analysis theory by investigating the three features of the context of situation in the advertisements in order to interpret its message correctly. Next were classifyed the types of conjunction used in the English printed advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The research method is fundamentally important in this analysis. It is a process and procedure of how we approach the problems and seek out the answers through finding, collecting and analyzing the data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The data was collected and randomly taken from tourism information post in Kuta area. There were seven brochures randomly taken from tourist information post, namely </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Fave Hotel MEX Building Surabaya</span><span class="font0"> (text 1)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">, Aston Bali Resort and Spa</span><span class="font0"> (text 2)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Set of data of this research were qualitatively taken from the written text of English printed advertisement in the brochures. </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Qualitative research</span><span class="font0"> which is much more reliant upon, interviews and case studies and deals generally with much smaller numbers and qualitative research methods were developed in the social sciences to enable researchers to study social and cultural phenomenon. The opposite to this type of research is quantitative method which is a research method that relies less on interviews, observations, small numbers of questionnaires, focus groups, subjective reports and case studies but is much more focused on the collection and analysis of numerical data and statistics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">First the data were qualitatively collected and descriptively analyzed based on Halliday and Hasan concept of context of situation theory in their books entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font0">. It was useful to find out the real message in the advertisement by interpreting the situational context of the advertisement based on; the field, the tenor, the mode. Next, this study used the conjunction theory proposed by</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Halliday and Hasan (1976:320) in the book </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion of English (1976).</span><span class="font0"> To classify the types of conjunction and to identify the use of it in English printed advertisement. After the use of conjunction was analyzed in this study then followed by the percentage the conjunction that occurred using the quantitative method. The quantitative method showed how many times each of the conjunction emerged on the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis3.2 Text 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fave Hotel MEX Building Surabaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With its fun atmosphere, Fresh attitude and Friendly service the Favehotel MEX building is set to be Surabaya’s very best select service hotel and is ideal for people living in active and modern lifestyle as well as for budget oriented business travelers, small groups and families.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Rooms are super clean and functional offering amenities usually associated with more expensive hotels such as LCD televisions, remote controlled AC’s en suite bathrooms with standing showers and complimentary high speed Wi-Fi connections. Rooms also feature easy to use electronic key card systems for piece of mind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A Favehotel is unified team of energized people obsessed with creating a friendly and affordable hotel experience focusing on everything guests really want such a spotless cleanliness, efficiency, comfortable beds, functional rooms and bathrooms and a big smile …</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Context of Situation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to the discussion in the previous chapter, context of situation has a close communication relationship in a mutual co-operation between the text and its situation to transfer the meaning for its customers. The analysis of the first English printed advertisement is based on the three features of context of situation proposed by Halliday .</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>3.2.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">From the field point of view it could be identified that the text is about advertisement and the Fave hotel overview to their new customers. From the first sentences the Fave hotel presented its location which is enjoyable for everyone. On the second and third sentences the writer explained about the hotel facilities and the features on each of their rooms. The function of the pictures in this brochure was to support the readers imagination about the hotel looked like.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3.2.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tenor</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Tenor refers to who is taking part on the text, and also refers to the nature of the participants their status and roles including, kinds of relationship obtained among the participant whether that is permanent or temporary relationships of one kind to another. The participants involved in the text were the author of the brochures and the target reader the customers itself. The author is a person who writes the brochures. The customer is a person who read and is interested in the contents of the brochures. The customers are the target of this kind of advertisement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The role of the author was to give an interesting and as simple as they could to make the customers interested and understand about their hotel related to the location, facilities, short explanation about what their hotel look like, and also a complete address of the Fave Hotel to make it easy by the readers to find the hotel if they want to make a reservation. The role of the readers was to receive the information through the brochure. And the relationship that appeared between the writer and the reader was temporary relationship.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>3.2.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Halliday states the mode of discourse refers to what part of the language is playing. The mode in part of the printed advertisement was written text. This text was the written text of Fave Hotel brochures for their customers. The form of language used in this text was informative with monologue interaction because there is no feedback interaction from the readers. Based on the language used, it was an informative language. The whole sentences in this text have one general idea to give Fave hotel information to their customers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>3.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conjunction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">As described in the previous chapter a word that joins other word, clauses, etc, can be categorized as conjunction. Conjunctive elements are cohesive not in themselves but directly by virtue of their specific meanings; they are not primarily devices for reaching out into the preceding text, but they express certain meaning with presuppose the presence of other component in the discourse. In this analysis, there are two sub types of cunjunction that could be identified based on the theory proposed by Halliday and Hasan as described below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>3.2.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Additive ‘And’</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Additive appears when two sentences aregrouped together as already mentioned on the previous chapter. There were eight items of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> that could be found on the Fave hotel brochure, in this brochure </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> is categorized as a simple form of additive conjunctions. In this advertisement the conjunction </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> showed the internal sense because there was something more to be informed to the readers. The example could be given below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With its fun atmosphere, Fresh attitude </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">and</span><span class="font0"> Friendly service the Favehotel MEX building is set to be Surabaya’s very best select service hotel </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">and</span><span class="font0"> is ideal for people living in active </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">and</span><span class="font0"> modern lifestyle as well as for budget oriented business travelers, small groups and families.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The internal sense expressed there was information which is still related to the previous one in order to make the readers able to imagine what the hotel looked like and the facilities on each of the hotel rooms. There are specifically emphatic forms of the ‘and’ relation occurring in an internal sense, that of ‘there is yet another point to be taken in conjunction with the previous one’. This fact is that the meaning that is taken by ‘and’ which has relation in the form of internal conjunction (Halliday-Hasan, 1976:246).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>3.2.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reversed Causal Relation ‘For’</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The causal relations included the specific ones of result, reason and purpose or there is new information that has been given in the terms of cause and consequence. In this brochure there are three items of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font0"> which could be identified as reversed causal relations. The reversed causal relation shows that the second sentence is the cause and the first sentence as the result. The example of the item could be given below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With its fun atmosphere, Fresh attitude and Friendly service the Favehotel MEX building is set to be Surabaya’s very best select service hotel and is ideal </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">fo</span><span class="font0">r people living in active and modern lifestyle as well as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">for</span><span class="font0"> budget oriented business travelers, small groups and families.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">in the first sentence there were two reversed causal </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font0"> presupposing the consequence dedicated to multiple types of the customers itself. The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font0"> is used in an internal sense meaning ‘this is the reason for what was just said’ (Halliday-Hasan, 1976:258).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>3.3 Text 2</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Aston Bali Resort and Spa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Discerning travelers who seek a carefree escape can enjoy the cozy ambience of our large rooms &amp;&nbsp;suites.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">All rooms are equipped with separate bathroom, private balcony and modern amenities, including flat screen TV and broadband internet access.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A contemporary resort and spa located on one of the most stuning private beaches of Benoa Peninsula overlooking the Indian Ocean.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Set within a beautiful landscape of exotica garden and surrounded by an impressive 700M2 swimming pool, the Resort is synonymous with casual elegance and typical Balinese Hospitality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Exciting “All inclusive” formulas as well as unforgettable wedding packages are among some of our exclusive offers… visit our website and discover our amazing offers at: </span><a href="http://www.astonbali.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.astonbali.com</span></a><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Freshest seafood, casual BBQ, themed nights, Balinese dinner &amp;&nbsp;dance, healthy Spa cuisine or candlelight dinner on the beach. Indulge in a pure gastronomic journey and treat your self!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>3.3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Context of Situation</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">According to the discussion in the preceding analysis, context of situation has close relationship in both written and spoken languages. We are able to understand easily about the text as a whole if we include the context of situation in understanding the text. The analysis below presented Aston Bali Resort and Spa text based on the three aspects of context of situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>3.3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Field</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The field of discourse refers to what is happening on the text. The text was about an advertisement from Aston Bali Resort and Spa to their customers. In this brochure they tried to explain the facilities in their hotel rooms including their location, wedding packages, and other facilities on their hotel.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>`3.3.1.2 Tenor</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The tenor refers to participants, the nature of the their status and roles. The participants in this text were the writer of the Aston Bali Resort and Spa brochure and the readers or their new customers. The writer of this brochure tried to inform the hotel to the readers. The second participant was the reader who read and got interested in this hotel. Kinds of relationship obtained among the participant temporary relationships of one kind to another, although they did not know each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>3.3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mode</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The mode of discourse refers to what part of the language is playing. This advertisement used written texts printed in a brochure. The writer of this brochure dedicated their written text to the reader who was searching place to stay in Bali. The aim of the advertiser was to attract attention from the readers to become their customers through the sort explanations and including the pictures of the hotel.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>3.3.2 . Conjunction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">As described in the previous analysis a word that joins other word, clauses can be categorized as conjunction. In this analysis only additive sub types of conjunction found in Aston Bali Resort and Spa brochure. It is an advertisement text with a short explanation about the facilities, location and their extra services.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>3.3.2.1 . Simple Additive Relations ‘And’</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">As explained before additive conjunction indicates that a sentence is meant to add further information to the preceding sentence. There were seven items of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> which could be found in this brochure. Based on the data, the entire sentence which contain simple additive relations </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font0">occurred in the middle of sentence. It could be seen clearly in the following examples:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">All rooms are equipped with separate bathroom, private balcony </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> modern amenities, including flat screen TV and broadband internet access.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">And</span><span class="font0"> in this example was categorized as a simple additive form of additive conjunction. The expression </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font0"> occurred in the middle of sentence that showed internal sense because it expressed ‘there is something to be said’. There are specifically emphatic forms of the ‘and’</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">relation occurring in an internal sense, that of ‘there is yet another point to be taken in conjunction with the previous one’ (Halliday-Hasan, 1976:246).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark47"></a>3.3.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simple Additive ‘Or’</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">For the conjunction </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or,</span><span class="font0"> there is only one which could be found in the text of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Aston Bali Resort and Spa</span><span class="font0">. With the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font0"> relation the distinction between the external and the internal plan is perhaps more clear cut in the basic meaning of which the meaning of conjunctive </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font0"> relation is alternative simple. And next is the example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Freshest seafood, casual BBQ, themed nights, Balinese dinner &amp;&nbsp;dance, healthy Spa cuisine </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">or</span><span class="font0"> candlelight dinner on the beach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The basic meaning of conjunctive </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font0"> relation is alternative (Halliday-Hasan, 1976:246). It was clear in the example that conjunction </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font0"> took on the internal sense of an explanation. In the sentence, there was another option that could be chosen by the customers to enjoy their food.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark49"></a>6 Conclusion</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">The advertisement text had three features of context of situation namely</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The fields of all texts were different and the same thing that all of them were advertisements in tourism industries. Tenor and all of the text had similar tenors, they are writers and readers and the relationship among them was temporary. In regard to mode the texts they used written language to persuade the readers for what was being written by the writer. Every text had their own context of situation</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font0">There were four types of conjunctions used in English printed advertisements.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark51"></a>References</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Halliday, M. A. K, and R. Hasan. 1976. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font0">. London and New York: longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Halliday, M.A.K, and Ruqaiya HAsan. 1985. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Context and Text: Aspect of Language in a Social Semiotic Perspective</span><span class="font0">. Australia: Deakin University, Victoria</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Fave Hotel MEX Building Surabaya</span><span class="font0"> brochure (text 1)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Aston Bali Resort and Spa</span><span class="font0"> brochure (text 2)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>