---
layout: full_article
title: "MAGERY AND FIGURATIVE LANGUAGES IN THE SONG LYRIC OF   1. Abstrak SECONDHAND SERENADE “Like a Knife”"
author: "Kadek Mahardika Saputra"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">IMAGERY AND FIGURATIVE LANGUAGES IN THE SONG LYRIC OF</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SECONDHAND SERENADE “Like a Knife”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kadek Mahardika Saputra</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">0718351143</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERSUDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abstrak</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Topik penelitiansaat ini adalahImagery and Figurative Language in the song lyric of Secondhand Serenad“Like a Knife”.Laporanpenelitian inibertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis-jenis bahasa citra dan bahasa kiasan yang digunakan dalamlirik lagu“Like a Knife”dalam album Secondhand serenade dan serta mengetahui fungsi dari citra dan bahasa kiasan dalam lirik lagu“Like a Knife”jenis teori yang akan digunakan adalah dari buku KLKnickersbocker dan H.WillardReninger, Setelah data dianalisis dan dibahas, ditemukan bahwa ada beberapa citra dan bahasa kiasan yang digunakan dalamkedua lirik lagu tersebut,contoh teori citra adalah;citraVisual dan Kinesthesia. Selain bahwa citra itu juga didukung dengan penggunaan bahasa kiasan antaranya :simile dan metafora. Lagu “Like a Knife”menceritakan tentang kisah cinta yang buruk.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Song is a kind of art, either in the form of poetry or song lyric that expresses many aspects of life. Song lyric are the same as poetry in terms of arranging the words of the lines, and song lyrics have stanzas and lines like poems do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Creating song lyric is not an easy job to do. The writer needs imagination and figurative sense to create the lyrics of the song to make somebody listens to it, feel interested in it. One song that is recognized to have used very much using imagery and figurative is the group Secondhand Serenade, Almost in all of their songs lyrics imagery and figurative could be found.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Since Secondhand Serenade songs are very interesting to hear, it is considered important to know what actually the meaningin hidden within the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">song. It will be useless if just listening to the song without understanding what actually the song wants to convey to us as the listeners. That is the reason for the study to analyze it more deeply.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">1)Types of imagery being employed in the song lyric of “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Like a Knife“</span><span class="font1">inSecondhand Serenade?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">2)The functions imagery and figurative languages in the song lyric in relation to the meaning or theme of the lyric?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding the background and the problem above, the aims of the study can be stated as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the type of imagery and figurative language employed in the song lyrics “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Like a Knife“</span><span class="font1">inSecondhand Serenade.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out functions of imageries and figurative language in the song lyrics “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Like a Knife“</span><span class="font1">inSecondhand Serenade.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research based on Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary is a careful study to discover new facts or information. While on the other hand, method that is based on Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary means the way of doing something. Here the research method means the way of doing such a careful study to find the new facts or information, research method itself includes data sources, method and technique of collecting data and the last one is method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Use of Imagery and Figurative languages in the Lyric “Like a Knife”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Thesong lyric which were analyzed is “Like a Knife”.This lyric consists of three stanzas with second repeated lyrics. Imageries and Figurative Languages can be found in these lyrics. However, before going further to the analysis, the lyrics can be presented as follow.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>“Like A Knife&quot;</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">I dream a lot, I know you say</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I've got to get away</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The world is not yours for the taking</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Is all you ever say? I know I'm not the best for you,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But promise that you'll stay</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause if I watch you go,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">You'll see me wasting; you'll see me wasting away</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, you walked out of my life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, your words felt like a knife</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'm not living this life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Goodbyes are meant for lonely people standing in the rain</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">And no matter where I go it's always pouring all the same.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">These streets are filled with memories</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Both perfect and in pain And all I wanna do is love you</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But I'm the only one to blame</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, you walked out of my life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, your words felt like a knife</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I'm not living this life but what do I know, if you're leaving</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">All you did was stop the bleeding.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">But these scars will stay forever,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">these scars will stay forever</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and these words they have no meaning if we cannot find the feeling that we held on to together try your hardest to remember</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Stay with me,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Or watch me bleed,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I need you just to breathe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, you walked out of my life</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(Stay with me, or watch me bleed)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Cause today, your words felt like a knife</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I need you just to breathe,I'm not living this life</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>6.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kind of Imagery languages:</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Visual Imagery</span><span class="font1">is based on the theory taken from Gallaudet University; it states that by visual imagery someone can see something in his mind.For example :</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">world </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">is not yours for the taking” “Goodbyes are meant for lonely people standing in </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">the rain”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In these lines there are some words which can stimulate our sense of sight, namely the word “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">world</span><span class="font1">”, in the first line, we can imagine the planet that we live in. the third planet in the galaxy. The second phrase is “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">the rain</span><span class="font1">” which can be imagined as water droplets from warm air. It is a water vapor which collects together, we see them as clouds, which when have enough water droplets, and the droplets bang together and fall as rain.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kinesthesia </span><span class="font1">is based on the theory stated, there is word which can be considered as kinesthesia in the song lyric under study.For example:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Goodbyes are meant for lonely people </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">standing </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in the rain”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word “</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">standing</span><span class="font1">” in this line can stimulate our physical senses of which can be described as a</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_position"><span class="font1"> human positioni</span></a><span class="font1">n which the body is held upright and supported only by the feet. This position usually appears when people are waiting for someone, tired of sitting, or a position which is usually done by the army in their daily practice activity.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>6.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kind of figurative languages:</span><br><br><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark16"></a>•</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metapho</span><span class="font1">r</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Knickerbocker and Reniger (1963:367),metaphor is a means of comparing things that are essentially unlike. Two or more different objects are though similar, the similarities may be in this forms, attitudes of features.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stay with me,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“I need you just to breathe”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In Metaphor, example the word “ I need you just to breathe” is something needs of each person in the life so the writers have special purposes to analyze a certain metaphor in his poem, and one of purposes are make a good lyrics for remember when the readers read the poem. A metaphor that is commonly used may lose in our minds the element of similarity that originally prompts it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark18"></a>•</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hyperbole</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">According to Knickerbocker and Reniger (1963:367), Hyperbole is a figure of speech which employs an exaggeration that is used for special effect. For example:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stay with me, or watch me bleed</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The above example shows that “stay with me or watch me bleed” is hyperbola because a person is not possible to sacrifice of himself for the one he loves even though it dangerous and should die. He tries to tell her that if she is not with him,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">he will suffer from losing her.So we should not be selfish if someone who is in a relationship of love wants to leave.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">After all the discussion and analysis in the six sections, the following are some important things that can be taken as the conclusion of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">First, in lyrics &quot;Like a Knife&quot; there are several types of imagery used: they really help us to imagine something. Such an imaginationcan really support the idea being conveyed through the song. The imageries which are employed in the song are mostly visual imagery but there are also other types of imagery such as: Visual imagery and Kinesthesia The use of imageries is profound in the lyrics, in addition such a figurative language is important in these two lyrics&quot;Like a Knife&quot; there are several figurative language employed to assist the imageries in delivering the idea of the song to the listener. Those figurative languages are Simile, Metaphor and Hyperbole.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second, all the imageries and figurative language are functioning to boost the idea of the song. Here the figurative languages and imageries that are related to each other in the lyric to boost the idea so that the song becomes full of pain and feeling of love.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>BIBLIOGRAHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Bogdan and Biklen in the book entitled MetodolagiPenelitianKualitatif revised edition byProf.DR. Lexy J. Moleong, M.A</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Knickerbocker, K.L. and H. Willard Reninger. 1963. Interpreting literature. Smith, Sybille. 1985. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">inside Poetry.</span><span class="font1"> Victoria: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1956. Theory of Literature. New York: America.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">7</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">