---
layout: full_article
title: "EXPRESSIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS FOUND IN DONNIE BRASCO MOVIE"
author: "I Nyoman Bayu Raharja"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">EXPRESSIVE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS FOUND IN</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DONNIE BRASCO MOVIE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">BY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I NYOMAN BAYU RAHARJA</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NON REGULER PROGRAM, FACULTY OF LETTER UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Abstrak</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul “ekspresive illocution acts di dalam film berjudul Donnie Brasco”.Penelitian tindak bahasa atau speech act di dalam film Donnie Brasco meneiliti tentang ekspresive illocution acts yang digunakan dalam percakapan antara pemeran utama dalam film ini yaitu Donnie dan Lefty. Data penelitian ini diambil dari film dan penelitian ini dimulai dari menonton film mencatat naskah yang diucapkan oleh kedua karakter utama tersebut.Setelah itu mengklasifikasikan yang mana termasuk dalam ekspresive illocutionnary acts. Teori yang digunakan adalah teori dari Searle (1969) untuk menentukan yang mana termasuk ekspresive illocutionnary acts dalam percakapan di film Donnie Brasco.Hasil penelitian dari Expresive Illocutionary Acts dalam film Donnie Brasco lebih banyak ditemukan Thanking daripada Apologizing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: Illocutionary Acts, Expressive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Searle in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts: An Essay in The Philosophy of Language </span><span class="font2">(1969, 23-4) said that pragmatically at least there are three types of act that may be realized by a speaker upon his/her speech, that is the act to express something (locutionary act), the act to do something (illocutionary act), the act to affect the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">converse speak (perlocutionary act). Respectively, the three types are called the act of saying something, the act of doing something, and the act of affecting someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pragmatic analysis is a language analysis based on pragmatic views. Analysis of pragmatics tries to find out the speaker’s intentions, whether it would be expressed explicitly or implicitly because it is a revealing speech in comunication. Listening is a significant aspect within the competence attainment in English speech. The student is expected to get to understand a several meanings in various interactions using oral text, and particularly in the form of descriptive, narrative, recount, procedure, report and anecdote.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">An </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">illocutionary</span><span class="font2"> act is a complete speech act, made in a typical utterance, that consists of the delivery of the propositional content of the utterance (including references and a predicate), and a particular illocutionary force, whereby the speaker asserts, suggests, demands, promises, or vows as has stated before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Illocutionary acts, more commonly known as speech acts, are acts performed in saying something: making a statement or promise, issuing a command or request, asking a question etc. The illocutionary act is the semantic ‘illocutionary force’ of the utterance, thus its real, intented meaning (Austin,1962). “Speech act” is often meant to refer just to the same thing as the term illocutionary act.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Expressive Illocutionary Actsare those kinds of speech acts that state what the speaker feels. They express psychological states and can be statements of pleasure, pain, likes, dislikes, joy, or sorrow.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background stated above, the problem of the study is “What categories of Expressive illocutionary acts are used by the two main characters in the Movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2">?”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background stated above, the aim of the study is “To find out the category of expressive illocutionary act used by the two main characters found in the Movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2">.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In matter of conducting a research, an appropriate research method is required.There are three steps that are required in completing this method. The research method covers data source, method and techniques of collecting data, and method and techniques of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were taken from the internet as the main source and which werethen analyzed using some sources such as books, articles, encyclopedia, etc, to support study. The other type of data being used were data from the Movie trough DVD and internet.This uses body movement of the characters that can be seen from the DVD to find out the hidden meaning that cannot be interpreted only from the script.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were collected by watching the movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2"> while reading the script many times in order to have a deep understanding of the story along with its context. The process of watching here functions just as synchronizing the original dialogues in the script with the dialogues spoken by the characters in the film. Then, was written down the description of the character’s action in the movie was written down.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">After Reading and watching the chosen movie and understanding the stories then categorizing the illocutionary acts into each categorywereidentified the utterances that contain expressive illocutionary act inthe movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of Expressive illocutionary acts</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2"> is a 1997 crime drama film directed by Mike Newell, and starring Al Pacino and Johnny Depp. Michael Madsen, Bruno Kirby, James Russo, and Anne Heche appeared in supporting roles. The film is based on the true story of Joseph D. Pistone, an FBI undercover agent who infiltrated the BonannoCrime Family in New York City during the 1970s, under the alias </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2">, &quot;The Jewel Man&quot;. Brasco maneuvers his way into the confidence of an aging hit-man, Lefty Ruggiero, who vouches for him. As Donnie moves deeper into the Mafia, he realizes that not only is he crossing the line between federal agent and criminal, but also leading his friend Lefty to an almost certain death.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Expressive </span><span class="font2">Illocutionary acts are acts that state what the speaker feels. They express psychological states and can be statements of pleasure, pain, likes, dislikes, joy, or sorrow. (Searle (1969:68-70).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Apologizing</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Donnie : you want to embarrass yourself with this thing ?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lefty : embarrass myself ?my family, my children, my mother can hold her</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">head up in any neighborhood in this city.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">in all the five boroughs, I’m known. forget about it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I’m known all over the fuckin world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">anybody ask anybody about lefty from mulberry street. you’re pissing up the wrong tree.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donnie : I didn’t mean no disrespect. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it’s a miss understanding</span><span class="font2">. Lefty : where you going ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The utterance of Donnie is representative of Apologizing. Donnie expresses an apology to Lefty. The utterance ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">it’s a miss understanding’ </span><span class="font2">means that Donnie apologize to Lefty because he makes Lefty angry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation is taking place in the bar. In the first meeting between Lefty and Donnie, Lefty asks about the Diamond to Donnie because he wants to sell his diamond. Donnie makes Lefty mad because he says to him to be a Dunsky. Dunsky is an idiot and has absolutely no clue at what he/she are saying or doing. That is why Lefty is mad. But Donnie is trying to leave Lefty because he does not want trouble with him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thanking</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Donnie &nbsp;&nbsp;: I’m sorry left but I’m in a little bit of rush here.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lefty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: merry Christmas</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donnie &nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">thank you</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lefty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: that’s really nice of you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">very generous of you Donnie, thanks you. good boy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donnie : happy holyday</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The utterance of Donnie is representative of thanking. Donnie thanks Lefty for his greeting and his present on Christmas eve. The utterance ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thank you’</span><span class="font1"> is uttered by Donnie for Lefty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This conversation is taking place in Lefty’s house on Christmas eve. Lefty invites Donnie to come to his house on Christmas eve, but Donnie does not want to spoil his day. Donnie’s plan is to go back to California to meet his family before</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">christmass day ends. But Donnie is said that he is an orphan, and Lefty is not his friend to be alone on christmass day. So Lefty invites him to accompany him and his family and celebrating christmass day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lefty : so keep your nose clean, be a good earner, follow the rules, and who knows, maybe one day when they open the book you get straightened out. become a wise guy, a made guy. come on. lift your glass.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">I’d die with you, Donnie. anything happens, im responsible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Donnie : allright.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">thanks a lot that was excellent</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lefty : could you spot me a couple please ? I’ll get it back to you. call me tomorrow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The Utterance of Donnie is said to be representative of thanking. Donnie thanks Lefty for his word that he will be taking care of him. The utterance ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">thanks a lot that was excellent</span><span class="font1">’ means that Donnie thanks Lefty for his word and his statement that Lefty will be taking care of him, and will represent Donnie to the Family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This conversation is taking place in Lefty’s house on Christmas eve. Lefty invites Donnie to come to his house on Christmas eve, but Donnie does not want to spoil Leftys day. Donnie’s plan is to go back to California to meet his family before christmass eve. But Donnie said that he is an orphan, and Lefty does not want his friend to be alone on Christmas day. So Lefty invites him to accompany him and his family celebrating Christmas day.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">It can be concluded that there are two expressive illocutionary acts found in Donnie Brasco movie, there are Apologizing and Thanking. The expressive illocutionary acts mostly used in that Movie was Thanking Expressive illocutionary acts.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Austin, John L. 1975. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Do Things with Words</span><span class="font2"> (2nd end). Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Searle, John R. 1969. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts. An Essay in the Philosophy of Language</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wikipedia. 2012. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Donnie Brasco</span><span class="font2"> (film).</span></p>
<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donnie_Brasco_%28film%29"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donnie_Brasco_%28film%29</span></a></p>