---
layout: full_article
title: "THE POTENCY OF CHITOSAN AS AN ELICITOR ON ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY  OF Streptomyces sp. GMR-22 AGAINST HISTAMINE-PRODUCING BACTERIA"
author: "Mohamad Aji Ikhrami, Jaka Widada, Indun Dewi Puspita, Masagus Muhammad  Prima Putra"
categories: jbb
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-78196 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/id-78196"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jbb/full-78196"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOSCIENCES AND BIOTECHNOLOGY ∙ Vol. 9 No.1 ∙ September 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">pISSN: 2303-3371</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">THE POTENCY OF CHITOSAN AS AN ELICITOR ON ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">OF </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> sp. GMR-22 AGAINST HISTAMINE-PRODUCING BACTERIA</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Mohamad Aji Ikhrami<sup>1</sup>, Jaka Widada<sup>2</sup>, Indun Dewi Puspita<sup>1</sup> and Masagus Muhammad Prima Putra<sup>1*</sup></span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>Fish Product Technology, Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Agriculture, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jl. Flora gedung A4, Bulaksumur Yogyakarta 55281</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup>Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jl. Flora gedung A4, Bulaksumur Yogyakarta 55281</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">*</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Corresponding author, e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:primaputra@ugm.ac.id"><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">primaputra@ugm.ac.id</span></a></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Streptomyces is a Gram-positive bacteria that produces the largest secondary metabolite compounds. The results of whole-genome sequence analysis showed that Streptomyces can carry more than 30 Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGC) encoding secondary metabolites that have the potential to be explored in the exploration for new bioactive compounds. However, not all BGC can be expressed in the laboratory scale and requires a specific activation method. This study aims to explore the potential of chitosan as an elicitor compound to activate and or increase the antibacterial activity of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was tested against histamine-producing bacteria (HPB) </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1. Chitosan was added to the fermentation medium with the final concentration of 250, 500, and 750 µg/ml while without the addition of chitosan used as control. Fermentation was carried out for 10 days at room temperature, with constant agitation 200 rpm. The supernatant was separated by centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 15 minutes, then fractionation with ethyl acetate, concentrated by vacuum rotary evaporator, and freeze-dried. The test for antibacterial activity was carried out by the microdilution method with an extract concentration of 100 mg/ml. The test results of the microdilution method showed that the addition of chitosan successfully increases the antibacterial activity with the highest activity shown by the water fraction of 250 µg/ml addition of chitosan which effective in inhibiting the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1 by 97,29% and 97,92% respectively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Key words: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">antibacterial, histamine-forming bacteria, elicitor, chitosan, Streptomyces sp.</span><span class="font3"> GMR-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">22</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Streptomyces is a group of filamentous Gram-positive bacteria belonging to the Actinomycetes phylum. These bacteria can be found in nature in various types of habitats such as the sea, soil, and in symbiosis with insects, plants and marine sponges (Cheng </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font3">, 2015). Streptomyces is one type of potential bacteria that has produced nearly two-thirds of the antibiotic compounds that have been discovered and used to date (Procópioa </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2012). Several types of secondary metabolite compounds produced by Streptomyces include antifungal, anticancer, antiviral, and other antibiotics (Azerang &amp;&nbsp;Soroush, 2017). One of the Streptomyces species that has a large potential for bioactive compounds production is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 which was isolated from soil samples in Wanagama Forest, Gunungkidul, Yogyakarta (Nurjasmi </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2009). Several studies have been conducted to detect the presence of bioactive compounds produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 includes antifungal activity (Alimuddin </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2011) and antiviral (Mentari </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2019).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The secondary metabolite compounds that can be produced by Streptomyces are encoded by various types of protein coding</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">genes that are located close to each other. These gene groups are called gene clusters and are located on chromosomes in the cell nucleus. Based on the analysis of genome mining using the AntiSMASH 3.0 program conducted by Herdini </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., (2017), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was reported to have around 63 types of biosynthetic gene clusters. However, Abdelmohsen </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2015) explained that the major gene clusters encoding secondary metabolites of this bacterial group were a little difficult to express under laboratory conditions. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3"> A3 (2) was reported to have 29 types of BGC (Bentley </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2003), but only 6 types of BGC were expressed on a laboratory scale (Rutledge &amp;&nbsp;Challis, 2015). The other gene clusters that are not expressed named as silent or cryptic. Several strategies can be done to activate the silent gene cluster includes co-culture (Onaka, 2017), heterologous expression (Matsuda </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2017), ribosome engineering (Thong </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2018) and elicitation (Tyurin </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2018). Elicitation is one of the silent gene cluster activation methods by adding elicitor compounds to influence the expression of secondary metabolites. Elicitor is a compound that has the ability to stimulate changes in the production of secondary metabolites in cells (Abdelmohsen </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">.,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2015). Several elicitor compounds reported have the potential to stimulate the expression of secondary metabolites by bacteria, namely ethanol; dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (Pettit, 2011); N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) (Rigali </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2008; Nazari </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013); and chitin (Nazari </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2013).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Nazari </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2013) reported that the addition of chitin and N-acetylglucosamine to the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3"> A3 (2) culture resulted in an increase in the expression of antibiotics encoded by the Act, Red, Cpk cluster genes. Moreover, Rigali </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2008) also reported an increase in the expression of the production of the antibiotics undecylprodigiosin (Red) and actinohordin (Act) in the culture of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3"> A3 (2) supplemented with N-acetylglucosamine. However, research related to the application of chitosan as an elicitor compound to influence the expression of BGC in the production of Streptomyces secondary metabolites has not been reported. Chitosan is a chitin derivative compound that has undergone a deacetylation reaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Despite of the already reported bioactive compound produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22, information regarding the antibacterial activity has not been done yet. This study aim to observe the potency of chitosan as an elicitor compound</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994 pISSN: 2303-3371 </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">to increase and or activate Streptomyces antibacterial compounds. Antibacterial test is carried out on histamine-producing bacteria (HPB) which is one of the pathogenic bacteria in fishery products. HPB produce histamine compounds that is toxic at certain concentrations. Apart from being able to trigger the formation of histamine, this group of bacteria is also reported to have various types of virulence factors that can be dangerous. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> as one of HPB is also reported to cause food poisoning and diarrhea and can produce several toxic compounds such as Shiga-like toxins and heat-stable toxins (Liu </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">MATERIAL AND METHODS</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Material</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Autoclave (Hirayama HVE-50), oven (Eyela NDO-451SD), orbital shaker (Ohaus), showcase chiller (Sanyo SR-D180F), freezer (Sanyo MDF-U3333), vortex mixer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Ohaus), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;single &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;beam</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">spectrophotometer (Hanon 13 UV / Vis), hot plate stirrer (Labnet PC-420D; Thermo Scientific SP88857107), micropipette (Ohaus), centrifuge (Corning 6766-HS), rotary evaporator, analytical balance (Shimidzu BX-320D) microtip, microtube, magnetic stirrer , petridish, inoculation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">needle, bunsen burner, cuvette (Brand 1.5 nl, semi-micro), measuring cup, test tube, propipet, falcon tube, vial tube, erlenmeyer, pH meter, fume hood, tweezers, separating funnel, needle ose, inoculation needle, drigalsky, magnetic stirrer, tweezers, measuring pipette, tip (white, yellow, and blue), microtube, laminar flow, yeast extract (Merck), glacial acetic acid, 70% alcohol, ethyl acetate, antimicrobial susceptibility disk (Oxoid), cotton and gauze.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Bacterial isolate and fermentation media</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Malt extract (Oxoid), dextrose (Oxoid), soluble starch (Merck), KNO</span><span class="font1">3 </span><span class="font3">(Merck), K</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">HPO</span><span class="font1">4 </span><span class="font3">(Merck), MgSO</span><span class="font1">4</span><span class="font3">.7H</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">O (Merck), FeSO</span><span class="font1">4</span><span class="font3">.7H</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3">O (Merck), NaCl (Merck), bacteriological agar (Oxoid), Tryptic soya broth (Merck), Tryptic soya agar (Merck), medical grade chitosan (PT. Biotech Surindo), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 (collection of Microbial Physiology Laboratory, Department of Agriculture Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture UGM), and BPH </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 (collection of Fisheries Product Quality and Safety Laboratory, Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Agriculture UGM).</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Methods</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Isolate refreshment</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Isolate </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 from glycerol stock stored in frozen conditions at -23<sup>o</sup>C was inoculated on yeast extract malt extract agar medium (yeast extract 0.4%; malt extract 1%; dextrose 0.4%; and agar 2%) and incubated at room temperature for ± 5 days. The histamine-forming bacteria (BPH) used were </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1, and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 from glycerol stock stored in frozen conditions at -23<sup>o</sup>C inoculated on tryptone soy agar (TSA) medium then incubated at 37<sup>o</sup>C for ± 24 hours.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Preparation of chitosan solution</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Preparation of chitosan stock solution was carried out by dissolving 0.5 g of commercial chitosan powder into 100 ml of glacial acetic acid solution (1% (v/v)), then the solution was homogenized for ± 1 hour. The chitosan solution was then sterilized using an autoclave at a temperature of 121<sup>o</sup>C for ± 10 minutes. The chitosan is then stored in the refrigerator at 4<sup>o</sup>C.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Preliminary research</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The preliminary research was done to observe the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) of chitosan to </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">22. The concentration of chitosan used in this preliminary study refers to the research of Ghinet </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2010) which has been modified in chitosan concentrations of 10 µg/ml, 25 µg/ml, 50 µg/ml, 100 µg/ml, 250 µg / ml, 500 µg / ml, 750 µg / ml, 1000 µg/ml, and without chitosan as control. The inoculum concentration used was 1% (v/v) with the final volume of the medium around ± 5 ml. The medium was then incubated using an orbital shaker at room temperature with an agitation of 200 rpm for ± 1 day. Optical Density (OD) of each treatment replication was observed using a spectrophotometer with a wavelength of 600 nm.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Production and isolation of secondary metabolite</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Single colony of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was pre-cultured on tryptic soy broth (TSB) medium with a volume of ± 7 ml and incubated at room temperature for ± 2 days in an orbital shaker with an agitation speed of 200 rpm. Fermentation process was done by inoculating 1% (v/v) pre-cultured inoculum in 250 ml flasks containing 100 ml of starch nitrate broth (SNB) medium. Each treatment was added with a sterile chitosan solution with varying final concentrations of chitosan 250 µg/ml, 500 µg/ml, 750 µg/ml, and 0 as a control (E250, E500, E750 and E0).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kanamycin (50 mg/ml) was used as positive control, while sterile TSB medium used as negative control. The medium was then incubated using an orbital shaker at room temperature with an agitation speed of 200 rpm for 10 days. The extraction of secondary metabolites from the fermentation process was carried out by transferring the culture into a 50 ml falcon tube. The sample was then centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 15 minutes to separate the pellets and supernatant. The supernatant was then transferred to a separating funnel, then extracted using ethyl acetate solvent with a ratio of 1: 1 (v/v), then shaker for ± 25 minutes. The extract was then separated into two types of fractions, water fraction and ethyl acetate. The sample extract was put into a rotary evaporator, the water temperature in the water bath was set at 40<sup>o</sup>C with a speed of 100 rpm. The sample was allowed to reach a volume of 1-2 ml, then transferred to a 5 ml vial tube. The extract will then be dried using a freeze dryer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Antibacterial activity assay</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Microdilution assay was conducted according to Balouiri </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2016). HPB isolate was inoculated into TSB medium with a volume of ± 7 ml incubated at 37<sup>o</sup>C for ± 24 hours. Extract the water fraction of the metabolite </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">dissolved in sterile distilled water and mixed into TSB medium with a final concentration of 100 mg / ml with a final volume of ± 1 ml. The inoculum concentration used for each BPH was 1% (v/v). The medium was then incubated at 37<sup>o</sup>C for ± 24 hours. Optical Density (OD) was observed using a spectrophotometer with a wavelength of 600 nm (OD</span><span class="font1">600</span><span class="font3">) to determine the effectiveness of antibacterial activity. The antimicrobial activity was described in terms of the percentage of antibacterial effectiveness in the growth of histamine-producing bacteria between negative control and treatment.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp.GMR-22 was isolated from cajuput plant rhizosphere soils in Wanagama I Forest UGM Yogyakarta (Nurjasmi </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2009). The strain GMR-22 was identified afterward by Alimuddin </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2011) by using 16S rRNA primer pairs 27f (5’- AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3’) and 1492r (5’-GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’) and reported as the isolate which possessed the strongest antifungal activity. In this study, we aims to continue the exploration of bioactive compounds produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 and focused on the antibacterial</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">activity against histamine-producing bacteria (HPB). In the same time, we also want to explore the potency of chitosan (chitin derivate) as elicitor compounds.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Preliminary test</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Determination of the concentration of chitosan that will be used as a treatment for the fermentation of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was done through a preliminary test. Based on Table 1, it can be observed that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 grown on TSB medium with the addition of chitosan treatment 10 µg/ml, 25 µg/ml, 50 µg/ml, 100 µg/ml, 250 µg/ml, and control gave OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">values in the range of 2.414 - 2.523. The OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">value tends to be high and indicates that the environmental conditions of the medium in the treatment of adding chitosan 10 µg/ml to 250 µg/ml still provide optimal environmental conditions for the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22. Based on Table 1, the addition of chitosan which is first dissolved using 1% glacial acetic acid still provides an optimal pH conditions for the growth of Streptomyces. This results was in accordance with Kontro </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">. (2005) which reported that several types of Streptomyces grown on various types of medium able to grow at pH conditions range from 4 - 11.5.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In addition, it is also assumed that there has been a change in pH during the mixing process of chitosan solution with TSB medium which affects the protonation mechanism of chitosan, which results in weakening of the antibacterial activity produced by chitosan. Chitosan has a pKa value of around 6.2 - 7.0 which causes chitosan to dissolve in dilute organic acids (Zargar </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2015). In this condition, the chitosan amine group will undergo protonation so that it is positively charged to become NH3<sup>+</sup> ions which will affect the antibacterial activity of chitosan (Zargar </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2015). Increasing the pH value due to mixing chitosan with TSB medium resulted in chitosan not being protonated, so that the antibacterial activity of chitosan did not tend to affect the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22. Streptomyces is also reported to have the ability to utilize chitin and its</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994 pISSN: 2303-3371 </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font3">derivatives as a nutrient source by producing chitinase and chitosanase. Streptomyces is able to produce the chitosanase which has a role to hydrolyze the long chain of chitosan into its oligomers so that it can be transported into cells and is useful as a source of carbon and nitrogen (Ghinet </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on Table 1 the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was a dramatically decrease in the addition of 500 µg / ml chitosan (OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">1.129); 750 µg/ml (OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">0.030); and 1000 µg/ml (OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">0.072). This condition indicates that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 slowly cannot withstand the antibacterial activity of chitosan which causes its growth to be inhibited. The mixing process of chitosan and TSB medium still provides a pH condition in the pKa value range of chitosan (6.2 - 7.0) which allows chitosan to undergo protonation so that it still has the ability to be antibacterial</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. Effect of chitosan concentration on </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 growth</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">pH</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">OD</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">600</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Control</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7.4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2.523</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 10 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">7.3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.458</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 25 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">7.3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.436</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 50 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">7.3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.436</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 100 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">7.2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.414</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 250 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">7.1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">2.441</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 500 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">6.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">1.129</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 750 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">6.7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0.03</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Chitosan 1000 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">6.5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0.072</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">Based on these conditions, the selection of the concentration of chitosan was carried out by referring to the OD</span><span class="font1">600 </span><span class="font3">value which is considered to provide environmental conditions that can stimulate changes in the production of secondary metabolite compounds </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22. Secondary metabolites are compounds produced by microorganisms under certain conditions in response to survival. The chitosan treatment that will be used for the main research stage is assumed to create environmental conditions that can threaten the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22. Based on this results, chitosan concentration</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of 250 µg/ml, 500 µg/ml, and 750 µg/ml were further used as treatment.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Characteristics of secondary metabolite compounds of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> sp. GMR-22</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The fermentation process was carried out using 3 treatments of chitosan concentration 250 µg/ml, 500 µg/ml, and 750 µg/ml which were obtained from the preliminary test and 1 control. This process was carried out for 10 days using an orbital shaker with an agitation speed of 200 rpm and incubated at room temperature. During the fermentation process, there was a color change in the SNB medium in each treatment which can be seen in Table 2. In the control</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">treatment without the addition of chitosan, the color changes in the medium from initially white to brownish orange. Whereas in the chitosan treatment of 250 µg/ml, 500 µg/ml, and 750 µg/ml in general, the color characteristics were not different from the respective treatments which caused the medium to turn yellowish. The change in the color of the medium is caused by the presence of secondary metabolites produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22. This color change is also caused by several factors such as temperature, pH, agitation, aeration, and fermentation time during the fermentation process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The fractionation of secondary metabolites from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was carried out using two solvent which were water and ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate fraction was done with a ratio of 1:1 (v/v) in constant shaking to dissolve the secondary metabolite compound which is semi-polar. The insoluble portion of ethyl acetate hereinafter referred to water fraction. The extract was then concentrated using a rotary evaporator using a temperature of 40<sup>o</sup>C in each of the water and ethyl acetate extracts. Furthermore, the extract is freeze dried to get the dry extract.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on Table 2, it can be seen that the appearance of ethyl acetate extract is</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994 pISSN: 2303-3371 </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font3">generally similar in the whole treatment which will produce yellow to orange crystals after freeze dried with a production capacity of 0.10 - 0.33 g/l. In water extract, the resulting compound is more yellowish to brownish in color. The treatment of chitosan administration has an effect on changes in the brighter color of fermented products. This may be due to changes in environmental conditions in the SNB medium which affect the response of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 utilizes available nutrients which also have an impact on the metabolites produced. The production capacity of the compounds obtained from aqueous extracts tends to be greater when compared to ethyl acetate extracts. Based on Table 2 it was shown that the water extract production capacity of the entire treatment was in the range of 12.54 -15.27 g/l.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table 2. The characteristics of the secondary metabolite extracts of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Fraction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Weight (g/l)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Appearance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Color</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Control</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">14,97</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Brown crystalline powder</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Brownish orange</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">250 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">15,27</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">White fine powder</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Yellowish clear</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Water</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Yellowish</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">500 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">12,54</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">White fine powder</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">cloudy Yellowish</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">750 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14,44</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">White fine powder</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">cloudy</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Control</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0,32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Orange crystals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Clear</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Ethyl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">250 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0,10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Yellow crystal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Clear</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Acetate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">500 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0,29</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Yellow crystal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Clear</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">750 µg/ml</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0,33</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Yellow crystal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Clear</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Antibacterial activity against histamine-producing bacteria</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">The antibacterial activity of the secondary metabolite extracts of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 was performed</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">using microdilution assay with extract concentration 100 mg/ml. Antibacterial activity produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 is shown in Table 3.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table 3. Antibacterial activity of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 on histamine-producing bacteria</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Tested strain</span></p></td><td colspan="6" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Percent inhibition (%)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kanamycin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Negative</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">E0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">E250</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">E500</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">E750</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">99.45</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">75.69</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>c</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">97.29</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">87.91</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">79.61</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>c</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">98.01</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">97.78</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">97.92</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">99.69</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">58.29</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>b</sup></span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">different, however, all bacterial tested were</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the results, it can be seen</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">grew normally in negative control. Treatment</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">that the response of each histamine-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">E250 has the highest antibacterial</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">producing bacteria used as the test bacteria is</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">activity in every antibacterial activity test carried out on the three types of histamine-forming bacteria. E250 extract was effective in inhibiting the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1 with inhibition percentage values of 97.29% and 97.92%, respectively and no significant different with positive control. The antibacterial activity of E250 was slightly higher compared to E0. This shows that the addition of 250 µg/ml chitosan might be stimulate </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 to increase the expression of genes that play a role in increasing the antibacterial activity. Based on the preliminary test conducted previously, it can be seen that the addition of 250 µg/ml of chitosan has an OD600 value of 1.129. This absorbance value indicates that the addition of 250 µg/ml of chitosan creates a stress-response condition that can be used by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 to be able to grow even with stressful conditions that trigger the expression of genes that affect certain metabolite pathways.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Changes in growth environmental conditions can affect the morphology of each Streptomyces life cycle and can affect the production of secondary metabolites. The addition of chitosan dissolved using acetic acid has the potential to affect the pH conditions of the fermentation medium,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994 pISSN: 2303-3371 </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font3">besides the antibacterial activity of chitosan can cause a stress response from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 which might be resulted in the response changes in gene expression produced on producing secondary metabolites during the fermentation process. Ghinet </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al.</span><span class="font3"> (2010) reported that the addition of different chitosan concentrations could affect morphological changes in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces lividans</span><span class="font3"> TK24 grown on agar medium. Morphological changes in Streptomyces can affect the process of the production of secondary metabolites produced during its life cycle. Viollier </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al. </span><span class="font3">(2001) also reported that different pH conditions affect the growth and development of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3">. Chitosan and chitin have the same constituent components, it's just that chitin is dominated by N-acetylglucosamine, while chitosan tends to be composed of glucosamine monomers (Zerger </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font3">., 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">To confirm that the antibacterial activity of the extract produced during the fermentation process in the addition of chitosan treatment did not come from the activity of chitosan, an antibacterial activity test of chitosan was also carried out which can be seen in Table 4.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table 4. Antibacterial activity of chitosan on histamine-producing bacteria</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Tested strain</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Inhibitory Percentage (%)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">K250</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">K500</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">K750</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">10.54</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">32.95</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">97.95</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>c</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">74.76</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">77.18</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">93.89</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">When compared with the results of the antibacterial activity described in Table 3, it can be seen that the antibacterial activity produced between extracts of secondary metabolites and chitosan is not the same. This shows that the antibacterial activity of the secondary metabolite extract is not derived from chitosan, thus indicating that the addition of chitosan during the fermentation process can affect the response of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 in producing secondary metabolite compounds.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Conclusions</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 has the potential to produce antibacterial compounds that can inhibit the growth of histamine-producing bacteria. The addition of chitosan had an effect on the color change and the characteristics of the extract of secondary metabolite compounds. The addition of chitosan has an effect on the antibacterial</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">activity of secondary metabolites of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 with the most effective antibacterial activity was found in E250 treatment which inhibited the growth of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Morganella morganii</span><span class="font3"> TK7 and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter freundii</span><span class="font3"> CK1 with inhibition percentage values of 97.29% and 97.92%. This shows that chitosan has the potential as an elicitor compound which can influenced the metabolites produced by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Suggestions</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">In this research, it is still necessary to test the characterization of the secondary metabolite extracts of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 to determine the differences in the compound components of each extract produced. In addition, the volume of production of secondary metabolites of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 needs to be increased so that the optimal amount of extract is obtained for activity testing using a higher concentration. The extraction process of secondary metabolites can use various</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">types of solvents to confirm the secondary metabolites of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 which has antibacterial activity.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>REFERENCES</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Abdelmohsen, U. R., T. Grkovic, S. Balasubramanian, M. S. Kamel, R. J. Quinn, &amp;&nbsp;U. Hentschel. (2015). Elicitation of secondary metabolism in actinomycetes. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biotechnology</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Advances. 33: 798-811.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alimuddin, J. Widada, W. Asmara, and Mustofa. (2011). Antifungal production of a strain of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Actinomycetes</span><span class="font3"> spp. isolated from the rhizospore of cajuput plant: &nbsp;selection and detection of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exhibiting activity against tested fungi. Indonesia Journal of Biotechnology. 16(1): 1-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Azerang, P. &amp;&nbsp;S. Sardari. (2017). Bioactive Compound &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Produced &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Actinomycetes-Streptomyces. Nov. Appro. Drug. Des. Dev. 1(3): 1-2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Balouiri,M., M. Sadiki, and S. K. Ibnsouda. 2016. Methods for in vitro evaluating antimicrobial activity: A review. J. Pharm. Anal. 6 (2): 71–79.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bentley, S. D., K. F. Chater, A. M. Cerdenio-Tarraga, G. L. Challis, N. R. Thomson, K. D. James, D. E. Harris, M. A. Quail, H. Kieser, D. Harper, A. Bateman, S. Brown, G. Chandra, C.W. Chen, M. Collins, A. Cronin, A. Fraser, A. Gobie, J. Hidalgo, T. Hornsby, S. Howarth, C. H. Huang, T. Kieser, L. Larke, L. Murphy, K. Oliver, S. O’Neil, E. Rabbinowitsch, M. A. Rajandream, K. Rutherford, S. Rutter, K. Seeger, D. Saunders, S. Sharp, R. Squares, K. Taylor, T. Warren, A. Wietzorrek, J. Woodward, B. G. Barrell, J. Parkhill, &amp;&nbsp;D. A. Hopwood. (2002). Complete</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">eISSN: 2655-9994 pISSN: 2303-3371 </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/IJBB.2021.v09.i01.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">genome sequence of the model actinomycete </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor </span><span class="font3">A3 (2). Nature 417: 141-147.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cheng, K., X. Roong, A. A. Pinto-Tomás, M. Fernández-Villalobos, C. Murillo-Cruz, &amp;&nbsp;Y. Huang. (2015). Population of genetic analysis of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces albidoflavus</span><span class="font3"> reveals habitat barriers to homologous recombination in the diversification of Streptomyces. Applied &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Environmental</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Microbiology. 81(3): 966 - 975.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ghinet, M. G., S. Roy, D. Poulin-Laprade, M. Lacomber-Harvey, R. Morosoli, &amp;&nbsp;R. Brzezinski. (2010). Chitosanase from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3"> A3 (2): biochemical properties and role in protection against antibacterial effect of chitosan. Biochemical Cell Biology 88: 907-916.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Herdini, C., S. Mubarika, B. Hariwiyanto, N. Wijayanti, A. Hosoyama, A. Yamazoe, H. Nojiri, &amp;&nbsp;J. Widada. 2017. Secondary bioactive metabolite gene clusters identification of anticandidal-producing </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 isolated from Wanagama Forest as revealed by genome mining approach. Indonesian Journal of Pharmacy 28(1): 26-33.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kontro, M., U. Lignell, M-R. Hirvonen, &amp;&nbsp;A. Nevalainen. (2005). pH effects on 10 Streptomyces spp. growth and sporulation depend on nutrients. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 41(1): 32-38.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Liu, L., L. Qin, S. Hao, R. Lan, B. Xu, Y. Guo, R. Jiang, H. Sun, X. Chen, X. LV, J. Xu, &amp;&nbsp;C. Zhao. (2020). Lineage, antimicrobial resistance and virulence of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Citrobacter</span><span class="font3"> spp. Pathogens. 9(195): 1-21.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Matsuda, K., F. Hasebe, Y. Shiwa, Y. Kanesaki, T. Tomita, H. Yoshikawa, K. Shin-Ya, T. Kuzuyama, &amp;&nbsp;M. Nishiyama. (2017). Genome Mining of Amino Group Carrier Protein-Mediated</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Machinery: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discovery &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Biosynthetic Characterization of a Natural Product with Unique Hydrazone Unit. ACS Chem. Biol. 12(1): 124-131.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mentari, D., M. Naima, R. Wulansari, J. Widada, T. R. Nuringtyas, T. Wibawa, &amp;&nbsp;N. Wijayanti. (2019). Pengaruh perbedaan metode ekstraksi metabolit sekunder </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3"> sp. GMR-22 terhadap toksisitas pada sel BHK-21. Pharmacon: Jurnal Farmasi Indonesia. 16 (1): 1-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nazari, B., M. Kobayashi, A. Saito, A. Hassanisab, K. Miyashita, &amp;&nbsp;T. Fujii. (2013). Chitin-induced gene expression in secondary metabolic pathway of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces coelicolor</span><span class="font3"> A3 (2) grown in soil. Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 79 (2): 707-713.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nurjasmi, R., J. Widada, &amp;&nbsp;Ngadiman. (2009). Diversity of actinomycetes at several forest types in Wanagama I Yogyakarta and their potency as a producer of antifungal compound. Indonesia Journal of Biotechnology. 14 (2): 1196-1205.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Onaka, H. (2017). Novel antibiotic screening methods to awaken silent or cryptic secondary metabolic pathways in actinomycetes. The Journal of Antibiotics 70: 865–870.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pettit, R. K. (2011). Small-molecule elicitation of microbial secondary metabolites. Microbial Biotechnology. 4 (4): 471-478.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Procópioa, R. E. L., I. R. da Silvaa, M. K. Martinsa, J. L. de Azevedoa, &amp;&nbsp;J. M. de</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Araújob. (2012). Antibiotics produced by Streptomyces (review). Braz. J. Infect. Dis. 16 (5):466–471.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rigali, S., F. Titgemeyer, S. Barends, S. Mulder, A. W. Thomae, D. A. Hopwood, &amp;&nbsp;G. P. van Wezel. (2008). Feast or famine: the global regulator DasR links nutrient stress to antibiotic production by </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Streptomyces</span><span class="font3">. European Molecular Biology Organization. 9(7): 670-675.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rutledge, P. J., &amp;&nbsp;G. L. Challis. (2015). Discovery of microbial natural products by activation of silent biosynthetic gene clusters. Nature 13: 1-15.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thong W. L., K. Shin-ya, M. Nishiyama &amp;&nbsp;T. Kuzuyama. (2018). Discovery of an Antibacterial Isoindolinone-Containing Tetracyclic Polyketide by Cryptic Gene Activation and Characterization of Its Biosynthetic Gene Cluster. ACS Chem. Biol. 13 (9): 2615–2622.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tyurin A. P., V. A. Alferova &amp;&nbsp;V. A. Korshun. (2018). Chemical Elicitors of Antibiotic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biosynthesis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Actinomycetes. Microorganisms 6 (2): 1-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Viollier, P. H., W. Minas, G. E. Dale, M. Folcher, &amp;&nbsp;C. J. Thompson. (2001).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Zargar, V., M. Asghari, &amp;&nbsp;A. Dashti. (2015). A Review on Chitin and Chitosan Polymers: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Structure, Chemistry,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Solubility, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Derivatives, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Applications. Chem. Bio. Eng. 2 (3): 204-226.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">14</span></p>