---
layout: full_article
title: "SERAT HARDAMUDHA IN JAVANESE LITERATURE: A STUDY OF STRUCTURE, FUNCTION AND MEANING"
author: "Kamidjan Kamidjan, I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, Setya Yuawana Setya Yuwana, I Nyoman Suarka"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-4585 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-4585"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-4585"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">E-Journal</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>SERAT HARDAMUDHA</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> IN JAVANESE LITERATURE: A STUDY OF STRUCTURE, FUNCTION AND MEANING</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Kamidjan</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Education of Indonesian Language and Literature, Faculty of Languages and Arts, State University of Surabaya Email: </span><a href="mailto:kamidjan@yahoo.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">kamidjan@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Postgraduate Program, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Weda Kusuma</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Setya Yuwana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Department of Education of Indonesian Language and Literature, Post Graduate Program, State University of Surabaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Nyoman Suarka Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">In this study </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> written by Kyai Secanitis is chosen as the object of the study. It is part of a collection at the Sonobudoyo Museum, Yogyakarta, with No. PB A 244 as its collection number. It contains symbols and signs which attracts the researcher’s attention. Such signs can be interpreted as social, moral, religious, and cultural teachings which are so great that they may be utilized as a learning medium in our lives. The problems in this study are formulated as follows: (1) what is the structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serta Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> like; (2) what are its functions for our lives; and (3) what meanings it contains? This study aims at analyzing (1) the structure of Serat Hardamudha; (2) its functions for our lives; (3) its meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study is classified as a qualitative one using qualitative data in the forms of words, sentences or concepts taken from the data sources. The data were obtained from the primary and secondary sources. The primary data source in this study is a literary work entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha.</span><span class="font0"> The secondary data sources include references related to research. The data were collected using note taking technique completed with data cards and note books. The data were descriptively and interpretatively analyzed using hermeneutic approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The novelties of the study are that (1) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> deviated from conventions but contained innovations. From the form point of view, it, especially </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang Dhandhanggula, gatra 3</span><span class="font0">, deviated from conventions. (2) The massage was symbolically and implicitly presented. (3) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> presented the life of the Javanese people during colonial era. (4) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> was written to give enlightenment to the community that </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ma lima</span><span class="font0"> should be eliminated.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> – a study of structure, function and meaning</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> written by Kyai Secanitis is chosen as the object of the study. It is part of a collection at the Sonobudoyo Museum, Yogyakarta, with No. PB A 244 as its collection number. It contains symbols and signs which attract the researcher’s attention. Such signs can be interpreted as social, moral, religious, and cultural teachings. Such teachings may be utilized as a learning medium.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Katalog Induk Naskah-Naskah Nusantara Jilid I Museum Sonobudoyo</span><span class="font0">, the code number given by Behrend (1990: 431) for the manuscript is L 397, and the code number given for its microfilm is 63 No. 5. The code number given by the Library of the Sonobudoyo Museum, Yogyakarta, is different from the code number mentioned above. However, the difference in code number does not influence its existence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> is a socio-cultural document belonging to the Yorgyakarta community and its surrounding areas. According to the researcher, the social, moral, religious and cultural teachings it contains needs to be accurately excavated and socialized in such a way that it will useful to our lives. Religious teachings are related to our devotion to God; moral teachings are related to our behaviors. Both lead us to how to live a societal life. The problems in this study are formulated as follows: (1) what is the structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serta Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> like; (2) what are its functions for our lives; (3) what meanings it contains? This study aims at analyzing (1) the structure of Serat Hardamudha; (2) its functions for our lives; (3) its meanings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In theory, it is hoped that the results of the study may (1) give contribution to the development of literature in general and the theory of Javanese literature in particular; (2) add to and complete the studies of old literature, in which only a few people are interested; (3) give contribution to the way of analyzing a text in the form of what is called </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat </span><span class="font0">(Javanese poem). In practice, it is hoped that the results of the study may (1) give contribution to those teaching Javanese literature; (2) give contribution to the government when making policies regarding conservation of manuscripts; (3) socialize what the manuscript contains to the community. The values it contains may be used for building the teachers’ characteristics formally. In addition (4), its transliteration may be utilized by the art group of “macapatan”; as well, its translation may also be used as the material for “wacan” and for discussion in the “macapatan’ program. Apart from that (5), it is also hoped that the results of the study may be used to motivate those who explore manuscripts, as there are still many which have not been explored. Finally (6), it is hoped that the results of the study may broaden the researcher’s insights into, experience in and knowledge of the studies of Javanese manuscripts in general and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> in particular.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The method used in this study is qualitative method, in which the data used are described and analyzed from the data sources. The data needed in this study were obtained from the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> manuscript. There are two types of data; they are primary and secondary data sources. The primary data in this study were obtained from a literary work entitled </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">, part of a collection at the State Museum Library of Sonobudoyo, Yogyakarta with its registered code number L 397, PB A. 224. It is used as the data source in this study. As the data source was still in the form of a manuscript, it needed transliterating from Old characters into Latin characters, which was then translated from Javanese into Indonesian. The secondary data were obtained from other related sources and references.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Supratno (1991: 101), library research should be used in the studies of literary works. The primary data were obtained from the data source, that is, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">. The data obtained from books and articles were inventoried as the supporting (secondary data). The data were collected using note taking technique supported by data cards and note books. The data cards were used to record the data in accordance with the problems formulated above. The note books were used to record, classify, sort, select and compare the data to make the analysis easy. The data already selected and classified in accordance with the problems of the study were ready to be analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data already classified were ready to be analyzed using analyses of descriptions, contents and text interpretation. Bungin (2008: 85) explains that the analysis of contents should be done in three stages; they are finding the symbols or signs, classifying the data based on the symbols, and analyzing the data. This is relevant to the theory of semiotics used. The data which were in the forms of symbols were the data which were in the forms of words, phrases and sentences taken from </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha.</span><span class="font0"> The data in the forms of symbols were classified in the forms of matrixes, models, and hypograms. The analysis of the data in the forms of symbols was in the form interpretation of such symbols to find out the function and meaning of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha.</span><span class="font0"> The symbols were interpreted using hermeneutic approach (Sumaryono, 2000). Furthermore, Surakhmad (1980: 139) states that the analysis of descriptive research explains and interprets the data in accordance with the problems proposed in the study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion and Results</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The discussion in this current study is made by analyzing the data used based on the structure, function, and meaning of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">. The analysis of structure is classified into two: the narrative structure and the formal structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat</span><span class="font0">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of narrative structure includes (1) narrative units of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha </span><span class="font0">which are made up of nine episodes; they are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">manggala</span><span class="font0"> which contains the explanation of the text, gambling, sexual abuse, those whose responsibility is making payment for the factory, trading, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">makelaran</span><span class="font0"> (broker), those who can see and feel what is physically not seen and felt (paranormals), difficult times, and learning Islam. (2) The </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> has moral teachings as its theme. Such a theme appears in the first strophe </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dhandhanggula</span><span class="font0"> (P.i.l), in which the writer says </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">angganggit piwulang kaot</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">beber wasita luhung</span><span class="font0"> to the reader. (3) The characters in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> are </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jaka Sudra Mudha</span><span class="font0">, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Nyi Darmasarasa</span><span class="font0">, Ki Darmasarasa, Mbok Talang Menyak, Raden Warsita, and Raden Murka, as someone who can see and feel what is not physically seen and felt), Li Tyong Bin (the heirloom owner), Sukartak, Dipakarya, and Asim. They are the main characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The analysis of the formal structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat</span><span class="font0"> includes (1) the conventions used in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat</span><span class="font0">, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> writer’s loyalty to the standard rules of the poem recited (tembang); in other words, the rules of the song are not broken; as far as the ‘tembang Dhandhanggula’ is concerned, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">guru lagu</span><span class="font0"> (one of the rules) falls on line three, that is, on vowel /e/. However, the writer uses two versions; in one version /e/ is used and in the other version /o/ (</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">taling-tarung</span><span class="font0">) is used. (2) Most of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sasmita tembang</span><span class="font0"> in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> falls on the end of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">pupuh</span><span class="font0"> (strophe) in order to mention the name or type of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang</span><span class="font0"> in the next strophe; which, in the previous strophe fall on the beginning in order to initiate the composition</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">(P.i.l). (3) The use of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">watak tembang</span><span class="font0">; as the royal man of letters, the writer was so careful that the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">watak tembang</span><span class="font0"> (characteristics of the strophe) used is in accordance with what is narrated. The usage is as follows: (a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dhandhanggula</span><span class="font0"> ; characterized as being flexible enough to express pleasant atmosphere; (b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Asmaradana</span><span class="font0">; characterized as having affection and being anxious expressing the story telling about loving someone with the same and different sexes, and God. (c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pangkur</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Mijil</span><span class="font0"> characterized as having serious affection, being rather hard, and being anxious due to love. (e) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pucung</span><span class="font0">; characterized as behaving carelessly and as a humorous puzzle. (f) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Maskumambang</span><span class="font0">; characterized as being sad, anxious and poor. (g) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Megatruh/Dudukwuluh; </span><span class="font0">characterized as being hard and sad. (h) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Durma</span><span class="font0">; characterized as being angry, cruel, and strict. (i) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kinanthi</span><span class="font0">; characterized as having affection and hope. (j) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sinom</span><span class="font0">; characterized as being simple and sad. (k) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Gambuh</span><span class="font0">; characterized as stating something seriously in order to obtain truth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Function of Serat Hardamudha</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> functions as (1) an educational medium giving emphasis on morality in our families and community; (2) as an Islam proselytizing medium which includes (a) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fiqih </span><span class="font0">teaching, (b) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">qalam</span><span class="font0"> teaching, and (c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tasawuf</span><span class="font0"> teaching.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Meaning of </span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Viewed from the semiotic point of view, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> contains meaningful signs. In addition, in a sign there are three elements; they are matrix, model and hypogram. The matrix in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> is “dualistic complementary” or a symbolic classification which is made up of two opposing components; however, they complete one another. Being bad versus being good, being up versus being down, being on the left versus being on the right, and so forth exemplify this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Model in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> refers to (1) the change in human nature as reflected by the character </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jaka Sudra Mudha</span><span class="font0">. (2) Religious teachings influence human behavior towards God; life experience and getting older can influence and change human nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hypogram in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> can be divided into two. They are (1) potential hypogram which constitutes the elements of words or phrases which are made up of the phenomenon in the community, which are still productively used such as “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wangsalan, tembung entar, tembung seroja</span><span class="font0"> and so forth. They all have connotative or figurative meanings. (2) Actual hypogram refers to the influence of other Javanese literary works in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Jaka Slewah, Serat Ma Lima, Serat Wulang Dalem, Serat Suluk Penganten, Serat Darmawasita,</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Pitutur Mring Estri.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardmudha</span><span class="font0"> has (1) social meaning, (2) local genius meaning, and (3) the meaning of great morality. The social meaning includes (a) mutually helping each other, and (b) philosophy of sexual abuse. The meaning of local genius includes (a) the people’s beliefs such as believing in supernatural creatures and heirlooms which have supernatural power. There are three heirlooms which are believed to have supernatural power; they are the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">akik</span><span class="font0"> ring belonging to Haji Asrar, the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">keris</span><span class="font0"> (the wavy double bladed dagger) belonging to Abu Kasan from Poncol Gunung Kidul, and Nayi Jimat (a cart belonging to the Mataram Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Palace). Believing in the paranormal (those who can see and feel something which cannot be physically seen and felt) such as Kyai Secadarma from Paadepokan Gunung Karangnangka, Kyai Sasmita from Girisonya atas Girisampurna, Ki Irientrih from Kediri, and Seh Suhu from Mount Grugena Pare. (b) Religious ritual in the form of a series of activities such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sesaji </span><span class="font0">(offering). (c) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Selamatan</span><span class="font0"> and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tirakatan</span><span class="font0">; the rituals undertaken to ask</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">God for safety. (d) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tirakat</span><span class="font0">; fasting in order to be close to God. (e) </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ziarah kubur</span><span class="font0"> (making a devotional visit to the cemetery) to pray to the spirit which controls the cemetery. (3) Great morality includes (a) Getting far from “ma lima”; avoiding from doing </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">madad, madon, mangan, maling, main</span><span class="font0">. (b) Moral excellence of women; meaning the women who were born from noble families, families of priests or highly moral women. (c) Gambling destroys everything such as families, kinship, brotherhood, and the children’s future. (d) A child’s devotion to his/her parents; he/she is supposed to respect his/her parents. In the old Javanese literature, there is such a teaching termed as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">suputra sadhu gunawan</span><span class="font0">. In Islam, a pious child brightens his/her family.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Novelties</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The novelties of the study, based on the analysis above, can be described as follows.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">, the form is broken. The standard convention is that the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">guru lagu</span><span class="font0"> is on vowel /e/. However, in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">gatra</span><span class="font0"> 3 of the </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang Dhandhanggula</span><span class="font0"> there are two versions; one is on vowel /e/ and the other is on /o/. Such a deviation is not mistake but deliberateness. The reason is that there are many such deviations which are also found in the other manuscripts. From the aspect of content, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> shows innovation. The royal manuscripts usually present noble figures but </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha </span><span class="font0">presents common people.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">, messages or advices are symbolically presented; in other words, the messages or advices are implied or </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sinandi</span><span class="font0">. The reader should be able to comprehend the meaning; otherwise, the messages cannot be understood.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(3)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> presents the life of the Javanese community during the colonial era, as can be concluded from the journey made by Jaka Sudra and the fact that the text was written in 1928. Life was getting difficult and many people gambled as the solution.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">(4)</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> was created to give enlightenment to the community that gambling should be eliminated. The writer intended to make the people avoid what is called </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">ma lima.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions and Suggestions</span><br><br><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The results of the analysis of the structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> can be distinguished into two; they are the analysis of narrative structure and the analysis of the formal structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat</span><span class="font0">. The theme of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> is moral teaching. The main character is Jaka Sudra Mudha supported by the other fourteen characters. The analysis shows that the formal structure of </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang macapat</span><span class="font0"> includes </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tembang</span><span class="font0"> conventions, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">sasmita tembang</span><span class="font0">, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">watak tembang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> functions as (1) a medium of moral education presenting moral teachings to be referred to in our lives; (2) a medium of religious proselytizing of Islam including </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">fiqih</span><span class="font0"> teaching, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">galam</span><span class="font0"> teaching, and </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">tasawuf</span><span class="font0"> teaching.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From the semiotic point of view, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> constitutes signs containing matrix, model and hypogram. The matrix in </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamuda</span><span class="font0"> is dualistic complementary in nature. The model can be distinguished into two; they are (1) change in human nature and (2) the fact that mental development influences human attitudes. The hypogram can be distinguished into two; they are (1) the potential hypogram which is in the form of figurative words such as </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">wangasalan </span><span class="font0">and (2) the actual hypogram which includes the elements adopted from the other literary works</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">such as Serat Jaka Slewah. The meanings which </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> has includes (1) social meaning, (2) the meaning of local genius, and (3) the moral meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Suggestions</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0"> is a moral and didactic literary work. It will be better if the values it contains can be spread to the community as it can be used to develop character building for the young generation. It can be spread by transliterating, translating, discussing, and publishing it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The old archipelago literary works in general and the old Javanese literary works in particular should be seriously explored to excavate the values they have which then can be used as references in our lives. It will be better if such values are conserved, maintained and utilized.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It will be better if the results of the studies of old literary works, from which the reader can obtain oral information which is still relevant to the current condition, are published.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">It is necessary to activate the research in the old archipelago literary works including the old Javanese literary works. However, such research needs much energy, time and money, as most of them are still in the form of manuscripts written in Javanese, Arabic, Pegon, and Old Javanese characters, and so forth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">On one hand, many foreign researchers are interested in the old archipelago literature, languages and cultures; on the other hand, the young generation is more interested in foreign cultures. Therefore, the national cultural values the old literary works contain need to be introduced to the young generation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">This dissertation could not have been completed without any assistance and motivation from various parties. In this opportunity, the writer would like to thank Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, M.S. as the main supervisor; Prof. Dr. Setya Yuwana, M.A. as co-supervisor I, and Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Suarka, M.S. as co-supervisor II, for their attention, thoroughness, patience and motivation from when the proposal was prepared to the completion of this dissertation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">A word of appreciation should also go to the board of examiners such as Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, M.S., Prof. Dr. Setya Yuwana, M.A., Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Suarka, M.S., Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Kutha Ratna, S.U., Prof. Dr. I Made Suastika, S.U., Prof. Dr. I Wayan Cika, M.S., Prof. Dr. Drs. Ida Bagus Putra Yadnya, M.A., Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Darma Putra, M.Litt., for their ideas and input provided for the betterment of this dissertation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Finally, thanks are also expressed to those who have also supported the writer to finish his Doctorate Program at the Post Graduate Program of Udayana University. It is not possible for the writer to mention them one by one.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Arp, Bernard, 1992. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Tembang in Two Tradition: Performance and Interpretation of Javanese Literature. Leiden:</span><span class="font0"> Departement School of Oriental and African Studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Behrend,TE (editor). 1990. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Katalog Induk Naskah-Naskah Nusantara Jilid I: Museum Sonobudoyo Yogyakarta</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Djambatan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bogdan, Robert and Sam Knopp Biklen. 1982. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Qualitative Research for Education An Introduction to Theory and Methods.</span><span class="font0"> Boston: Alyyn and Bacon Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bungin, Burhan. 2008. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Data Penelitian Kualitatif: Pemahaman Filosofis dan Metodologis ke Arah Penguasaan Model Aplikasi</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Culler, Jonathan. 1981. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Persuit of Sign</span><span class="font0">. Chapter 5 “Presupposition Intertexstuality”. London: Routlege &amp;&nbsp;Kegan Paul Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Djamaris, Edward. 1987. “Filologi dan Cara Kerja Penelitian Filologi” </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Bahasa dan Sastra III.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Eco, Umberto, 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotcs and the Philosophy of Language</span><span class="font0">. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Faruk, 1996. ”Aku dalam Semiotika Riffatere: Semiotika Riffatere dalam Aku” dalam </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Humaniora</span><span class="font0"> Nomor III/ 1996.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hardjowirogo, R. 1980. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Pathokaning Nyekaraken</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta Balai Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kaplan, David. dan Albert .A. Mners. 1999. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Budaya</span><span class="font0">, terjemahan dari </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory of Culture</span><span class="font0"> oleh Landung S. Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Klein, Ted 1996. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Penafsiran Wacana dan Makna Tambah</span><span class="font0">. diterjemahkan oleh Hani’ah, judul asli </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Interpretation Theory</span><span class="font0">: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Dicourse and Surplus Meaning.</span><span class="font0"> Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan Bahasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nurgiyantoro, Burhan. 1998: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Pengkajian Fiksi</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Padmosoekotjo 1955. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ngengrengan Kasusastran Djawa</span><span class="font0"> Jld I. Yogyakarta: Hien Hoo Sing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Piliang, Yasrat Amir. 2003. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hiper Semiotika: Tafsir Cultural Studies Atas Matinya Makna</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha, 2005. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Riffaterre, Michael. 1978. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotics of Poetry</span><span class="font0">. Blomington &amp;&nbsp;London: Indiana University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Secanitis, Kyai. 1928. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Serat Hardamudha</span><span class="font0">. Manuskrip. Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Segers, Rien T. 2001. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Evaluasi Teks Sastra</span><span class="font0">. Terjemahan Suminto A. Sayuti dari </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">The Evaluation to Literary Texts</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta; Adi Citra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Selltiz, Claire.1976. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methods in Social Relation.</span><span class="font0"> New York: Holt Renehart and Winstone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sudjiman, Panuti dan Aart Van Zoest. 1992 </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Sumaryono, E. 2000. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hermeneutik</span><span class="font0">. Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Teeuw, A. 1980. ”Estetik, Semiotik, dan Sejarah Sastra” dalam Basis No. 301. Bulan Oktober.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Zoest, Aart van. 1993. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotika: Tentang Tanda, Cara Kerjanya dan Apa Yang Kita Lakukan Dengannya</span><span class="font0">. Diterjemahkan oleh Ani Soekowati. Jakarta: Yayasan Sumber Agung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>