---
layout: full_article
title: "MEANING AND WORD FORMATIONS OF SLANG IN “GANGSTER SQUAD” MOVIE SCRIPT"
author: "Ni Made Lisa Candra Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">MEANING AND WORD FORMATIONS OF SLANG IN “GANGSTER</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">SQUAD” MOVIE SCRIPT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NI MADE LISA CANDRA DEWI</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FACULTY OF LETTERS AND CULTURES, UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Judul dari skripsi ini adalah Meaning and Word formations of Slang in “Gangster Squad” Movie Script. Adapun beberapa tujuan dari skripsi ini adalah untuk mengkategorikan tipe-tipe slang, untuk mengklasifikasi tipe-tipe makna dan untuk menjelaskan pembentukan kata dalam slang tersebut dalam skrip film “Gangster Squad”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Data dalam skripsi ini diambil dari skrip film yang berjudul “Gangster Squad” yang disutradarai oleh Ruben Fleischer. Metode yang digunakan untuk mengumpulkan data di penelitian ini adalah metode dokumentasi; dan dengan teknik mencatat. Metode kualitatif deskriptif digunakan untuk menganalisa data. Metode kuantitatif berhubungan dengan persentase dari setiap kategori, yaitu tipe-tipe slang, makna dan pembentukan kata dari slang tersebut. Langkah-langkahnya diawali dengan membaca skrip film untuk menemukan slang, lalu slang tersebut diklasifikasikan dan dianalisa menjadi dua tipe slang menggunakan teori dari Chapman (1988). Tipe-tipe makna dari slang juga dideskripsikan menggunakan teori dari Leech (1981). Data juga dianalisa menjadi beberapa tipe pembentukan kata menggunakan teori dari Plag (2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil penelitian ini adalah tipe-tipe slang yang digunakan di skrip film “Gangster Squad” ada dua: (1) primary Slang dan (2) secondary slang. Dalam hal makna, ada lima tipe makna yang muncul pada skrip film “Gangster Squad” dari tujuh tipe. Pembentukan kata slang ada empat tipe dari Sembilan tipe yang ada pada teori.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: slang, makna, pembentukan kata</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As a language phenomenon, slang usually engages teenagers’ attention, even it could be said all that people’s attention, also influences the life of the school or campus nowadays. One of the special form of language is slang which people who have used it in daily life for a long time, it is not a standard variety of language. Slang has been generated with the development of society; moreover, the meaning of each slang evolves continuous. Almost all people, whether they</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">are in formal or non formal situation, have been influenced to use slang to make conversation more interesting. At first people generally think that it is usually used in informal setting only. Although there could be a gap between slang and standard language, but definitely it would not be stated as vulgar. One thing which is interesting to note is while most languages commonly have vertical transmission patterns, slang has spread more quickly through horizontal transmission patterns, which spread from friends to friends. It is due to the subcultures and intra-generational nature of slang as the opposite of the mainstream immersion of early childhood education. Nowadays, in the modern era, students have become daily slang users and creators. Young students often talk about something unimportant using slang which is well-known as ‘campus slang’, they might be called the developer of slang itself whether the spelling or the meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Slang was chosen as topic in this study since it is interesting to analyze, which is mostly used by teenagers or students whether as users or creators. Slang is used in almost all conversations to make people feel more familiar and comfortable with their friends although the topic that they talk about is unimportant. The meaning, message and how they construct those slangs is interesting to know.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In an American action crime movie entitled “Gangster Squad” there were many American slangs that might be added to make audience easier to understand the story. The movie was produced in 2013, starring Josh Brolin, Ryan Gosling, Nick Nolte, Emma Stone, and Sean Penn, and directed by Ruben Fleischer. The Movie contains slang to interest audience to watch. People usually used the new slangs obtained from the movie in daily life. It could be said that movie is an important medium to enlarge people’s knowledge of slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of slang are found in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of meaning of slang are applied in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the slang words were formed in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To categorize the type of slang in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To classify the type of meaning of slang in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the word formations of slang in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad</span><span class="font1"> movie script</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research is one of the effects involved to find and examine the truth of something. Methodology is a procedure required to do the research well. Therefore, research method is the systematic steps which are used in producing a scientific study. Research method is very important for the validity of the research. In this study, methodologies include the data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data. The following are the detailed explanation of them:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data used in this study were taken from an American action crime movie entitled Gangster Squad. The movie was produced in 2013, starring Josh Brolin, Ryan Gosling, Nick Nolte, Emma Stone, and Sean Penn, and directed by Ruben Fleischer. It contains a lot of slang words that might make people easier to understand the American slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected using documentation method from the movie script of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gangster Squad.</span><span class="font1"> Documentation method means that the data were taken from the written material (movie script). The movie script was read and slang words that appeared on it are identified. The technique of collecting the data was taking note in order to match the slang found before in the movie script and to know how the slang words were constructed. The slangs used as the data in this research are 15 slangs taken randomly out of 52 slangs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were collected through some techniques as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;First step was finding a movie assumed or considered having slangs in the dialogue.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Second step was reading the movie script carefully and intensively. It was followed by selecting 15 slangs that could be the best representation for the analysis.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Then slang was read carefully in order to get better understanding of it.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Techniques of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Descriptive qualitative method was used to classify and analyze types of slang, types of meaning and word formation. Qualitative method was one of the major approaches to research methodology that relied on reasons or meaning behind various aspects of behaviour and did not involve measurement or statistics. Descriptive meant that the data were analyzed by explaining or describing it in words or sentences. The quantitative method is related to the percentage of the categories, they are types of slang, types of meaning and types of word formation that construct the slang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The collected data were classified into two groups, primary and secondary slang based on the theory proposed by Chapman (1988). The data were described and classified into seven types using the theory proposed by Leech (1981) and the word formations that constructed the slang words were classified using the theory proposed by Plag (2003).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meaning and Word Formations of Slang in “Gangster Squad” Movie Script</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This part describes clearly the meaning of slangs by determining the types of slang. According to Chapman (1988) there are two types of slang, the primary and the secondary slang. Primary slang is the pristine speech of subculture members; so very natural to its speakers that it seems they might be mute without it. The teenage talk, the speech of urban streets gangs would be the example of primary slang. Secondary slang is chosen not so much to fix one group as to express one’s attitudes and resourcefulness. It is also a matter of stylistic choice rather than true identification. Then, it is followed by the analysis of meaning of slang since it helps us to be able to comprehend the real meaning conveyed by the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">slangs. Leech in his Semantic - A Study of meaning (1981) breaks down meaning into seven types or ingredients giving primacy to conceptual meaning. In addition, the word formations that constructed the slangs are classified. Plag (2003) categorized the word formation into several types.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">5.1.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data 1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“A pig-sticker”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Funston : The shine had this on him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Police officer : You packing </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">a pig-sticker</span><span class="font1">, Bwana? You must be out here from Chicago.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis of the type of slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Slang is primarily speech claiming group membership and it is the pristine speech of subculture members. The slang in the dialogue above “a pig-sticker” belongs to primary slang type as its aim to keep the degree of secrecy so that no other people could get the point of the slang. Only the member of the gang can get the meaning of the slang.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis the meaning of slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Connotative meaning is the communicative value of an expression over and above its purely conceptual content. It is something that goes beyond mere referent of a word and hints at its attributes in the real world. It is something more than the dictionary meaning. The slang above belongs to connotative meaning which is more than dictionary meaning. “A pig-sticker” is a name that refers to the police officer who has worked for the gang member. The word “pig” in this slang is an offensive word for a police officer and it is used to describe that the police officer is an unpleasant and a greedy person. While the word “sticker” is something easy to stick into something else, which means the police officer can give any benefits to the gang member. In this conversation above, the police officer says about “pig-sticker” while he is a police officer but he seems to like supporting the gangster and protect the area of the gangster. He does not like being a good police officer, that’s why he calls the policeman by “pig-sticker”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis the word formation of slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Compounding is a process in which two different words are joined together to denote one thing. Compounds are pronounced as one unit, but sometimes difficulties in writing arise. The slang that exists in the dialogue above is “pig-sticker” which is formed by compounding. This is compounded by two different words, they are “pig” and “sticker” but it has nothing to do with pig as animal. This slang refers to one object, it is a cop. This slang is formed to describe a particular person or job that is being talked about among them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">From the previous discussion, it can be concluded that there are two types of slang, Primary which is a type of slang that usually is used to keep the degree of secrecy between certain group and Secondary slang which is slang that has been known by most all people in the world that is used just for stylistic choice. The slangs which are categorized as primary slang in the Gangster Squad movie script is five slangs (33%), the secondary type are ten slangs (67%).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In terms of meaning, there are five slangs (33%) categorized as conceptual meaning, three slangs (20%) have connotative meaning, two slangs (13%) have social meaning, five slangs (33%) have affective meaning. From seven types of meaning, there are only four types found in the slang used in the Gangster Squad movie script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word formations used to create word found in this movie script are four types. The first type is compounding which exists in nine slangs (60%), the clipping type is four slangs (26%), the conversion type is one slang (7%), and the derivation type is one slang (7%).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Chapman, Robert., 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of American Slang</span><span class="font1">, Pan Macmillan, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Geoffrey., 1981. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics, The Study of Meaning</span><span class="font1">, The Chaucher Press Ltd., London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Plag, Ingo., 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Word-formation in English</span><span class="font1">, Cambridge University Press, United Kingdom.</span></p>