---
layout: full_article
title: "EXPLOITATION AND PROTECTION OF TURTLES AT SERANGAN AND TANJUNG BENOA VILLAGES SOUTH BALI IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES"
author: "I Gusti Ngurah Sudiana, I Wayan Ardika, I Gde Parimartha, I Made Titib"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3577 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3577"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3577"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">EXPLOITATION AND PROTECTION OF TURTLES AT SERANGAN AND TANJUNG BENOA VILLAGES SOUTH BALI IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF CULTURAL STUDIES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Gusti Ngurah Sudiana<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0"><sup>s</sup></span><span class="font1">, I Wayan Ardika<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Gde Parimartha<sup>2</sup>, I Made Titib<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduate Study, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University <sup>3</sup>Hindu University of Indonesia </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:Sudiana.ngurah@yahoo.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">Sudiana.ngurah@yahoo.com</span></a></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The people at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages have a habit to kill turtles for sale, consumption, custom and religion. They were all restless when their habit was hegomonized by the government by applying the Act concerning scarce animal conservation. The people urged that they be provided with freedom in killing turtles, but the government still intends to stop killing turtles at the two villages. The two different interests have resulted in a controversy over the exploitation of turtles making the Bali community as a whole called the killers of turtles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The title of this study is the Exploitation and Protection of Turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages, South Bali: in the Perspective of Cultural Studies. The subjects discussed are how the exploitation and protection of turtles implemented, what factors motivating their exploitation and protection, what meaningfulness is made to appear by their exploitation and protection.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Qualitative method was used. The data needed were collected by interview, observation, documentation of the secondary data. The data were descriptively and qualitatively analyzed using the theory of discourse, the theory of deconstruction, the theory of hegemony and the perspective of cultural studies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The research findings show that before the Acts Number 7 and 8 of 1999 concerning conservation of scarce animals, exploitation of turtles was part of the people’s life in South Bali. However, after 2005, such constitution has changed from being done in an extractive way to being done in a non-extractive way. Meaningfulness to turtles has also changed, from being exploited to being conserved. Such a conservation has been done by releasing </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tukiks</span><span class="font1"> ( turtles’ babies) to the sea. Since 2005, a change has also taken place with regard to the turtles killed for religious and traditional ceremonies. Formerly, many big turtles were used for religious and traditional ceremonies, but now only a few and small ones are used. If none is found, ducks are used to replace the turtles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Key word: Exploitation, protection of turtles, meaningfulness, hegemony, and socio cultural transformation.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The people at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages have a habit to kill turtles for traditional and religious ceremonies, consumption, sales, and for handicraft. Before 2000, Serangan and Tanjung Benoa villages were used as the places where boats carrying turtles transited, and buying and selling turtles took pace. Business in turtles was a promising one for the local people, because of such a business they could meet their needs. The highest took place in 1987, when Bali exported the most handicrafts made up of turtles. Such an increase in export and trade of turtles could not be separated from “the market ideology”, as global capitalism system integrated in globalization” (Piliang, 1998: 23). The market influence made turtles commercial commodities, which could be processed into various types of products leading to hyper- consumption.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Then the exploitation of turtles was reported in the meeting conducted by Union Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 1987 in Ottawa Canada. It was suspected that every year 30,000 turtles were caught and killed from all the coastal areas of Indonesia where turtles lay eggs. Such a report made animal loving organizations criticized Indonesia (Bali) as the country, which killed a very great number of turtles. In 1990 the world sent its statement to the Governor of Bali through a letter entitled Slaughter in Paradise . The letter contained a threatening that tourism in Bali would be boycotted if the exploitation of turtles were not stopped.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The world’s criticism has caused the Indonesian government to apply the Act Number 5 of 1990, the Rules and Regulations Number 7 and 8 of 1999 and the Bali Governor’s Letter of Decision Number 240 concerning scarce animals including</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">turtles. The pressure and resolute step taken by the government has caused the people at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages to feel hegemonized in exploiting turtles, because turtles have been part of their lifestyle. The controversy whether to exploit or to protect turtles has resulted in effects on and meaningfulness to their exploitation and protection. This phenomenon deserves being investigated from the perspective of cultural studies. Therefore, the title of this dissertation is “Exploitation and Protection and Turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages, South Bali: in the Perspective of Cultural Studies”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exploitation and Protection of Turtles</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Before 2000, turtles were exploited for trade, traditional activities, religious ceremonies and tourism at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages. The food products that were traded were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lawar, sate, komboh, srapah</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kwah ares</span><span class="font1"> (Balinese food products made from turtle’s meat). Such foods were sold in such a great quantity at restaurants and traditional stalls that hyperconsumption took place. In addition to selling food products, the people also sold handicrafts made of turtle’s eggshell. Such handicrafts were shown at small shops as souvenirs for the tourists. In 1978, Bali served as one of the centers where products made of turtles from Indonesia were exported. The people exported handicrafts made of turtles to Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, and the United States of America and sometimes to Belgium (Polunin and Nuitja, 1981: Suweto et al, 1991).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Turtles have been killed for Hindu-related religious ceremonies called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Panca Yadnya.</span><span class="font1"> At the upper level ceremonies, a turtle’s head is put at </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sanggar Tawang</span><span class="font1"> as the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">puer</span><span class="font1">, while its meat is processed to make</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lawar</span><span class="font1"> to be put on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Banten Suci</span><span class="font1"> (holy offerings). As a tourist attraction, the turtles’ babies are released to the sea. The babies are taken from the pools where turtles are looked after and their eggs are hatched. For traditional activities, turtles are generally killed for consumption for those who are involved in them. In addition, turtles killed for traditional activities are related to someone’s social status in the society. The more turtles are killed for traditional and religious ceremonies, the higher someone’s social status is. The more </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sate </span><span class="font1">made from turtle’s meat can be provided (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bayuh roras</span><span class="font1">) when religious and traditional activities are performed at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages the higher someone’s social status is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The protection of turtles is done at the pools particularly built for looking after turtles. At Serangan Village, there are two such pools. They are Taman Wisata Penyu and TCEC. At Tanjung Benoa Village there are Pudut Sari, Bulih Sari, Moncot Sari, Deluang Sari, and Lecha Ceria. In this way, the people can conserve turtles by releasing their </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tukiks</span><span class="font1">, which are hatched in the pools where their mothers are looked after, to the sea. Such a protection is termed as nonextractive, meaning that the people indirectly conserve mature turtles living in the sea, because the turtles needed for ceremonies are taken from the pools where they are looked after.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Factors Causing Exploitation and Protection of Turtles</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The factors causing the people to kill turtles are tradition, religious ceremonies and their commercial values. Before 2000, at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages turtles were killed for consumption when they mutually helped each other and for religious ceremonies (Panca Yadnya). The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">food products made from turtle’s meat was not only for consumption for the people who were involved in the traditional activities, but also for </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jotan</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bayuh</span><span class="font1"> . </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jotan</span><span class="font1"> is provided to the guests and relatives, while </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bayuh</span><span class="font1"> is provided to those who are respected depending on their social status at the villages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The turtles killed for Hindu-related ceremonies in Bali is caused by the mythology that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Awatar Wisnu</span><span class="font1"> comes down to the earth in the form of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Badawangnala</span><span class="font1">/turtle serving as the foundation of Mount Giri Mandara so that the earth will not get sunk. Such a belief has made a turtle’s head used as medium of ceremonies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The factor that is most responsible for the exploitation of turtles is their commercial value. Such a value has led to the fact that the number of turtles killed has exceeded the capacity permitted. It is this that has threatened the conservation of turtles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition to the factors causing turtles to be exploited, there are also some factors causing turtles to be protected at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages. Such factors are there has been hegemony from the government through the Act Number 5 of 1990, the rules and regulations number 7 and 8 of 1999, the Bali Governor’s Letter of Decision Number 240 of 2000, the legal action taken by the government, the international pressure, and animal loving Non Government Organizations. They have all urged that turtles cannot be killed any more. The socialization of what has been instructed by PHDI concerning scarce animals cannot be neglected. Due to the hegemony, the people have been made to be aware that they should conserve turtles by looking after them in the pools particularly designed for this purpose. In conserving</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">turtles, the people work together with the government and animal-loving nongovernment organiza tions, religious leaders and the leaders of the villages. Moreover, the protection of turtles is included in the Traditional Rules and Regulations of Serangan Traditional Village, reading </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pawos 30 “Penyu lan binatang laut liyanan tur seluiring paksi</span><span class="font1">. Turtle conservation, which is realized by building pools where turtles are kept, has made the International Community not consider Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages as the ones where turtles are killed any more. They have been considered places where turtles are conserved.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effects of Exploitation and Protection of Turtles</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effects of Exploitation of Turtles</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Economically, exploitation of turtles before 2000 benefited the people at the two villages. By exploiting turtles, they could fulfill their needs. However, the exploitation of turtles exceeding the needs made the government prohibit the trade of turtles, which, in turn, made the people unsatisfied. The reason is that the people were frightened to lose their jobs. Such a fear has been overcome by WWF by approaching the people and giving training courses in economics to those whose profession was trading turtles. Working capital was also provided and cooperation was made with them. Such cooperation was continued by building TCEC on March 16, 2003 at Serangan Village. In addition, WWF also approached the people holistically. The approach was not only limited to those who had the authority to reinforce rules and regulations, but also involved the people to make them aware of conservation. The attempts mentioned above resulted in a change that the food products that used to be</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">made from turtle’s meat have now been made from other materials. Baudrillard (2004) calls such a change comodification, that is, a basic change from the status of commodity into a complex relation between economy, language and ideology of the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The effects of turtles on religious activities are that after 2000 the people have found it difficult to find turtles for ceremonies. Therefore, the government has recommended turtles be used for religious ceremonies. However, such a recommendation has resulted in negative effects that turtles have been smuggled without being observed by the parties that have the authority for that. The positive effects have been that turtles are still used for ceremonies. Since 2005, turtles have been used for the upper level ceremonies. The turtles used have not been necessarily the big ones, have only been used as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jatu </span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sarana</span><span class="font1"> = medium), and have not been necessarily many. Foucault (2002: 9) call these effects </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">discourse</span><span class="font1">, that is, the appearance of religious awareness resulting from the enriched knowledge and social practices in the form of social awareness of using turtles for religious ceremonies. These effects have contributed to the establishment of the centers where turtles are looked after at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages, which, at the same time, have supplied the turtles for Hindu-related ceremonies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In tourism, the effects are that at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages the turtles looked after in the man-made pools are also for tourists. Such a protection is packaged in such a way that many stalls and restaurants have been built in those areas. Tourists are interested in this tourist attraction, making the world’s view positive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effects of Protection of Turtles</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The protection of turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages has been able to raise the people’s awareness of protecting turtles. Before 2000, the people exploited turtles in an extractive way (directly taking from the nature), but after 2000, the turtles needed for religious ceremonies have been taken from the pools where they are looked after. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tukiks </span><span class="font1">released to the sea have also been taken from the pools. Wallace (1961) call it </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Partial equevalance structure,</span><span class="font1"> the interaction between those looking after turtles in the pools and turtles conserving groups with the Balinese community is mutual complementary in nature in treating environment. Then another alternative tourist attraction appears which generates income, makes job opportunities available, regains the local people’s reputation, and widens the people’s formal and informal cooperative network.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The other effect is related to the environmental rescuing. Many parties have done their best to protect turtles, but the results achieved have not been maximal. The traditional community has applied the traditional law that turtles should be protected. Such a protection is included in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font1"> (traditional law) that traditional institutions should protect turtles. It reads </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Palet 5, Indik Druwen Desa, Pawos 29 and 30.</span><span class="font1"> The effect of turtle protection is related to environment, that is, Serangan Village is recalled the island of turtles. The turtles multiplying there are saved. To save such animals is the collective local people’s responsibility. The people have implemented what is instructed by the law concerning protection of wild animals.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4. Significance of Exploitation and Protection of Turtles</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Significance of Exploitation of Turtles</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The exploitation of turtles means welfare, physical and spiritual balance, ecotourism and environmental conservation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Welfare has something to do with whether what is economically needed by the community is fulfilled or not fulfilled. The significance, in this case, can be denotative and connotative. Denotative significance refers to the community’s welfare contributed by the trade of turtles involving fishermen, distributors, boats carrying turtles, traders, agents, and consumers with money as the final objective. Connotative significance refers to the people’s habit in managing the natural potentials for their welfare. However, such a significance also damages environment resulting from hypercommodity, meaning that for welfare the number of turtles killed exceeds the capacity permitted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Meaningfulness of turtles as the symbol symbolizing the macrocosmos and microcosmos balance can be seen from the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">puer</span><span class="font1"> put on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sanggar tawang</span><span class="font1"> symbolizing the earth’s foundation. The earth’s balance is identical with the man’s physical and spiritual balance (microcosmos). That is why turtles are used in Hindu-related religious ceremonies. This means that the turtles killed for religious ceremonies means something or represents something which is immaterial, abstract, idea, quality, signs of process of an object, and so forth (Coulson: 1978. Vol. II. 1696). In this case, turtles killed for religious ceremonies represent something abstract about physical and spiritual balance in Hinduism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The physical and spiritual balance symbolized by the turtles killed in religious ceremonies is also described in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa Samhita</span><span class="font1">. It is described that a turtle is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">identical with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kurma</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kurma</span><span class="font1"> refers to a poison container swallowed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa</span><span class="font1"> when rotating Mount Mandara Giri. If related to Balinese spirituality/</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kedyatmikan</span><span class="font1">, there is a term </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">cedoking gulu.</span><span class="font1"> In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lontar Dadig Karana</span><span class="font1">, it is called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">murda jangkep, Ngamurtiang Lingga</span><span class="font1">. In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Arga Patra,</span><span class="font1"> it is called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ngarmutiang Agni Surya.</span><span class="font1"> In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">nasarin swamba</span><span class="font1"> of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Weda Parikrama</span><span class="font1">, it symbolizes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Omkara.</span><span class="font1"> In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Panca Sarawati</span><span class="font1">, when </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ngenteg linggih</span><span class="font1"> ceremony is conducted, turtle’s puwer symbolizes </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">agni</span><span class="font1"> (fire). In </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Siwa Linga </span><span class="font1">, a turtle is identical with </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">agni</span><span class="font1"> (fire), the priest of the Gods of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Reg Weda Mandala I. Mantra I</span><span class="font1"> reads </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Agnim ile purohitam, yajnasya deva rivjyam, hotaram ratna dhatamam</span><span class="font1">, meaning that we worship God as the universe’s priest, who activates through eternal law, who looks after and sustains every godly and bright characteristic (Maswinara, 1999: 1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Foucault (19261984), the discourse of the exploitation of turtles refers to the relationship between power and knowledge. The higher the people’s knowledge about turtles (as the animals that should be protected), the more aware they will be that such animals should be conserved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The people’s awareness at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages of conserving turtles has made ecotourism develop. Such awareness is included in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Awig-Awig</span><span class="font1"> (traditional law) of Serangan Traditional Village. It is included in Article 30, which reads that turtles belong to the traditional village, and that they should be protected by the Traditional Village itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The protection of turtles for ecotourism serves as the response to the world’s criticism that turtles are killed at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Traditional Villages. As tourist attraction, the protection of turtles has made the people’s way of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">thinking and profession change. Connotatively, ecotourism refers to the attempts made by the people at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages to change their predicate from being called killers of turtles to being conservers of turtles (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font1">) under the custom’s structure inspired by Hinduism.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Meaningfulness of Protection of Turtles</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The protection of turtles constitutes the application of the great values of Balinese culture, especially the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana</span><span class="font1"> in the subculture of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan,</span><span class="font1"> that is, the balance between man and his environment. The concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bhuta hita, ayua tan masih ring sarwa prani</span><span class="font1"> is always given the priority to keep balance. Therefore, the people have killed turtles for offerings to God (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">luwur/hulu)</span><span class="font1"> instead of for consumption and trade (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">teben).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Turtles in Balinese community are still believed as the symbol of sacred animals functioning as the earth’s foundation. Therefore, how they are used is arranged through the process of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">utpati</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Stiti</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">praline</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Utpati</span><span class="font1"> means eggs are hatched, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stiti</span><span class="font1"> means turtles are looked after and released to the sea, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">praline</span><span class="font1"> means using them for ceremonies as the symbol of balance. The new awareness means that environment should also be well looked after if man, in his life, wants balance, including protecting turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages are used for trade, tourism, traditional needs, and Hindu-related ceremonies. The exploitation of turtles before 1999 was influenced by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">libido</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">economy (libidinal economy). After 2000, the exploitation of turtles has been influenced by the hegemony imposed by the government through legal action. As a result, the people have gradually ceased buying and selling turtles. Next, the community has built pools where turtles are looked after accompanied by the activities of releasing </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">tukiks</span><span class="font1"> to the sea with the tourists visiting there as the form of ecotourism. In Hindu-related ceremonies, the turtles’ heads (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">puers)</span><span class="font1"> and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lawar</span><span class="font1"> made from the turtle’s meat are used for supplementing the holy offerings (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">banten suci</span><span class="font1">), especially when the upper level ceremonies are performed. The people have also been used to using the turtle’s meat for the custom’s needs, that is, for consumption for the guests attending the ceremonies and for </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jotan</span><span class="font1"> given to the relatives and the villages’ leaders. After 2000, the people’s habit in exploiting turtles has changed, that is, by collaborating with the government and non-government organizations, they have started protecting turtles.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The exploitation of turtles at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages have been motivated by various factors such as the habit of consuming turtle’s meat, the turtle’s symbolic value, someone’s social status, and the turtle’s commercial value. The economic effects of exploitation and protection of turtles have been that, on one hand, the people have lost their profession by buying and selling turtles, but, on the other hand, they have been able to create job opportunities. The other effect has been that the people have been able to keep the turtles’ lives balanced through </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tri Hita Karana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The economic significance of turtles to the people at Serangan and Tanjung Benoa Villages has been that the people have not only considered turtles</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">commercial items, but they have considered them the creatures which should be conserved. The people have also considered the protection of turtles identical with keeping the nature balanced. In other words, man is obliged to sacrifice (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">beryadnya)</span><span class="font1"> for the continuity of the existence of other creatures (including turtles). The change in giving meaningfulness to turtles cannot be separated from the cultural attitude of being embarrassed (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">lek/malu</span><span class="font1">) and maintaining self-esteem (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">jengah</span><span class="font1">). The people have considered the exploitation and protection of turtles the symbol of balance/</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sarwa bhutahita,</span><span class="font1"> that is, turtles are not denotative in nature but connotative in nature (as the symbol symbolizing </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">awatar Wisnu</span><span class="font1"> who saves the earth from being damaged); therefore, turtles should be conserved to keep the nature balanced.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">I would like to thank the Recor of Udayana University and the Director of Postgraduate Program Udayana University for the opportunity and facilities provided when persuing my study at the Postgraduate Program Udayana University. My thanks also go to Prof.Dr. I Wayan Ardika, M.A., as the Promoter; Prof.Dr. I Gde Parimartha, M.A., as Co-Promoter I; Prof. Dr. I Made Titib, Ph.D., as Co-Promoter II. Their guidance and advice have been very helpful in the process of completing this dissertation. Finally, I would also like to extend my thanks to the other parties who have supported the process of this study.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>BILIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Adnyana, I.B. Windia, 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Turtle Trade In Bali : A Retrospective, Current Situations and Future Challenges For Its Control</span><span class="font1">. Denpasar : Udayana University, The Fakulty Of Veterinary Medicine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_________2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kompilasi perundang-Undangan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mengenai</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Perlindungan Tumbuhan dan Satwa Liar</span><span class="font1">, Yayasan wwf Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_________ 2005. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Aturan Regional, Nasional, local, yang Relevan dengan Pelestarian Penyu</span><span class="font1"> Laut, Email Wadnyana @WWF.or.id: Wadnyana1 @ yahoo.co.uk.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Antariksa, 1999- 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Budaya Mater</span><span class="font1">. Kunci Cultural Studies Center.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ardika, I Wayan, 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Membangun Budaya Rohani pada Suatu Peradaban</span><span class="font1">, Makalah Sarasehan Bidang Agama, Adat dan Budaya Tahun 2006, Ruang Padma, Bale Diklat Provinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Astra, Gde, Semadi, 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Revitalisasi untuk Memperkokoh Jatidiri Bangsa di Era Global</span><span class="font1">. Seminar Internasional, Seri Sastra, Sosial, Budaya ke 15, Diesnatalis ke 42, Univ Udayana Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bungin,Burhan, 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Data Penelitian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kualitatif</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pemahaman Filosofis dan Metodologis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kearah</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penguasaan Model Aplikasi</span><span class="font1">, Jakarta : PT Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris, 2000. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice</span><span class="font1">. London: Sage Publications.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">_____________ 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies, Teori &amp;&nbsp;Praktik</span><span class="font1"> (terjemahan). Yogyakarta : Kreasi Wacana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foucault, Michel, 1972</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">. The Archaelogy of Knowledge &amp;&nbsp;the Discourse on Language</span><span class="font1"> (terjemahan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">L’archeologie du Savoir</span><span class="font1">). London : Tavistock Publications Limited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hall, Stuart. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies and Its Theoretical Legacies</span><span class="font1"> dalam L. Grossberg, C. Nelson, and P. Treichler (Ed.) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cultural Studies</span><span class="font1">. London and New York : Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kadjeng dkk.1994. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sarasamuscaya. </span><span class="font1">Jakarta : Hanuman Sakti</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mariyah, Emiliana, 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Wacana Bagus dalam PIP Kebudayaan dan Kajian Budaya (Rintisan Pemikiran Posmodernisme yang Ironis</span><span class="font1">). Denpasar : Univ Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ngurah Bagus, I Gusti. 1991. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dari Objek ke Subjek</span><span class="font1">: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Memanfaatkan Peluang Pariwisata sebagai Industri Jasa dalam Pembangunan, dalam Ilmu-ilmu Humaniora, Persembahan bagi Prof. Dr. Siti Baroroh Baried dan Prof. Dr. Sulastin Sutrisno</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarta: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Gadjah Mada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Piliang, Yasraf Amir. 2004 : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dunia yang Dilipat</span><span class="font1"> : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tamasya Melampui Batas-Batas Kebudayaan. </span><span class="font1">Yogjakarta : Jalasutra</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Pudja, Gde dan Tjok Sudharta.1975, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Manawadharmasatra</span><span class="font1">. Surabaya : PT. Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna, I Nyoman. Kuta. 2004. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori, Metode, dan Teknik Penelitian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sastra</span><span class="font1">, Yogjakarta : Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sanderson, Stephen K. 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makrososiologi</span><span class="font1"> : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah Pendekatan terhadap Realitas Sosial</span><span class="font1"> (edisi kedua, Terjemahan). Jakarta : PT Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sanjaya, Oka Gede. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Wisnu Purana</span><span class="font1">, Surabaya : PT. Paramita</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudiana, I Gusti Ngurah, 1999 : </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Desakralisasi Tari &nbsp;&nbsp;Barong</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam Kehidupan &nbsp;&nbsp;Sosial</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Budaya Masyarakat Bali</span><span class="font1">, Tesis, Universitas Gajah &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mada</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yogjakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">________________, 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Menyayangi Satwa &nbsp;&nbsp;Langka</span><span class="font1">, &nbsp;&nbsp;Denpasar,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Harian Nusa Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">________________,2006. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Samhita Bhisama Parisadha Hindu Dharama Indonesi</span><span class="font1">a, Denpasar : PHDI Provinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Titib, Made, 2003. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teologi dan Simbol-Simbol Dalam Agama Hindu</span><span class="font1">, Surabaya : PT Paramita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wiana, Kt. 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nitisastra.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta : Dirjen Bimas Hindu Bhuda.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Windia, I Wayan P. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Hukum Adat Bali.</span><span class="font1"> Denpasar : Lembaga Dokumentasi dan Publikasi Fakultas Hukum Universitas Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wuisman, J.J.J.M. 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Ilmu-ilmu Sosial, Asas-asas</span><span class="font1"> (Volume 1). Jakarta: Lembaga Penerbit Fakultas Ekonomi Universitas Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Alam, Bachtiar. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Globalisasi dan Perubahan Budaya: Perspektif Teori Kebudayaan, Antropologi Indonesia,</span><span class="font1"> Majalah Antropologi Sosial dan Budaya Indonesia/</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian Journal of Social and Cultural Anthropolog</span><span class="font1">y, Year XXI Nomor 54.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ngurah Bagus, I Gusti. 1992. “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pembangunan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Berwawasan Budaya</span><span class="font1">”, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Majalah Ilmiah Universitas Udayana</span><span class="font1">, 1 (1), pp. 1-8.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p>