---
layout: full_article
title: "KABA GOMBANG PATUANAN: AN ORAL LITERARY WORK OF MINANGKABAU PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY, WEST SUMATRA"
author: "Eva Krisna, I Nyoman Kuta Ratna, I Wayan Cika, I Nyoman Weda Kusuma"
categories: eol
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-3539 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/id-3539"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eol/full-3539"  
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>KABA GOMBANG PATUANAN: AN ORAL LITERARY WORK OF MINANGKABAU PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY, WEST SUMATRA</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0">Eva Krisna</span><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Kuta Ratna<sup>2</sup>, I Wayan Cika<sup>2</sup>,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Nyoman Weda Kusuma<sup>2</sup>, <sup>1</sup>Postgraduate Program Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Indonesian Department, Faculty of Letters, Udayana University Email: Evakrisna </span><a href="mailto:bbp@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">bbp@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Gombang Patuana</span><span class="font1"> (abbreviated to KGP) is a </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Minang</span><span class="font1"> literary genre which is orally presented in the form of songs. Therefore, it is known as an intonational prose. As a piece of oral literary work, KGP needs a medium of presentation. The medium needed is in the form of a performance known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pertunjukan Kak Oai</span><span class="font1"> (PKO), which exists at </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kenagarian Air Haji</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pesisir Selatan</span><span class="font1"> Regency, West Sumatra. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Gambang Patuanan</span><span class="font1"> tells about the socio cultural life of the community of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pesisir Selatan</span><span class="font1"> Regency using the local variety of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Minangkabau</span><span class="font1"> language. The availability of the texts of KGP, the performance of PKO, and the collective community possessing such a literary work shows that the phenomenon of what is written and spoken about oral literary work is different from the phenomenon of what is written and spoken about written literary work. Oral literary work cannot be approached from literary discipline only, but linguistic approach and anthropological approach are also needed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The morphology of KGP is made up of stem of the story ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">batang curito’</span><span class="font1">, branch of the story ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dahan curito’</span><span class="font1"> , and twig of the story ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rantiang curito’</span><span class="font1">. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">batang curito </span><span class="font1">(the stem of the story) is the text of GPP as a whole. The ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito’</span><span class="font1"> (the branch of the story) serves as the episodes of the story and the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ranting Curito</span><span class="font1"> serves as the parts of the episode. The functions performed by KGP are: (1) as a medium for conveying what is expected from a king; (2) as a medium for conveying Minang tradition; (3) as a medium for conveying oceanic knowledge; (4) as a medium for conveying nation-loving enthusiasm ‘chauvinism’ ; (5) as a medium for conveying henotheism towards ancestors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">literary genre, literary work, and local variety.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background and Problem</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Gombang Patuanan</span><span class="font1"> (KGP) refers to a Minang literary genre having the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pasir Selatan</span><span class="font1"> socio culture as the background. It is conveyed in Minang language in the form of an intonational prose. As an oral literary work, it is performed in three variants of performance. They are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Bataram</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rabab</span><span class="font1">, and the performance of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kak Oai</span><span class="font1">. The object of this study is the KGP, which is performed as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kak Oai Performance</span><span class="font1"> (PKO = Pertunjukan Kak Oai) at Kenagarian Air Haji, Pesisir Selatan Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the past, KGP was so popular that it was not only well known all over Pesisir Selatan Regency but also in Malaysia. The main character of KGP has become the legendary character to the community of Pesisir Selatan due to his hyperbolic intensity, patriotism, and his being example. Although it lives peacefully with the other </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabas</span><span class="font1"> such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Gadih Basanai, Kaba Puti Nilam</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Puti Mambang Lauik</span><span class="font1">, it differs from them. KGP is considered sacred by the community of Pesisir Selatan. The factors that have contributed to its being sacred are the relatedness of the origins of several names in Pesisir Selatan Regency and the origins of traditions, the belief that the story was real in the past, and the belief that its characters still exist in the form of souls that directly influence the community’s life. It is believed that the souls of the characters have supernatural power, occupy high places, and will come any time when the community members need them. They will come when called through ritual ceremonies when KGP is performed and practices of native healing are carried out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The sacredness of KGP is shown by the prohibitions that such performances cannot be performed where the community members like and without any ritual ceremonies. If such prohibitions are broken, the characters will get angry and this will badly affect their lives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As a sacred oral literary work, the existence of KGP is supported by various things such as performance, socio cultural background of the supporting community, its form as an intonational prose, its narrative elements, the messages conveyed, and the functions performed as folklore. Those are all what form the background of this study and make it important to conduct.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background described above, this study covers five main things. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What forms the background of the creation of KGP?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the formal structure of KGP as an intonational prose?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What is the narrative and morphological structure of KGP?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the ideologies conveyed by KGP are formed?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions of KGP to the supporting community?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In particular, this study aims at (1) describing PKO, the Minang socio cultural background, and the socio cultural background of Pesisir SElatan and West Sumatra; (2) analyzing the formal structure of KGP; (3) analyzing the narrative structure, and the morphology of KGP; (4) analyzing and revealing the ideologies of KGP; and (5) analyzing and finding out the functions of KGP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Theoretically, this study is expected to: (1) contribute to and develop the theory of oral literary work, especially that of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba</span><span class="font1">; and (2) to give contribution in the form of knowledge to further researches, on both KGP and the other </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kabas</span><span class="font1"> , and on the forms of literary works.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Practically, this study is expected to: (1) motivate the researchers on the other Minang literary works to direct their attention to the Minang literary works existing in the coastal areas; and (2) make the community occupying Pesisir Selatan Regency proud of expressing their self-identity as an oceanic community.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of Creation of KGP</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Socio cultural aspects of Minang, Pesisir Selatan and West Sumatra form the background of the creation of KGP. The socio cultural aspect of Minang includes system of traditional Minang government, the course of history, the religions to which the Minang people used to adhere, and the Europeans who used to visit Minang. The socio cultural aspects of Pesisir Selatan and West Sumatra include their geographical locations, their system of kinship, languages and arts, and religions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The socio aspects of Minang, Pesisir Selatan and West Sumatra, which form the background of KGP are reflected on its texts. Pesisir Selatan (the southern areas) includes the southern part of the western coastal areas of Indian Ocean, to which the Minang culture has extended. The culture in this region, or the region where Minang</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">culture is derived from, is called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Luak Nan Tigo</span><span class="font1">, which is considered highly valued, while the culture to which the community of Pesisir Selatan adheres is considered descendant. The forms of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaba</span><span class="font1"> are also considered descendants as well. KGP reflects the cultural specification of the sub ethnic group occupying Pesisir Selatan Regency, which shows its differences from and similarities to the sub ethnic group of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Luak Nan Tigo</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The oral performance, which has led to the creation of KGP is PKO. A single performer called Tukang Kak Oai, who also plays the role as a composer, performs it. It is performed in front of the onlookers called </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">khalayak</span><span class="font1"> (audience). </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Khalayak</span><span class="font1">, in this case, refers to the perceivers, lovers, onlookers, and listeners to the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaba</span><span class="font1">. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">khalayak </span><span class="font1">consumes the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaba</span><span class="font1"> because it is interested in the content of the story with which it has usually been long familiar, it is interested in the style the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaba</span><span class="font1"> is narrated which is always new in every performance, and it is interested in the intonational language and the sounds going with the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kaba</span><span class="font1">. The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">khalayak</span><span class="font1"> can interact in the process of the performance without disturbing and determines the course of the story. The performance supporting tools, the time when it is performed, the place where it is performed, and the situation in which it is performed is all the supporting factors of the realization of PKO.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formal Structure</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The formal structure of KGP as an intonational prose is that there is an integration of prose and poetic elements in the text. Those elements are diction, homology, euphony and cacophony, image, terms of addresses, time aspects, repetition of words, syllabification and repetition of words, reduction and insertion of words, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">karmina </span><span class="font1">(a two-lined traditional poetry), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pantun</span><span class="font1"> (a traditional poetry , each verse of which consists of two couplets), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">talibun</span><span class="font1"> (old poetry with a distinctive rhyme pattern), narration, and dialogues.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The formal structure of an intonational prose refers to the exploration of all the creational abilities in arranging a story by a poet with beautiful spoken language. If the text of KGP is in its original form, that is, oral, it can be seen that KGP is a rhetorical matter, that is, the emphasis is on the sound aspects and its influence on the audience. When the text of KGP is already written, then it is a stylistic matter related to the language use in literary works, in which the aspects of beauty are considered. Kutha</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna (2007:233-276) states that rhetoric belongs to the old stylistic studies, which is different from the modern stylistic studies that concentrate on the textual uniqueness. The most dominant element in the modern stylistic is figure of speech. The figure of speech is defined as all the descriptions that are related to types of metaphors, parables, and similarities (Kutha Ratna, 2007:233). The most dominant figures of speech in poetic studies are metaphors and metonymies. The more dominant figure in the text of KGP is metaphor. Thus, the structural formal of KGP belongs to stylistic studies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Narrative and Morphological Structure of KGP</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the narrative structure of KGP includes the background, characterization, theme and message. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung Ledang</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nagari Lunang</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Taluak Kualo Banda Mua</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Taluak Kualo Aia Batu</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Taluak Sinjalai Tambangan Papan</span><span class="font1"> form the background of KGP. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung Ledang</span><span class="font1"> is the only cosmologic background, which refers to the place where the souls of the ancestors and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Non Gombang</span><span class="font1">’s relatives reside after they died. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nagari Lunang, Taluak Kualo Banda Mua, Taluak Kualo Aia Batu</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Taluak Sinjalai Tambangan Papan</span><span class="font1"> form the geographical background, where common people live. The protagonist characters of KGP are </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Bombang</span><span class="font1"> with his younger sister, fourth wife, and his children. They are faced with the antagonist characters that are made up of four foreigners, who physically look like giants, behave wickedly, and have bad habits. The messages conveyed by KGP are that everyone is supposed to maintain his/her personal and collective self esteem. Through the discourses of nobleness, the protagonist characters are shown to build self-esteem with the superpower and braveness they have. Through the discourses of nativity, they are shown to reject the foreigners who come there bringing bad effects on them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The morphology of KGP is made up of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">batang curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘stem of the story’, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">dahan curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘branch of the story’ and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rantiang curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘twig of the story. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Batang Curito</span><span class="font1"> is the text of KGP as a whole. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘branch of the story’ serves as the episodes of the story. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ranting Curito</span><span class="font1"> is employed for selecting the focus of the story at one performance. If, at one performance, it is decided to tell about the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Batang Curito</span><span class="font1">, the narration is only focused on the guidelines only. If, at another performance, it is decided to tell about the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1">, the narration is focused on one episode only that is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">usually relatively more intact. If </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantiang Curityo</span><span class="font1"> is chosen, the narration is limited to one part of one episode considered interesting. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantiang Curito</span><span class="font1"> is usually narrated on a one short performance that does not take a whole night. Commonly, one performance of KGP chooses the narration of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1">. Such a choice is based on the agreement between the audience and the performers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1"> is made up of the episodes of KGP including (1) Greeting; (2) Introdution to the Story, (3) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> Is Tempted by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Andam Dewi</span><span class="font1"> through a Dream, (4) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> Visits </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Andam Dewi’s</span><span class="font1"> World, (5) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> Defeats </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Unggeh Layang</span><span class="font1">’s Message, (6) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> Is Defeated by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Unggeh Layang</span><span class="font1">, (7) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Pengaduan</span><span class="font1"> Is Defeated by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rajo Si Patoka</span><span class="font1">, (9) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang’s</span><span class="font1"> Relatives Eradicate Wickedness, and (1) the Closing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ten </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1"> are a combination of the functions binding thirteen </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantian Curito</span><span class="font1"> or fuctions. The ten </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantiang Curito</span><span class="font1"> of KGP are (1) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado Sutan-1</span><span class="font1">, (2) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado Mukasuik-1</span><span class="font1">, (3) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado Caro-1</span><span class="font1">, (4) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Mukasuik Sampai-1</span><span class="font1">, (5) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Datang Bala-1</span><span class="font1">, (6) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Cilako-1</span><span class="font1">, (7) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado Sutan-2</span><span class="font1">, (8) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado Mukasuik-2</span><span class="font1">, (9) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Ado-Caro-2</span><span class="font1">, (10) Mukasuik Sampai-2, (11) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Datang Bala-2</span><span class="font1">, (12) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Cilako-2</span><span class="font1">, and (13) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Manang</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The thirteen </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantian Curito</span><span class="font1"> are the functions referred to as ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The Function of Dramatis Personae’</span><span class="font1"> by Proff (1975:93-95). They mean the same deeds and roles or the repeated actions done by one or two figures. The character of father (Nang Gombang or Sutan Sabirullah) and the character of son (Sutan Pangaduan) play the functions of KGP</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ideologies of KGP</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The ideologies of KGP are revealed through the analysis of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">rantiang curito </span><span class="font1">‘ranting cerita’. Such ideologies are (1) the ideology of leadership, (2) the ideology of matriarchal, (3) the ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">phalocentric</span><span class="font1">, (4) the ideology of equality in social status, (5) the ideology of super powerness, the ideology of sacredness ‘</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mana</span><span class="font1">’, (7) the ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pasatian,</span><span class="font1"> (8) the ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Patuanan</span><span class="font1">, (9) the ideology of henotheism, and (10) the ideology of anti colonials.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ideology of leadership indicates that a king must be handsome, has super powerness and sacred things that can overcome all the difficulties encountered, and must</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">be able to build sovereignty. The ideology of nobleness is intended to give the leadership concept of a king based on the thought of the traditional Minang community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ideology of matriarchy indicates that the line of kinship based on the mothers is ideal to the Minang community. The mothers are believed to have mercy on their offspring. The ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">falosentris</span><span class="font1"> is the realization of patriarchy in the Minang community, which adheres to matriarchal kinship. This ideology is also shown at the habit of wandering and the practice of polygamy that marginalizes the females’ position in a social life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ideology of henotheism (a belief in one God without neglecting that there are other Gods and supernatural creatures) indicates that the Minang community believes in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">magi</span><span class="font1"> (something or a particular way that can results in supernatural power and therefore can control the surrounding nature including the way of thinking and behavior of human beings) which is adjusted to Islam. The ancestors’ belief in supernatural creatures has been the religious principle to the community. Islam, as the only accepted religion, is a package of practices of the belief in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">magi</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The ideology of anti colonials expresses that colonialists are refused. An ethnic group, which is not native or ‘out group’ who comes to colonize should be refused considering its ‘strangeness’ and the dangers it brings. The belief that native people are more superior to the colonialists should be implanted to develop enthusiasm of ethnicity or maintenance of the nation’s identity.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Functions of KGP</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In its functions as the reflection of the notions of the collective community of Pesisir Selatan in the past, KGP conveys the expectation that the leader should be handsome, have supernatural power, and have sacred things and animals that will support his charisma. This folklore also conveys the expectation that the region of Pesisir Selatan is free from the foreign colonialists who used to occupy it. The community views that the charismatic leaders who had been able to expel foreigners were their powerful ancestors. The charismatic leaders at the same time serve as the metaphor of superiority of the sub ethnic group residing at Pesisir Selatan as an oceanic community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As the medium for socializing the Minang tradition, KGP shows the act of giving priority as the base of kinship, the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">mamak</span><span class="font1"> (avunculate), the figures of fathers, the concept of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">affinal kin</span><span class="font1"> or kinship resulting from marriages of kin group, and the kinship which is oriented toward the ancestors (ancestor oriented kin group).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As the medium for maintaining oceanic knowledge, KGP inherits knowledge of various types and names of fish, various parts of ships and all sorts of ropes vital to traditional ships. Inheritance in the form of the knowledge of ocean is very essential at the time when the community feels that such knowledge is strange resulting from the era development.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As the medium for conveying nation-loving enthusiasm, KGP intends to implant proudness as an indigenous ethnic group, which is expected to develop nationloving sense. It is intended to make the young generation aware of the danger following from the arrivals of the colonialists in Pesisir Selatan, which is rich. In this case, KGP implants so excessive nation-loving enthusiasm that other ethnic groups are considered inferior known as chauvinism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Kaba Gombang Patuanan</span><span class="font1"> , in its function as the medium for compelling and controlling the community’s norms, conveys the belief in one God known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">monotheism</span><span class="font1"> without neglecting the existence of the other Gods or supernatural creatures known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">henotheism</span><span class="font1">. The belief in one God is based on Islam as the acknowledgement of the religion to which the community adheres, while the belief in supernatural creatures refers to the ancestor worshipping practices known as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">patuanan.</span><span class="font1"> Through KGP, it is shown that henotheism actually refers to the belief to which the traditional Minang community or even a group of people has adhered so far.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Novelties</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are seven novelties of the research. They are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social, cultural, and historical aspects of Minang form the background of the creation of KGP; all those aspects are implicitly included in the text.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As an oral literary work, KGP is realized through various performances, one of which is the performance of Kak Oai (Pertunjukan Kak Oai = PKO).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.3</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The narrative structure of KGP is similar to that of the common literary works, that is, it consists of background, characterization, theme and message.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.4</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The morphological structure of KGP is as follows: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Batang Curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘Stem of the story’ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dahan Curito</span><span class="font1"> “Branch of the Story’, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rantiang Curito</span><span class="font1"> ‘Twig of the Story’.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.5</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The formal structure of KGP, as an intonational prose, consists of : diction, homology, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ejambement</span><span class="font1">, euphony, cacophony, image, terms of addresses, aspect of time, reduction and insertion of words, charmina, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pantun</span><span class="font1"> (traditional poetry), </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">talibun</span><span class="font1"> (old poetry with a distinctive pattern), narration, dialogues, and figure of speech.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.6</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The ideologies presented through KGP are the ideology of leadership, the ideology of matrilineal kinship, the ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">falosentris</span><span class="font1"> , the ideology of equality in social status, the ideology of sacredness </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">‘mana’</span><span class="font1">, the ideology of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Pasatian</span><span class="font1"> , the ideology of henotheism, and the ideology of anti colonialists.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">3.7</span><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The functions of KGP are as the medium for conveying an expectation of ideal leaders, the medium for socializing the Minang tradition, the medium for maintaining knowledge of oceanography, the medium for conveying nation-loving enthusiasm, and as the medium for conveying the belief in henotheism.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The social, cultural and historical aspects of Minang and Pesisir Selatan Regency form the background of the creation of the KGP. Therefore, they all both explicitly and implicitly emerge in KGP. They are all realized through the performance of PKO and the text, which are made up of the narrative structure, the morphological structure, and the formal structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The text of KGP is full of messages and values, which are referred to as the ideologies of its audience. The values contained are those that are related to leadership, tradition, belief, and the state-loving value. Such ideologies have various functions such as the medium for conveying the collective community’s notions, the medium for legalizing regulations and cultural institutions, the medium for educating children, and the medium for enforcing and controlling the norms applicable in the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the functions of KGP and its ideologies, it has been found out that KGP belongs to Transition Influenced Old Indonesian Literary Work with the characteristics as described by Fang (1982: 102). In the text of KGP the influences of old belief and Islam have been found, such as (1) the role of sacred things like </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">pedang jenawI </span><span class="font1">(a long sword)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, rantai sakilan</span><span class="font1"> (a kind of chain) </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, jalo panjang tujuh, kaca cermin terus</span><span class="font1"> (a kind of mirror)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, lidi jaga-jagai</span><span class="font1">, and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">air tawar</span><span class="font1"> (tasteless water); (2) the characters of four giants who are brothers and capture a princess; (3) a giant bird that kills the nation; (4) people who are dead but revive (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Pangaduan</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Tembak Tuah</span><span class="font1">); (5) the names of the figures are taken from those in Islam, such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sutan Sabirulah</span><span class="font1">, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tuanku Malin Dewa,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tuanku Rambun Jatia;</span><span class="font1"> (6) addition of Islam to the story such as sevenlayer long flowing robe worn by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Lipat Cota</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Sari Makah</span><span class="font1"> when praying, the implementation of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">ijab Kabul</span><span class="font1"> (consent given by the bride’s family at a wedding ceremony) marking that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Andam Dewi</span><span class="font1"> are legally married, disgust expressed by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Andam Dewi</span><span class="font1"> over what is stated by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rajo Unggeh Layang</span><span class="font1">, who will have a ceremony with a party with the food made of bacon, the refusal of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Andam Dewi</span><span class="font1"> to have </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Reno Lautik</span><span class="font1"> as her daughter-in-law with the reason that she does not belong to the same religion; and (7) the emergence of Islamic words and sentences, such as the reply to a greeting “</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">assalamualaikuum”</span><span class="font1">, which is uttered by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Magek Sama Di Lautiktan</span><span class="font1"> to </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> and the whispering of </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">syahadat</span><span class="font1"> sentence (the profession of faith) by </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Puti Andam Dewi</span><span class="font1"> on the ears of Nan Gombang, who is seriously sick.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">KGP can also be classified as a Literary Work Containing History. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Nan Gombang</span><span class="font1"> and his friends serve as the metaphor of the whole community of Pesisir Selatan. They were ever visited by foreigners who were interested in the abundant agricultural products produced there. They were deceived, colonized, and suffered because they were badly treated by foreign countries in their home country. They were also ever successful in expelling foreigners. According to Dhamaris (1993:12 and 6370), the old literary work containing history is called History Containing Literary Work. Such a work is merely a fiction but it contains historical elements. That is what is called the background of the creation of KGP.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Acknowledgement</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">I thank Allah SWT for all his blessings. I would also like to thank my parents, husband and children for their prayer for me. I am also greatly indebted to Head of the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Balai Bahasa Padang</span><span class="font1"> , Head of the Center of Languages, and my colleagues at Balai Bahasa Padang and the Jakarta Center of Languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I would also like to express my appreciation to Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Kutha Ratna, S.U., the Promotor; Prof. Dr. I Wayan Cika, M.S., as Copromotor I; Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Weda Kusuma, M.S., as Copromotor II, and Dr. Edwar Djamaris, A.P.U, for their invaluable guidance in the completion of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For the opportunity provided to me to study at the Doctorate Program of Linguistics of Udayana University and for every facility obtained, I would also to extend my appreciation to all the Professors, Head of the Literature Concentration, Head of the Postgraduate Program of Linguistics, Head of the Doctorate Program of Udayana University, and Rector of Udayana Univesity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I apologize that there are many parties and names who are not mentioned here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">11</span></p>