---
layout: full_article
title: "The Violation of Cooperative Principle  In the Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20’th Anniversary Series Comic Vol.1"
author: "Made Diah Padmawati, I G.A.G. Sosiowati"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-68925 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-68925"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-68925"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i01.p8"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2021.v28.i01.p8</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">The Violation of Cooperative Principle</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>In the </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20’th Anniversary Series Comic Vol.1</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Made Diah Padmawati</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Denpasar-Indonesia e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:diahpadma10@gmail.com"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">diahpadma10@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I G.A.G. Sosiowati </span><span class="font4">Denpasar-Indonesia e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:sosiowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">sosiowati@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font4">The purpose of this research was to determine the violation types of cooperative principle in the utterance between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenzbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. This research used descriptive qualitative method. The data of this research are in the form of utterances between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. The method used to collect the data is observation method which refers to the tapping and note-taking techniques. The method used to analyze the data is pragmatic analysis method with heuristic technique. The result showed that there were four violation types of cooperative principle including: maxim of quantity, maxim of quality, maxim of relevance or relation and maxim of manner in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. The most frequently flouted maxim in the utterance between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1 was maxim of quality. This indicates that the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1 often say something that is still doubtful. On the other hand, related to the three violations of maxims, it was found that the same number of violations occurred between maxim of quality, maxim of relation and maxim of manner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font4">: cooperative principle, violation, comic</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak –</span><span class="font4">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jenis maksim prinsip kerjasama yang dilanggar pada pada tuturan antar tokoh dalam dialog komik </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode deskriptif kualitatif. Data pada penelitian ini adalah tuturan antar tokoh dalam dialog komik </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. Metode pengumpulan data yang digunakan adalah metode simak dengan teknik sadap dan catat. Metode analisis data yang digunakan adalah metode analisis pragmatis dengan teknik heuristik. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa dalam komik </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> terdapat empat jenis pelanggaran terhadap prinsip kerjasama, yaitu pelanggaran maksim kuantitas, pelanggaran maksim kualitas, pelanggaran maksim relevansi dan pelanggaran maksim cara atau tindakan. Dalam penelitian ini, pelanggaran terhadap maksim kualitas merupakan suatu pelanggaran yang paling sering ditemukan pada dialog antar tokoh dalam </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> ini. Hal tersebut menandakan bahwa para tokoh dalam </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">komik Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> sering mengatakan sesuatu yang belum jelas akan kebenarannya. Sebaliknya, terkait dengan ketiga pelanggaran maksimnya, ditemukan jumlah pelanggaran yang sama antara maksim kualitas, relevansi, dan juga maksim tindakan/cara</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font4">: prinsip kerja sama, pelanggaran, komik</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In a reasonable speech, speaker and hearer will always try to convey their speech in order to make it always relevant to the context of the speech, clear, easy to understand, brief or concise thus, the speech focuses on the issue being discussed. The most important thing related to the successful management of social interaction through language is the strategies that take into account the status of the speaker and hearer (interlocutor). Therefore, in order to make the utterance expressible and acceptable to the interlocutor, speaker in general should considering carefully the various pragmatic factors involved in a communication process. (Wijana, 2004:54).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In this regard, to make the conversation run smoothly, speaker should pay attention to the principles applied in communication. As a social being, communication is absolutely necessary for a human being to be able to continue their life. A communication in a conversation can be said to run smoothly if there is no misinterpretation by the hearer (interlocutor). Keith Allan (in Rahardi, 2005:52) says that speaking is the social dimension of activities. Social activities can run smoothly if all of the speech participants are actively involved in that process. If there are one or more parties who are not actively involved in the speech activities, certainly the speech will not run smoothly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Grice in (Thomas, 1995: 62) suggests a principle known as the cooperative principle and four maxims that support this principle. In general, the cooperative principle emphasizes on the contribution efforts that exist between speaker and hearer in ongoing conversation. Grice said that “Make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in you are engaged or be helpful.” (1996: 159). Contribution in conversation as the key of cooperative principle. The contribution that exists keeps the conversation going and the communication process becomes successful. If either speaker or hearer does not cooperate enough,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the conversation is threatened to fail. Therefore, speakers always try to keep their speech relevant to the context, clear, easy to understand, brief, concese, and straight forward. The four maxims are: quantity, quality, relation and manner maxims. Maxim of quantity requires the speaker be as informative as possible and not excessive in providing the information required by the hearer. Maxim of quality requires the speaker to tell the truth. Maxim of relation requires the speaker to provide an information relevant to the topic of conversation. Maxim of manner requires the speaker to speak clearly in providing the information in order to avoid ambiguity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the phenomenon of language, often in a conversation, a speaker considered violates the cooperative principle if the speaker provides information that is unclear, confusing, dubious, or even provides information that is not requested by the interlocutor. In daily life, we often see a conversation that ends in chaos, for example in a debate. We often see a debate that ends in chaos because the conversation is no longer based on the cooperative principle. The speakers are no longer see the situation and condition of their partner, and vice versa, thus it ignites emotions and there is a conflict. The violation of cooperative principle is not without purpose. There are certain reasons that motivate someone not to obey the cooperative principle in a conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the above phenomena, it is interesting to examine the violation of cooperative principle, considering that the cooperative principle as a factor that can determine the success of a conversation, but in practice, it is often violated. In this regard, we often encounter violations of the cooperative principle and the conversational implicature in our daily lives, for example in a comic. In a comic, there is a conversation between two or more people, and the dialogue of the characters is part of the process of language use. This research used utterances in Japanese comics as the data. The data of this research are the utterances in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">. This comic tells about the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">story of Hajime and Miyuki who were invited by their junior high school classmate, Mayu Midorikawa, to visit Hitokui Village, a village in the interior of a mountain that presents a view of &quot;the ancient city of Showa&quot;. However, behind that nostalgic scene, lurks a threatening crime. On their first night there, the suspension bridge as the only bridge connecting the village was burned. The burning of the bridge is only the beginning of the serial murder case in the Hitokui Laboratory which is said to be a place of &quot;man predators&quot;. They were also involved in three serial suicides. Based on the synopsis above, this comic story genre is a detective which describes the story of the unfolding of a crime, after observing this series the writer found that there are many utterances whose meanings are ambiguous, or the intent to be conveyed is different from the utterance that was said. Therefore, the tendency for the emergence of language phenomenon related to the violation of cooperative principle in utterances between the characters in this comic is quite high.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The example of violation of cooperative principle found in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">. is described as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">IiCfc : ‰nmRfc'9^ LTfrbg 立つんじゃん。</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hajime : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kalau cuma beli itu aneh kan</span><span class="font4">” (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hajime bergumam sendiri</span><span class="font4">) If I just buy that, it's weird, right? (Hajime muttered to himself)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">W⅛ : liL⅛⅛^' </span><span class="font2" style="font-variant:small-caps;">ΠroT⅛</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">の？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hajime, sedang membeli apa?</span><span class="font4">” Hajime, what are you buying?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">⅛L^ : ^oo^Φ⅛!! ^T^</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">なとこに？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hajime : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mi.. Miyuki kenapa ada di sini?</span><span class="font4">” Mi.. Miyuki, why are you here?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">みゆき </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">はぶらし忘れちゃって買いにき たの。はじめちゃんは？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aku lupa sikat gigi, makanya ke</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sini buat beli. Kalau Hajime?</span><span class="font4">” I forgot to brush my teeth, so I'm here to buy a toothbrush. What about Hajime?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">はじめ </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">あ！！ああ俺もこれを買おうと 思ってさ～～。い。。入れ歯洗 浄剤？いやこれね入れ歯じゃな くても使えんだよね～～旅のお 供にピッタリ！？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hajime : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ah!! Aah aku ingin beli ini.. larutan pencuci gigi palsu. Bukan ..ini bisa dipakai selain buat gigi palsu kok…sesuai buat teman perjalanan kan?.. (sambil gugup).</span><span class="font4">” Ah!! I want to buy this... denture cleaning solution. No... it's not just for denture... it's suitable for traveling, right? (while nervous).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The dialogue above is the dialogue between Hajime and Miyuki. Miyuki is Hajime's classmate in junior high school. During the conversation, Hajime and Miyuki would visit their junior high school classmate named Mayu. They promised to meet at the station. But before that, Hajime stopped at the supermarket to buy something, it is a contraceptive. Because Hajime did not want other people to see him buying that thing, he was sneaking around thus, it would not be noticed by others. But suddenly he met Miyuki. The utterance expressed by Hajime is </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ah!! Aah aku ingin beli ini…larutan pencuci gigi palsu</span><span class="font4"> (Ah!! I want to buy this... denture cleaning solution) and it is not in accordance with the fact that Hajime actually wanted to buy something he did not want other people to know, that is a contraceptive. Hajime's lie is violating maxim of quality by not fulfilling what was required in maxim of quality, in which speaker had to speak based on the facts, whereas Hajime did the opposite, he lied by saying that he bought a denture washing solution. Apart from violating maxim of quality, Hajime's next statement </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bukan..ini bisa dipakai selain buat gigi palsu kok…sesuai buat teman perjalanan kan?.. (sambil gugup)</span><span class="font4"> (No... it's not just for denture... it's</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">suitable for traveling, right? (while nervous) is not in accordance with the maxim of quantity, in which in communication, speaker should speak according to the level of information required, not too little (lack of information) or too long (too much information). Hajime's statement had violated maxim of quantity because Miyuki only asked what Hajime was buying and Hajime gave more information than she required. In order to fulfill maxim of quality, Hajime should have answered Miyuki's question by explaining the items he bought and in fulfilling maxim of quantity, Hajime should not have conveyed excessive information that was not requied by the interlocutor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Research on the violation of cooperative principle has been examined by Rustono (1998) in his dissertation entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Implikatur Percakapan sebagai Penunjang Pengungkapan Humor di dalam Wacana Humor Verbal Lisan Berbahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4">”. This study aims at explaining the conversational implicature that occurs as a result of violating the cooperative and humility function principles in humorous discourse. Based on the data analysis, it was found that violation of Grice’s cooperative principle (1975) occurred in the maxims of quantity, quality, relation, and maxims of manner. The violation of cooperative principle is the cause of the emergence of conversational implicature as a support for humor disclosure. The violation of politeness principle occurs in 6 maxims, they are: tact maxim, generosity maxim, approbation maxim, modesty maxim, agreement maxim, and sympathy maxim. Rustono's study uses Verbal Oral Humor Discourse in Indonesian, and focuses on violation of cooperative principle as a cause for the emergence of conversational implicature in dialogue as a support for humor. Meanwhile, in this study, it is only limited to the forms of maxims violation in cooperative principle in the utterance between the characters and it is not related to supporting humor as in Rustono's research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Second, research on the violation of cooperative principle has also been carried out by Mussallimah (2010), in her thesis entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penyimpangan Maksim dalam Wacana Humor Opera Van Java Pada Media Televisi</span><span class="font4">” is stated that in the humorous discourse of Opera Van Java, there is a violation from pragmatic aspect as a means of expressing the humorous aspect. The violation of pragmatic aspect can be seen from cooperative and politeness principles. The result showed that violation of cooperative principle were violations from maxim of quantity, maxim of quality, maxim of relation, and maxim of manner. Similar to Rustono's study, Mussallimah's study also examines the violation of cooperative principle as a means of supporting humor, whereas this research is a study that examines violation of cooperative principle in its four maxims only and is not related to humor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another research was conducted by Rahayu (2014) in the journal of Brawijaya University Vol.6 No.5 and she wrote an article entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pelanggaran Maksim Kerja Sama Grice dalam Komik Humor Prancis Les Bondes Tome 1</span><span class="font4">”. The article written by Rahayu analyzes the cooperative principle which is obeyed and violated by the speaker in French humor comic entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Les Blondes Tome 1</span><span class="font4">”. The result shows that the humorous French comic story entitled &quot;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Les Blondes Tome 1</span><span class="font4">&quot; contains violation of maxim of quantity, maxim of quality, maxim of relation, and maxim of manner. The violation maxim of relation occurred the most. The violation maxim of manner raised through the ambiguity of meaning, play of meaning and actions that are not relevant to the context. The similarity between this study and Rahayu's study is that both examine the forms of violation of cooperative principle in the utterance between characters in a comic. The difference is that Rahayu's study uses comic in French, meanwhile this study uses Japanese comic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Research on the cooperative principle has also been conducted by Firmansyah (2011) which examines violation of cooperative principle on his research entitled “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penyimpangan Prinsip Kerja Sama dan Prinsip Kesopanan dalam Wacana Humor Verbal Tulis pada Buku Mang Kunteng</span><span class="font4">”. The result of his research is a description of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">violation of cooperative and politeness principles in each humor group in Mang Kunteng's book. Research conducted by Firmansyah examines violation of cooperative and politeness principles, meanwhile, this research only limits the violation of cooperative principle without including the politeness principle in it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on several previous studies, there is a difference in this study in which this study uses data source from the Japanese detective comic series. It is different from previous research which focuses on film and humorous discourse. Therefore, violation of cooperative principle is an interesting topic be analyzed. This topic is one of language phenomenon. The cooperaative principle should be obeyed in a conversation, however, disobedient of cooperative principle is also often occurs. One form of disobedient is the violation cooperaative principle. Research on this topic can also increase the understanding of cooperaative principle, thus, violation of cooperaative principle can be avoided.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This study uses a qualitative approach. According to Litoselliti (2010:52) qualitative research in linguistics is related to the structure, patterns, and how the language is. This study also uses a descriptive method because the goal to be achieved in relation to the topic of this research is to describe or provide an overview of the violation forms of cooperative principle in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">. The data of this research are in the form of utterances between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The method used to collect the data is observation method. The observation method is done by listening to the language use of the object to be examined (Sudaryanto, 1993). In practice, observation method has basic technique that is tangible with tapping technique, in which the researcher tapping the language use. The tapping technique then followed by note-taking technique (Sudaryanto, 1998:2-7). After tapping the language</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">use, this note-taking technique is carried out by recording the data which is relevant to the research as well as the context that covers the data and the translation from Japanese to Indonesian. The researcher also observed to this </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> in depth to see the context of the situation when the utterance was uttered and to confirm the translation results that have been obtained. After the data were collected, the next step is analyzing the data. The method used in this step is the pragmatic analysis method proposed by L`eech (1983:40-44). This pragmatic analysis method is supported with heuristic analysis technique. This technique is used to identify the pragmatic power of a speech by formulating a hypothesis and then testing it based on the available data. If the hypothesis is not tested, a new hypothesis is created. All of these processes are repeated until a solution to the problem is reached, that is in the form of a proven hypothesis (which does not contradict the existing evidence). The collected data will then be classified in advance to make it easier for the researcher to carry out the data analysis process. After the classification is considered complete, step of analyzing the data is then carried out. Data analysis means breaking down or sorting out the elements that make up the lingual unit (Edi Subroto, 1992:55). This study used pragmatic analysis method proposed by Leech (1983: 40-44). This pragmatic analysis method is supported by heuristic analysis technique. This technique is used to identify the pragmatic power of a speech by formulating a hypothesis and then testing it based on the available data. If the hypothesis is not tested, a new hypothesis is created. All of these processes are repeated until a solution to the problem is reached, that is in the form of a proven hypothesis (which does not contradict the existing evidence).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;">
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></p></li></ul></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The result showed that there were four violation types of the cooperative principle, they</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">are: maxim of quantity, maxim of quality, maxim of relation and maxim of manner in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. Violation of quantity maxim occurs when the speaker gives more or less information than what the hearer requires. Violation of maxim quality occurs when the speaker says something which is not in accordance with the facts and evidence. Violation of maxim relation when the speaker gives a response which is very irrelevant to the topic being discussed. Violation of maxim manner occurs when a speaker provides unclear and ambiguous information that can lead to obscurity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maxim of quality is the most frequently flouted in the utterance between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1. This indicates that the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.</span><span class="font4">1 often say something that is still doubtful. On the other hand, related to the three violations of maxims, it was found that the same number of violations occurred between maxim of quality, maxim of relation and maxim of manner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2 . Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the data that has been collected through tapping technique followed by note-taking technique, and after pragmatically analyzed with heuristic technique, it was found that the utterance between characters contain violation of cooperative principle. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The following are</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">descriptions of the maxims were found in the utterance between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Violation of Quantity Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark3"></a>美雪 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">はじめちゃんならもう解い</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ちゃったんでしょう？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki &nbsp;:“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi... &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pasti sudah</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berhasil memecahkannya ya ?</span><span class="font4">” “Kindaichi… You must have solved it, right?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark7"></a>金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ん～まぁだいたい</span><span class="font4">…</span><span class="font2">ってと こ？コレの答え合わせも繭 に聞いときたくってよ！</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Yah sebagian besar sih, tapi aku tetap harus menanyakan jawabannya pada Mayu</span><span class="font4">” “ Well mostly, but I still have to ask Mayu the answer”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1, page 16</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maxim of quantity wants the speaker to gives information as required, not too much or too less. If the speaker provides much or less information, then it can be considered that the speaker has violated quantity maxim. In the utterances of characters in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> were found that there are utterances had violated maxim of quantity. The dialogue above is the conversation between Kindaichi and Miyuki on the train. They were on their way to visit Hitokui village and met Mayu. Mayu is their friend during junior high school. Mayu was working in a laboratory in Hitokui village. Miyuki asked whether Kindaichi had succeeded to solve the problem given by Mayu. Kindaichi, Miyuki, and Mayu were all friends when they were in junior high school.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data (1), Kindaichi is Miyuki’s interlocutor. Kindaichi has violated the quantity maxim by contributing excessive or more information. This information is excessive because Miyuki only asked whether Kindaichi succeeded or not to solve the problem given by Mayu, while Kindaichi gave an exaggerated answer by saying that he answered most of the questions successfully, but Kindaichi still had to ask Mayu again. Kindaichi should have answered that he succeeded or did not answer the problem given by Mayu. Kindaichi's exaggerated answer is considered violating maxim of quantity. The sentence in bold was violated maxim of quantity, because with the first sentence </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Yah sebagian besar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sih</span><span class="font4"> (Well mostly) actually, Kindaichi had already answered Miyuki's question without having to add the second sentence </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tapi aku tetap harus menanyakan jawabannya dengan Mayu</span><span class="font4"> (But I still have to ask Mayu the answer). Therefore, data (1) is classified contain violation of quantity maxim because Kindaichi gave an exaggerated answer beyond Miyuki's question.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark9"></a>金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">こんな店マジでやってるの </span><span class="font4">…</span><span class="font2">？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Toko seperti ini, beneran masih dijalankan kan?</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“The shop like this is still running, right?”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark11"></a>繭 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">そうね</span><span class="font4">…</span><span class="font2">休みが多いけど一</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark13"></a>応やってるわ</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Mayu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hhmm meski sering ditutup,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">setidaknya masih berjalan</span><span class="font4">.” hhmm even though it's often closed, at least it’s still running.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 16</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context occured in the dialogue above is the conversation between Kindaichi and Mayu. Kindaichi and Miyuki arrived at Hitokui Village and met Mayu. Mayu drove them to see the center of the Village. Hitokui Village is a very ancient village. The buildings and the village atmosphere are similar to ancient times or known as showa zama in Japan. In the example of utterance in data (2), Mayu as Kindaichi’s interlocutor. Mayu has violated maxim of quantity by contributing excessive information. This information is excessive because Kindaichi only asked the truth whether the old shop in the village was still running or not, while Mayu gives an exaggerated answer by saying that the shop was often closed and not operated. Mayu added information that even though the shop was often closed, the shop</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">was still running. Mayu should have clearly answered Kindaichi's question by providing sufficient information that the shop was indeed still running. By providing more information about the condition of the shop was often closed actually makes the information provided less effective because Mayu added information that Kindaichi did not ask. Mayu's exaggerated answer is considered violating maxim of quantity. The sentence in bold violating maxim of quantity because with the last sentence </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">masih berjalan</span><span class="font4"> (still running), Mayu actually has answered Kindaichi's question without adding the previous sentence </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hhmm meski sering ditutup</span><span class="font4"> (hhmm even though it's often closed). Thus, the data (2) is classified contain violation of quantity maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Violation of Quality Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark15"></a>美雪 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ねー！なんて書いてあるのそ れ！</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki :“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hei! Apa sih yang tertulis disitu?</span><span class="font4">” Hey! What's written on it?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark17"></a>金田一：ん～</span><span class="font4">“</span><span class="font2">金田一君ってホントイケ メンステキ☆</span><span class="font4">”</span><span class="font2">って</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi:“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hm.. Kindaichi keren dan hebat” </span><span class="font4">Hm... Kindaichi is awesome and great…</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark19"></a>美雪 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ププッなにそれ！ありえなー い！</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Apaan tuh! Bohong Ahhhhh</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">What is that! You're lying Ahhhhh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Page 16</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maxim of quality requires the speaker to tell the truth, the utterance must be based on adequate evidence. In the conversation between characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> there have been many violations of this maxim. The speaker in the characters'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">conversations often say things that are illogical, absurd, and untrue. The violation form of quality maxim is shown in the following dialogue. Violation of manner maxim was found in the utterance of the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, as shown in the dialogue above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The above dialogue is a conversation between Kindaichi and Miyuki on the train. They were on their way to visit Hitokui village and met Mayu. Mayu is their friend during junior high school. Mayu was working in a laboratory in Hitokui village. On the way, on the train Miyuki asked if Kindaichi had succeeded to solve the problem given by Mayu during the junior high school farewell. Kindaichi replied that he managed to solve most of it. While looking back at the question paper given by Mayu, he told Miyuki that he would ask Mayu the answer to that question later when she got to Hitokui village. Miyuki was curious to know what the question was written on the paper. In the example conversation in data (2) above, Kindaichi as Miyuki's interlocutor. Kindaichi has violated maxim of quality by providing dubious information. The information is incorrect because when Miyuki asked what was written on the paper given by Mayu, Kindaichi lied by saying that what was written there was Mayu writing that Kindaichi was cool and great. Kindaichi's questionable answer is considered violating maxim of quantity. Miyuki reacted by saying </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Apaan tuh! Bohong Ahhhhh</span><span class="font4"> (What is that! You're lying Ahhhhh) after hearing Kindaichi's answer, it strengthens that the information provided by Kindaichi did not match with what was written on the paper. Miyuki knew that Mayu is a smart kid, and he believes that there is an important message to be conveyed to Kindaichi through the question given by Mayu. It is impossible for Mayu to write the words Kindaichi said to her. Based on the result of the analysis above, it can be concluded that Kindaichi's answer, whose truth is not believed, is considered contain violation of quality maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">中神 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">まあ乗ってください。ボロ</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">いうえに狭い車ですけど、 よろしければ荷台にでも</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nakagami : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Silahkan naik, meski mobil ini sudah usang dan sempit. Kalau tidak keberatan, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;silahkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">duduk di belakang</span><span class="font4">.” “Please come up, even though this car is worn and narrow. If you don't mind, please sit at the back.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ほ</span><span class="font4">…</span><span class="font2">本当に荷台ですか </span><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Benar...benar. Di bak terbuka di belakang?</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Truly.. In the open tub in the back?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">繭 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ごめんね２人とも．．今２</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">人のりのこれしかなくて．． 他のは出払っちゃってる の．．</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mayu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Maaf ya. Hanya ini yang bisa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kami &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;gunakan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;untuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mengangkut kalian, yang lain juga sudah berusaha</span><span class="font4">...” “Sorry. This is the only thing we can use to transport you, the others have also tried...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">いやあこーゆーものなかな かオツな感じでいーじゃ ん？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hmm Mayu, gak apa kok, yang kayak ini juga. Rasanya seru kan??!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Hmm Mayu, it doesn't matter like this either. It feels so fun, right ??!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1, Page 24)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">The context occured in the dialogue above is the conversation between Nakagami, Kindaichi and Mayu when they were going to take Kindaichi and Miyuki to the laboratory they were staying at. At that time, Mayu also accompanied them. In the example of the data conversation (4) above, Kindaichi as Mayu's interlocutor. The car used to take Kindaichi is an old car where the passenger seat is an open pickup in the back. Initially, Kindaichi was very surprised because he did not think that Mayu would actually drive him in a car that he thought was not suitable for carrying passengers. Seeing Kindaichi's reaction, Mayu apologized to Kindaichi because she could only drive Kindaichi in a car like that. Kindaichi replied to Mayu's statement by giving words that violated cooperative principle. Kindaichi said, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hmm Mayu, gak apa kok, yang kayak ini juga. Rasanya seru kan</span><span class="font4"> (Hmm Mayu, it doesn't matter like this either. It feels so fun, right) has violated maxim of quality by providing unsure information. The information is not true because Kindaichi lied by saying that he had no problem riding a car like that and he thought it was very exciting or fun, even though Kindaichi was actually surprised to be driven in a car like that because the car was more suitable for carrying goods than for passengers. Kindaichi's comment, whose truth is not believed, is considered contain violation of quality maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 5</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark21"></a>麻木根 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">何しに来たの～君たち ひょ っとして「宝探し」？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Makine : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kalian mau apa datang ke sini? Jangan-jangan untuk ‘berburu harta’??</span><span class="font4">” “What are you doing here? Perhaps ‘hunting for treasure’??</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark23"></a>金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">宝？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Harta??</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Treasure?? “</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark25"></a>鰐部 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">よせよマッキ～どー見ても</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark27"></a>高校生じゃん</span></h2>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wanibe</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Biarkan saja Makki.. dilihat</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">麻木根</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bagaimanapun mereka murid SMP..</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Just let it be Makki... no matter how they are still junior high school students...”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: “ </span><span class="font2">ジョーダンだよ鰐部～！</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Makine</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">:“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aku &nbsp;cuma &nbsp;bercanda &nbsp;kok</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">小鷹</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Wanibe..</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“I'm just kidding, Wanibe..”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">金田一君七瀬さんどうぞこ</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">ちらです</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">:“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi, Miyuki.. silahkan ke</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">金田一</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">arah sini ...</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Kindaichi, Miyuki... this way please..”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">あの小鷹さん・・でしたっ</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">け？</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anuu, maaf Kodaka..</span><span class="font4">”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">小鷹</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">“Um, sorry Kodaka..” : </span><span class="font2">はいなんでしょう</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Iya, ada apa?</span><span class="font4">”</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">金田一</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">“Yes, what is up?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">一って聞きたいんですけど</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark29"></a>ー・・「宝探し」ってなん のことですか？</span></h2>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ada yang ingin kutanyakan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">‘Berburu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;harta &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;itu...’</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">makasudnya apa?</span><span class="font4">” “I have something to ask. ‘Hunting for treasure...’ what does it mean?”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark31"></a>小鷹 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: ――</span><span class="font2">さあ私からはなんと</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark33"></a>も・・</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Entahlah, aku tidak tau apa-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">apa...</span><span class="font4">” “I don’t know, I have no idea…”</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 30-31</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context in the above dialogue occurred when Kodaka escorted Kindaichi and Miyuki to their room and it was already night. Kodaka is Mayu's colleague who lives and works in the laboratory. Due to the laboratory administrator, Mr. Hajime, was busy, thus Kodaka escorted Kindaichi and Mayu to his room. While heading to the room, they met the two tourists who were staying there, they are: Tsukasa Makine and Eisuke Wanibe. They had time to greet each other, the two tourists asked Kindaichi and Mayu's purpose in coming to the Hitokui laboratory. Actually, Makine and Wanibe are former researchers who used to work in the laboratory. However, they finished their research there due to the death tragedy several years ago. Because there is actually a research that is being targeted by several researchers which, if it is successfully solved, will certainly be a field of money for those who succeed to solve it. Makine and Wanibe were coming back to Hitokui's laboratory hunting for treasure. It's just that they came as tourists thus their destination is not too visible to others. Therefore, for both of them, every tourist in there is definitely suspected of having the same goal as them. Makine asks Kindaichi whether Kindaichi's purpose is to hunt for treasure, unfortunately, Kindaichi did not understand the meaning of Makine's question. When he wanted to ask Makine, Wanibe immediately interrupted that it seemed like Kindaichi and Miyuki were only junior high school students. At that moment, Kodaka directed Kindichi and Miyuki to immediately go to the room. Kindaichi also asked Kodaka again the meaning of Makine's question to him. In example (5), Kodaka as the interlocutor of Kindaichi. Kodaka has violated the quality maxim by providing information that was not believed to be true. The information is incorrect because when Kindaichi asked what was meant by Makine's treasure hunt, Kodaka lied by saying that he did not know anything about this when in fact Kodaka understood &quot;hunting for treasure&quot; meant by Makine. Kodaka is also a researcher in the lab, of course he understands everything that has</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">happened in the Hitokui Lab. Kodaka should have explained the treasure hunt meant by the Makine. Kodaka's answer, whose truth is not believed, is considered contain violation of quantity maxim. Sentence in bold violating maxim of quality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 6</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark35"></a>^Φ≡ &nbsp;: ⅛⅛</span><span class="font4">^ </span><span class="font2">! ⅛^^^^□b</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hei ada apa ini ??” </span><span class="font4">“Hei, what is this??”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark37"></a>⅛≡- &nbsp;: Φ≡^</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kodaka!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Kodaka!”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark39"></a>Φ≡ &nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font4">^</span><span class="font2">Λ?^^? ‰⅛⅛^</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark41"></a>所地震が起きたかと</span><span class="font4">…</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ku kira ada gempa lokal.. Eh pencuri ??”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“I thought there was a local earthquake... Uh... a thief??”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark43"></a>⅛≡- &nbsp;: E^⅛≡? ^0Ξ^o</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark45"></a>Λ^? ⅛</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gempa lokal apa maksudnya itu?</span><span class="font4">” “What does the local earthquake mean?”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark46"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark47"></a>Φ≡ &nbsp;&nbsp;: ^⅛ Ξ0W^⅛r⅛^^</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark48"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark49"></a>^^^^ ≡¾⅛^tt^o</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark50"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark51"></a>こう起きるんですよ</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kodaka : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bukan, maksudku bukan di</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gedung lab. Tapi di gedung asrama memang sering terjadi</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“No, I don't mean in the laboratory building. But it often happens in dormitory building “</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1, Page 116</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context in the dialogue above occurred when Kodaka came to see the laboratory room 2, Mayu's messy office. He heard a loud noise in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">room where Mayu worked, thus, he was curious and came to see her. Apparently, Mayu's office looks very messy, the books fall off a shelf. This is similar to what happened after an earthquake. Seeing the situation, Kodaka thought that there had been a local earthquake or maybe a thief had tried to enter Mayu's office. Kodaka’s utterance in bold in data (6) above contains the violation of quality maxim. In the conversation (6), Kindaichi is Kodaka’s interlocutor. In the context of the conversation above, Kindaichi asked what the meaning of ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gempa lokal</span><span class="font4">’ or local earthquake as Kodaka said. However, Kodaka did not immediately answer Kindaichi's question clearly. Kodaka utterances that say </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bukan, maksudku bukan di gedung lab. Tapi di gedung asrama memang sering terjadi</span><span class="font4"> (No, I don't mean in the laboratory building. But it often happens in dormitory building) considered contain violation of quality maxim because it provides information that cannot be justified. Kodaka said something that didn't really happen and he believed was wrong. As we know, if it is based on reality, ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gempa lokal</span><span class="font4">’ or local earthquake as Kodaka said, it is a phenomenon that is difficult to accept by common sense. This is reinforced by the reaction of Kindaichi who asked Kodaka, what was the meaning of ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gempa lokal</span><span class="font4">’ or local earthquake because he himself did not understand what was meant behind the ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gempa lokal</span><span class="font4">’ or local earthquake as Kodaka said. In order to fulfill the cooperative principle, Kodaka should answer the meaning of ‘</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gempa lokal</span><span class="font4">’ or local earthquake which he said for example by saying </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Oh gempa lokal itu maksudnya ...</span><span class="font4"> (Oh local earthquake means...). However, because Kodaka contributed to provide the information which he believed was wrong, it can be concluded that the utterance contain violation of the first sub-maxim of quality maxim, it is said something wrong.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Violation of Relation Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 7</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark52"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark53"></a>中神 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">鰐部さん、行こうよ！</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Nakagami : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Wanibe, ayo ikut!</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wanibe, come on!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark54"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark55"></a>鰐部 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">とてもじゃねーけど 今は</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark56"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark57"></a>そんな気分じゃねえな</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Wanibe : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Aku sedang tidak mood untuk itu</span><span class="font4">.” I'm not in the mood for that.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark58"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark59"></a>中神 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">どうしたんです 鰐部さ</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark60"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark61"></a>ん？ 元気ないっスね</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Nakagami : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kenapa Wanibe? Kau sedang tidak bersemangat ya?!</span><span class="font4">” “What's wrong Wanibe? You're not excited, right?!”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark62"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark63"></a>鰐部 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ここに来たらいろいろ思い</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark64"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark65"></a>出しちまった・・・俺はあ の人に・・</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Wanibe : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Begitu datang ke sini, aku jadi teringat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;macam-macam</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">terhadap orang itu, aku telah...” &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">( </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ia berhenti</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">bergumam sambil memasang wajah takut</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As soon as I came here, I was reminded all kinds of things about that person, I have...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(he stopped muttering while putting on a scared face</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark66"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark67"></a>中神 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">え？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Nakagami : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ehhh ??” ...dan terdiam </span><span class="font4">ehhh ??... and silent</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 62</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In cooperative communication, the speaker and hearer are required to always be relevant to the topic of conversation. Contributions given must be appropriate and related to the topic being discussed. However, sometimes there are utterances that do not fit the topic of conversation or violate the relation maxim. The violation of relation maxim was found in the utterance of the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">20th Series comic Vol</span><span class="font4">.1, as can be seen in data (7) above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context occurred in the dialogue above is the conversation between Nakagami and Wanibe. Mayu invited all of her friends and tourists to stay in the laboratory for karaoke together. Nakagami, the representative of the laboratory management, also joined together, before he went to the karaoke room, he met Wanibe. He also invited Wanibe to karaoke together. In example (7) above, Wanibe is the interlocutor of Nakagami. Wanibe gave an answer that was irrelevant to what Nakagami asked. Nakagami invited Wanibe to join him for karaoke. Wanibe refused Nakagami's invitation by saying that he had no intention of karaoke. Nakagami also asked Wanibe why he wasn't excited at that time. However, Wanibe gave an answer that was irrelevant to Nakagami's question. Wanibe’s utterance </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Begitu datang ke sini, aku jadi teringat macam-macam terhadap orang itu, aku telah...</span><span class="font4"> (As soon as I came here, I was reminded all kinds of things about that person, I have...) gave the impression that it was irrelevant to Nakagami's question. Nakagami just asked if he was not excited at the time so he was not in the mood to join karaoke together. Wanibe's answer seemed irrelevant to the question because he said that he thought of someone when he first arrived at this inn. Meanwhile, Nakagami himself did not understand who Wanibe was referring to. This was reinforced by the reaction of Nakagami who was silent after hearing Wanibe's answer. He was silent because Wanibe's answer was irrelevant to what he was asking. In order to fulfills the relation maxim, Wanibe should answer that it is true that he is excited or not at that time and emphasizes the reason why he doesn't want to join karaoke instead of giving answer out of the conversation topic. Wanibe utterance </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aku jadi teringat macam-macam terhadap orang itu</span><span class="font4"> (I was reminded all kinds of things about that person) further confirmed that there was another topic he wanted to discuss out of the conversation topic between himself and Nakagami at that time. By providing information</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">that was not relevant to what was being asked, Wanibe's answer was considered contain violation of relation maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 8</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark68"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark69"></a>美雪 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">なんか携帯通じないと不便</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark70"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark71"></a>ねぇ・・？</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Miyuki &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rasanya tidak praktis, kalau</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ponsel tidak bisa dipakai di sini yaaa..?</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">It feels not practical, if the cellphone can't be used here, huh ..?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark72"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark73"></a>繭 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">そお？あたしはもう慣れた</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark74"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark75"></a>わよ 美雪！</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Mayu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Masa??? Aku sudah terbiasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">lho, Miyuki!</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Really??? I'm used to it, Miyuki!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 62</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context occured in the dialogue above is the conversation between Miyuki and Mayu. Mayu invites Miyuki, Kindaichi, and the other tourists for karaoke. Hajima as the laboratory representative made a karaoke room in the lab, because he thought there was no entertainment in the laboratory. Tanise, one of the tourists at the place also came to the karaoke room because she heard Kindaichi's voice singing. While joking, Tanise also commented on the old black telephone in the room. Eventhough it is old, the telephone can still be used but must use an external line. In the example data (8) above, Mayu is Miyuki's interlocutor. Mayu gave an answer that was irrelevant to what Miyuki was asking. Seeing the condition of the worn black telephone, according to Miyuki, it was really impractical if you had to communicate using a telephone that could only use external lines. Miyuki asked Mayu if the cellphone couldn't be used in the Hitokui village, while Mayu</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">gave an answer that she was used to communicating using the black phone and had no problem at all even though it seemed impractical to Miyuki. Mayu's answer, which was irrelevant to what Miyuki was asking, was considered contain violation of relation maxim. The sentence in bold indicates violation of relation maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Violation of Manner Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">ほ・・本当にいるんだ・・ 観光客！</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi :“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dengan seksama melihat kedua wisatawan tersebut, “benar-benar ada wisatawan ya..di desa seperti ini?.</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Looking at the two tourists carefully, “are there really tourists in a village like this?” </span><span class="font2">繭 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">こんな村だからこそよ・・</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">金田一君</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mayu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Justru karena desa seperti ini</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi.!</span><span class="font4">” ...</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Precisely because of the village like this Kindaichi.!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 26</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Maxim of manner requires the speaker to speak directly, not obscure, not ambiguous, not exaggerated, and coherent. Thus, this maxim requires the speaker to avoid ambiguous expressions, avoid words with multiple meanings, speak briefly (straight to the point), and speak regularly. However, the fact is that the violation of maxim of manner still often occurs due to ambiguous and unclear way of speaking. The violation of manner maxim was found in the utterance between the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, as can be seen in the example (9) above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context occurred in the dialogue above is the conversation between Kindaichi and Mayu on the way to the inn. They met other tourists who were touring the village. While driving, Nakagami greeted the tourists. In example (9), Mayu is Kindaichi’s interlocutor. Mayu has violated maxim of manner by contributing unclear, vague, and incomplete information. For Kindaichi, Hitokui Village is an old, ancient, and most isolated village. Hitokui Village is a 'nostalgic' Showa village and is connected to the outside world by only one suspension bridge. Therefore, seeing a number of tourists walking around the village made Kindaichi surprised, it was impossible for tourists to come and stay at a place like this. Even if it weren't for Mayu's invitation to come to this village, it seems like he wouldn't be interested in coming and staying overnight. That is why Kindaichi asked Mayu if it was true that some of the people they saw were tourists in Hitokui Village. However, Mayu answered Kindaichi's question with low clarity by saying </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Justru karena desa seperti ini Kindaichi!</span><span class="font4"> (Precisely because of the village like this Kindaichi.!). Mayu's answer seemed unclear and ambiguous. In this case, the context of Mayu's answer is also out of the information asked by Kindaichi. Supposedly, if Mayu's information fulfilled maxim of manner, Mayu should have answered clearly and consistently that it was true that the people they saw were tourists in Hitokui Village even though Hitokui Village was old and ancient. Due to Mayu gave an ambiguous answer and was not in accordance with what was required, thus, data (9) was classified as violation of manner maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 10</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">中神 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">さー着きましたよー ここが</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">仁久井村未来エネルギー開 発研究所・・またの名を人 食い研究所 昔は色々あって よく人が死んだんでそう言</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark76"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark77"></a>われてるんですよ～ハハハ ハ</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Nakagami :“</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Selamat Datang. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inilah</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">laboratorium &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pengembang</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">energi masa depan, Desa Hitokui. &nbsp;&nbsp;Namanya &nbsp;&nbsp;adalah</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">‘Laboratorium &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pemangsa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia’. Dinamai begitu karena dulu banyak manusia yang meninggal di sini lho. Ha ha ha ha ....</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">“Welcome. This is the laboratory for future energy development, Hitokui Village. Its name is 'Human Predator Laboratory'. It was named so because many people died here. Ha ha ha ha</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">....</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark78"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark79"></a>金田一 </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font2">笑えね～</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Kindaichi : “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Entah kenapa ...aa..aaku tidak bisa ikut tertawa</span><span class="font4">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Somehow ... I... I can't laugh too</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">page 27-29</span><span class="font4">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The context occured in the dialogue above is the conversation between Nakagami and Kindaichi when they all arrived at the laboratory where they were staying. Nakagami is one of the assistants Mayu trusted to help accompany Kindaichi and Miyuki while they were in Hitokui village. It was already late in the evening, Nakagami began explaining about the laboratory where Kindaichi and Miyuki were staying at. In the example (10) above, Nakagami said </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dinamai begitu karena dulu banyak manusia yang meninggal di sini lho. Ha ha ha ha ....</span><span class="font4"> (It was named so because many people</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">died here. Ha ha ha ha....) This utterance has violated maxim of manner by contributing information that is indirect, uncluttered, obscure, and exaggerated. Nakagami's speech was not clear,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">thus, it was ambiguous. If Nakagami's information fulfills maxim of manner, Nakagami should provide clear information about the truth of humans who have died in the laboratory with a good speech delivery. Because he delivered it with laughter at the end of his utterance, it made his utterance ambiguous and not in accordance with what was needed. Nakagami's laughing reaction after giving the information that many humans had died in the laboratory made the information seem negative. Kindaichi didn't feel like laughing too after hearing this information. Indirectly, Kindaichi already experienced confusion caused by Nakagami's utterance. He was confused if the laboratory really had taken many casualties, why did Nakagami laugh when he said that, isn't it something serious and unnatural to be used as a joke. Kindaichi's reaction confirmed that the information conveyed was excessive, making the information vague and unclear.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the result and discussion, it can be concluded that, in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> there were four violation types of the cooperative principle, they are: 1) violation of quantity maxim, 2) violation of quality maxim, 3) violation of relation maxim and 4) violation of manner maxim. The quality maxim is the most frequently flouted in the utterance between characters in the dialogue of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1.</span><span class="font4"> This indicates that the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series Comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> often say something that is still doubtful. On the other hand, related to the three violations of maxims, it was found that the same number of violations occurred between maxims of quality, maxim of relation and maxim of manner. This also indicates that in communicating, most of the characters in the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kindaichi Shonen No Jikenbo 20th Series comic Vol.1</span><span class="font4"> do not always try to make their utterances relevant to context, clear, concise and easy to understand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 28 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">References</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Firmansyah,Anand. 2011. “Penyimpangan Prinsip Kerja Sama dan Prinsip Kesopanan dalam Wacana Humor Verbal Tulis Pada Buku </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mangkunteng</span><span class="font4">.” Skripsi. Jogyakarta: Fakultas Bahasa dan Seni, Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Grice, H.P. 1975. “Logic and Conversation”. Reprinted from Cole et al. 2004. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Syntax and Semantic 3: Speech Arts</span><span class="font4">. With permission from Elsevier</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Leech, Geoffrey. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-prinsip Pragmatik.</span><span class="font4"> (M.D.D. Oka, Penerj). Jakarta: Universitas Indonesia. Volume: IV No. I. Universitas Sumatera Utara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Littoseliti, L., 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Methods in Linguistics</span><span class="font4">. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mussalimah. 2010. “Firmansyah,Anand. 2011. “Penyimpangan Prinsip Kerja Sama dan Prinsip Kesopanan Dalam Wacana Humor Verbal Tulis Pada Buku </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mangkunteng</span><span class="font4">.” Tesis. Jogyakarta: Program Pasca Sarjana, Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rahardi,R.Kunjana.2005.Pragmatik Kesantunan Imperatif Bahasa Indonesia.Jakarta: Erlangga.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rahayu, Nita Puji. 2014.”Pelanggaran Maksim Kerja Sama Grice Dalam Komik Humor Prancis </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Les Blondes</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tome</span><span class="font4"> 1”. Jurnal Ilmiah Mahasiswa FIB,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(online),Vol.6,No.5,</span><a href="http://jimbastrafib.studentjournal.ub.ac.id/index.php/jimbastrafib/article/view/639"><span class="font4">http://jimbastrafib.studentjournal.ub.ac.id/index.php/jimbastrafib/article/view/639</span></a><span class="font4">, diakses tanggal 10 Agustus 2015.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto. 1998. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik Bagian Kedua: Metode dan Aneka Tektik Pengumpulan Data. </span><span class="font4">Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wijana, I. Dewa Putu. 1996. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar-dasar Pragmatik</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta : Andi Offset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">96</span></p>