---
layout: full_article
title: "FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN THREE SONG LYRICS BY KANSAS, SARAH MC LACHLAN AND WESTLIFE"
author: "Alifia Rizky Fardila"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN THREE SONG LYRICS BY KANSAS, SARAH MC LACHLAN AND WESTLIFE</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">By :ALIFIA RIZKY FARDILA</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">(081 835 1016)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">NON REGULAR PROGRAM</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ENGLISH DEPARTMENT FACULTY OF LETTERS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">UDAYANA UNIVERSITY</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">DENPASAR</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Makalahini berjudul</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Figurative Language in three song Lyryics by Kansas, Sarah Mc Lachlan and Westlife. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Lagu pertamaberjudul&quot;Dust inWind&quot; dirilis padatahun 2004.Yang kedua adalah&quot;Angel&quot; yang dirilis padatahun 1998 dialbumCity of Angelsdanlagu terakhiradalah &quot;I Lay Mw Love on You&quot; dari albumCoast to Coast. Sayamemilihtigalagutersebutkarena hampirdisemua liriklagu bahsakiasandapat ditemukan. Penelitian yangberkaitan denganbahasakiasan dalamliriklaguolehKansas, SarahMcLachlandanWestlifebertujuanuntuk mengetahuijenis-jenisbahasa kiasanyang digunakan dalamlirik lagudan menganalisismaknayang disampaikan olehliriklagu tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodedokumenterdigunakansebagai metodedalam pengumpulandata,data dianalisisdengantahaptahapsebagaiberikut ; yang pertamamemilihlirik lagu, mendengarkanliriknya berulang-ulang, mengunduhlagu-lagutersebut,mencatatdan mengklasifikasikan. Teoriutamadiambil daribuku yang ditulis olehKnickerbockerdanReninger(1963) yang berjudul Interpreting Literature. Hasilpenelitianmenunjukkan bahwaada limamacamkiasanditemukan dalamempat lagu, yaitu personifikasi, hiperbola, simile, ironi, danmetafora.Di antarajeniskiasandisajikan dalam penelitian ini, hiperboladanpersonifikasiyang palingseringmunculdalam empatdari liriklaguolehKansasBand, SarahMcLachlandanWestlife.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A song lyric is the same as a poem in terms of arranging the words of the lines. Now songs are very popular, not only for teenagers and children but also for adults and even the old ones love listening to songs. One of the important things of a song is the lyrics itself. A lyric is a set of words that accompany music, either by spoken word or singing. Lyric derives from the Greek word for a song sung by the lyre, “lyrikos”. The word lyric came to be used for the “words of a song”. Lyric of songs usually contain words which are difficult to understand and presented in various ways and full of figure of speech, beautiful words to represent the writer’s feelings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Creating song lyric is not an easy job to do. A writer uses his power of imagination which is combined by using the sense of figurative languages to create a song. Since the writer of the song lyric mostly uses his imagination combined by figurative languages to create the song lyric. The lyric would be interesting enough to be discussed. Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife being recognized very much to use the figurative languages, almost in all of their song lyrics, the figurative languages can be found</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems which can be formulated based on the phenomenon above are the following:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What kinds of figurative language are used in the song lyrics by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What meanings are being conveyed in the song lyrics by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To be able to find out the kinds of figurative language used in the song lyrics by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the meaning conveyed by the song lyrics by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">To establish a scientific study, certain academic procedures must be followed. The procedures meant here refer not only to techniques by which the data can be collected but also to the method used in collecting the data. A method is the way how we solve problem. The methodology that is be used in this writing consists of three aspects, they are: data source, data collection (how to collect the data and tabulate from the source available) and data analysis (how to analyze the data collected).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>4.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this research was taken directly from three songs by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife as the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kansas is an American rock band which became popular in the 1970, with hit singles such as “Carry On Wayward Son” and “Dust in the Wind”. They have remained a classic rock radio staple and a popular touring act in North America and Europe. One song by Kansas in this study entitled : “Dust in the Wind” from the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Journey Within .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sarah Ann McLachlan is a Canadian musician, singer, and songwriter. She was born on January 28, 1968. There is one song that were analyzed; that were “Angel” from the Album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">City of Angels .In spring 1998“City of Angels” became the No. 1 album on the Billboard chart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Westlife are an Irishboy band established on 3 July 1998. They are to disband in 2012 after their farewell tour. There is one song that were analyzed; that is “I lay my love on you”from the album </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Coast to Coast.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason to choose these three songs was because there were so many figurative languages related to the topic of this study.These words give us chance to imagine about something, and then start to understand the meaning hidden in the song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data in the form of figurative languages were collected by documentation method. The first step is choosing the song lyrics and then listening to the song lyrics very carefully and downloading the lyrics from the internet. After that, the lyrics are read several times until they are understand what the songs were about. Finally note taking and classifying the lyrics or the words in the songs were done in figurative languages in the song lyrics under concern.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The way how this method was applied to analyze the data was as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reading and learning the lyrics of the songs, marking the key words in the lyrics.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Learning the key words to find out the meaning of the lyrics.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finally, describing the figurative languages based on the theory applied. The meaning of the lyrics was interpreted as poem.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">All of the collected data was analyzed descriptively based on the theory of figurative language proposed by Knickerbocker and Willard Reninger (1964)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The way of analyzing the song lyrics that were mentioned above are as follows: The first step is listening to the song lyrics very carefully and downloading the lyrics from the internet and then reading the lyrics several times until we understand what the songs about. Finally note taking and classifying the lyrics or the words in the songs to have the classification of figurative language in the song lyrics themselves. They were analyzed based on what kinds of figurative language used such as: simile, metaphor, personification, synecdoche, metonymy, hyperbole, irony, paradox, dead metaphor, and allusion. Also the analysis was focused on the meaningconveyed in the song lyrics by Kansas band, Sarah McLachlan and Westlife.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kansas Band-Dust in the Wind</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I close my eyes, only for a moment, and the moment's gone</span><span class="font2"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It is about how sometimes we are overwhelmed with problems, responsibilities, and emotions when really it doesn't matter what we do. It's a comparison between time in our lives and time in the Earth's life</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All my dreams pass before my eyes, a curiosity</span><span class="font2"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Looking back on life, one might think he was just another person and that nothing he did really mattered. Same old song- everyday was the same, he did nothing majorly accomplishing in his life. Just a drop of water.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dust in the wind</span><span class="font2"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All they are is dust in the wind</span><span class="font2"> (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Same old song, just a drop of water in an endless sea</span><span class="font2"> (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The line &quot;just a drop of water in an endless sea&quot; is about the best and most realistic position on life that I have heard. It's simple, yet if you think about it, it's a microcosm for the huge country, planet, universe of ours</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All we do crumbles to the ground though we refuse to see</span><span class="font2"> (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This is quoting that every human is just a smudge in the universe’s plan. We feel ourselves as being this “higher life form” but the reality of it that we are of no difference to anything else. We live, we die. We are not Gods by nature; we have just mastered our own reality and not yet that of the universe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All we are is dust in the wind</span><span class="font2"> (8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Now, don't hang on, nothing lasts forever but the earth and sky</span><span class="font2"> (9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In line (9) the so the dust (as individual particles) and the sky , it must put them together to get the big picture, to see the whole, and it lasts forever. Same thing with the wind and the sky. Kind of like saying that by ourselves we are nothing, but together we're invincible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">It slips away, and all your money won't another minute buy</span><span class="font2"> (10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All the money in the world won't buy another minute. </span><span class="font1">Don't waste your life worrying about material things, and don't spend your whole life trying to make more and more money, while forgetting about more important things like family and friends and being a good and honest person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dust in the wind</span><span class="font2"> (11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">All we are is dust in the wind</span><span class="font2"> (12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Talking about how short life is, like the blink of an eye. Or about when a person is dying. For an example, His whole life passes before him and he closes his eyes for a minute and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">remembers his life and then when he opens them has back in his hospital bed or wherever- and realizes his life went by so fast. He thinks of all his life's dreams and what he's accomplished.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dust in the wind</span><span class="font2">(13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Everything that we have built will crumble, nothing that is man-made is perfect, nor will it ever be. Only what the universe builds will remain forever in the sands of time. And in the end, no matter what you have in your life such as money, education, wife, husband, and also kids.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sarah Mc Lachlan-Angel</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Spend all your time waiting</span><span class="font2"> (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">How some people spend all their time with a kindness thing and give a support to another people for bring a joy for all people in every place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for that second chance</span><span class="font2"> (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In reality this is the kind of song that really has no specific or true meaning and can relate to most any situation, as it can be interpreted in so many different ways. They can touch the lives of every person in the world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for a break that would make it okay</span><span class="font2"> (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">there's always one reason</span><span class="font2"> (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">to feel not good enough</span><span class="font2"> (5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I my self never got involved in drug but they have affected me dramatically through out my life, however i have been on prescription drugs most of my life, to help keep me emotionally stable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and it's hard at the end of the day</span><span class="font2"> (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I need some distraction</span><span class="font2"> (7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Every people needs to buildings a relation not only societies, nations, empires, but also cultures, and even religions have faltered and fallen between the cracks of human existence</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">oh beautiful release</span><span class="font2"> (8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The release of emotions has came to the soul when I or somebody else felt lonely and sadness. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">memory seeps from my veins</span><span class="font2"> (9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">metaphorically, when we sleep and start dreaming, all bad memories leave us.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">let me be empty</span><span class="font2"> (10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and weightless and maybe</span><span class="font2"> (11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I'll find some peace tonight</span><span class="font2"> (12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">In the arms of an angel</span><span class="font2"> (13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We all know that everybody cannot see the angel ,but maybe some people imagined they can stay in the arms of angel, is about drug use and what not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">fly away from here</span><span class="font2"> (14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Referring to how sad it is that something as sad as cutting. This glorious sadness that brings me to my knees&quot; person feel so much better.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I could be completely wrong but this is what it means to me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">from this dark cold hotel room</span><span class="font2"> (15)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">of your silent reverie</span><span class="font2"> (16)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The song gives me chills and makes me cry. It always makes me think of the silent night from the sad face and the sad faces of the animals, even though it's about drugs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">may you find some comfort here</span><span class="font2"> (17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">So tired of the straight line</span><span class="font2"> (18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This line is about a girl who struggles with depression and. Even though she doesn't like herself and can't find a better way to get rid of bad memories she has parents who care about her and are willing to help.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and everywhere you turn</span><span class="font2"> (19)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This is the last one so better make it good. I just need it so bad. the thing with drug addiction is that it literally has the user on their knees begging to they don’t want to be they need it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Song Lyric 3 and the Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Westlife-I lay my love on you</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Just a smile and the rain is gone</span><span class="font2">(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence that shows the use of personification because it is impossible to smile and made the rain is gone. In this case, how ispossible only witha smilewecanmakethe rainstop?Commonly it is impossible for human. Here the authorsprobablymeanthatrainis a symbolofour tears, and whenwe smilethenour tearswill go awayby itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Can hardly believe it (yeah) (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">There's an angel standing next to me</span><span class="font2">(3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the sentence in line 3, it is quite clear for us to see the use of hyperbole. Most people believe that we cannot see angels. It is therefore in all probability impossible that an angel</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">can suddenly appear. The author likens the angel to a woman who is standing next to him. Many people believe that there is a guardian angel in their lives that watches over them to keep them safe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reaching for my heart</span><span class="font2">(4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of personification again appears in this sentence above. Grabbing my heart here means that there is someone who has managed to make me fall in love with it. The liver is the organ of the human body that should not be taken because if it is taken then we can not live anymore. The author makes the heart as a symbol of love, and if our hearts are already achieved by others means we have had a lover who can make us happy every day.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Just a smile and there's no way back</span><span class="font2">(5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Of course, the sentence shows the use of personification. Just like the previous sentence, a smile is a form of expression we are against something that we like. A smile is not an object living or dead and lifeless. The author here meant that not enough with just a smile a couple relationship is again the same way againCan hardly believe it (yeah) (6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">But there's an angel calling me</span><span class="font2">(7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence in line 7 shows the use of hyperbole because there was an exaggeration used for special effect. Just like the previous sentence, we cannot hear the voice of angels, see and do not know how to form the truth. How could an angel can speak and call us names? Perhaps the author wanted to say that the angel is a woman who was calling us. Many people believe that there is a guardian angel in their lives</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Reaching for my heart</span><span class="font2">(8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I know that I'll be ok now, this time it's real (9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2"> it's all I wanna do (10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence in line 10 above seems to show the use of personification. We can found it in the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">lay.</span><span class="font2"> As we know lay is one way of expressing human emotions when we tired. Meaning of a sentence </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love</span><span class="font2"> to you is that my love will I trust entirely to you. You are the right person for my love and hold dear forever. The word lie here may only be used for humans when we are tired of doing for a moment then we will lay our bodies. The author here uses the word lie for love. That is already obvious that we give our love to our loved ones.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Everytime I breathe I feel brand new</span><span class="font2">(11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If we read the sentence in line 11 above, we also find a hyperbolic expression. This sentenceisprobablyredundantif readcarefully. Everytime IbreatheIfeellike livingagain. The authors would liketo sayherethateverytime hebreatheshis lifehe feltbetter than ever. He felteverygust ofhis breathhewillalwaysbeanewmanwhosought andpreferred byallpersons,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">especiallywomen. One thing that someone also should have to understand this kind of sentence is a good imagination.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You open up my heart</span><span class="font2">(12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of hyperbole again appears in the sentence in line 12. Perhaps there is a question in our mind. Can we open someone heart? The answer is, of course not. Therefore, it is a hyperbolic expression. The sentence seems to be exaggerated. The meaningof the sentence</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">youopenupmy heart</span><span class="font2">is that youhave mademy heartopen toreceive lovefrom othersback. For a long timeI closemy hearttomyselfandnotdatinganyone</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Show me all your love, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">walk right through</span><span class="font2"> (13)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This sentence shows the use of personification. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">walk right through</span><span class="font2"> that meansstilllove melike this nowdo not everchange.Keeptheperson I loveyouneverleaveme. The authorwould like to saythatwemust be faithfulto our spousesnever turn awayfrom himbecausewehadentrustedour lovecompletely to him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love on you (14)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I was lost in a lonely place</span><span class="font2">(15)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this case, the place in the sentence above is given the human characteristic such as emotions and this is use a personification sentence. Of course place which is a lifeless object cannot do something that human can do. Placehererefers tothe human’s heartthatislonelyandlongingwith her boyfriend. The authorhas not foundthe right placetolayhis love forother people andhe felthisloneliness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Could hardly even believe it (yeah) (16)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Holding on to yesterday</span><span class="font2">(17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence in line 17 seems to show the use of personification. Yesterday was a day when the day is passed. Days can not be held or touched because it was not an object. Holding on to yesterdays have come back again to see the meaning of the experience is past</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Far, far too long (18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Now I believe its ok cause this time it's real (19)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2"> it's all I wanna do (20)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Everytime I breathe I feel brand new</span><span class="font2">(21)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You open up my heart</span><span class="font2">(22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Show me all your love, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">walk right through</span><span class="font2"> (23)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love on you (24)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I never knew that love could feel so good (25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Like once in a lifetime, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you change my world</span><span class="font2">(26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If we read the sentence in line 26, it seems that the sentence is highly hyperbole. It is an impossible thing. How can the people change my world? In this sentence, the writer of the song wants to describe that there are someone that could changeour world. Changehere meanswe becomea newlifeas there arelovers who arealwaystherewithus. Beforetheresheprobablyliveslonely, emptyandno one noticed. Noweverything is changedsincehe istherebecausethere isanoticeof our livesandmade usmorespiritleft to live. The worldheresymbolizesour dailylivesand our worldbecome happierthan before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2">(27)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You make me feel brand new</span><span class="font2">(28)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If we read in line 28 above, we also find a hyperbolic expression. In this case, the song writer seems to convey that the person in the song has a great imagination to give a special feeling or taste to the listener or the reader of the lyric of this song. Sentence</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Youmake mefeelbrand new</span><span class="font2">withthe previoussentenceisour loversmake our livesbetter than ever. We feel like newafter being withhim. Wealsofeelthe changeverymuchinour livesandit was he whohadmade it allnewagain. The writer of the song seems to show that the person in this song was falling in love with someone. He used many romantic sentences that make the song more beautiful. It is in this way that the songwriter to presents his imagination which is unique and exaggerated words in his song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Show me all your love, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and walk right through</span><span class="font2"> (oh yeah) (29)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love on you (30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2"> it's all I wanna do (31)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Everytime I breathe I feel brand new</span><span class="font2">(32)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You open up my heart</span><span class="font2">(33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Show me all your love, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and walk right through</span><span class="font2"> (34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love (35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2">(36)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I lay my love on you</span><span class="font2">(37)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You make me feel brand new</span><span class="font2">(38)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You open up my heart</span><span class="font2">(39)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Show me all your love, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">and walk right through</span><span class="font2"> (oh yeah) (40)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love on you (41)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As I lay my love on you (42)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A quick paraphrase of this song shows us about being in love with someone who makes life better in every way and makes the bad go away. It makes the writer feel he is protected and allows him to be refreshingly honest. So, this song is about a love that is empowering, refreshing, protective and life changing. To “lay my love” can be seen as trusting someone with your love.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study has analyzed and discussed about the figurative language in three song lyrics that were one song lyric by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kansas</span><span class="font2"> band entitled “Dust in the Wind”</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> one song lyric by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sarah Mc Lachlan</span><span class="font2"> entitled “Angel”and also one song lyric by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Westlife</span><span class="font2"> entitled “I lay my love on you”. Based on the analysis, there are several conclusions that can be drawn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the first song entitled “Dust in the Wind “of which the theme is about missing, i.e. the singer missing someone they love. This yearning for their love to be with them is very strong in the evenings and night times. In this song we found three kinds of figurative language such as personification, metonymy and hyperbole.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the second song entitled “Angel”the figurative language such as personification, hyperbole, simile and dead metaphor describe about spending the day doing strange and unreal (fairytale) things. From the kinds of figures of speech used in the lyric, there are four kinds of figures of speech found in the song; they are personification, hyperbole, simile, and irony for example: “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">in the arms of the angel”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">One “boy band” being recognized very much to use the figurative language is Westlife. In the third song entitled “I lay my love on you” the writer uses some figures of speech; they are personification, hyperbole, and irony for example: “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">just a smile and the rain is gone”, “there’s an angel standing next to me”, “i’ve got sunshine on a cloudy day”.</span><span class="font2"> Since the songs of Westlife are very interesting to be listened to, it is considered important to know what actually is the meaning hidden within the lyric of the song. It will be useless if just listening to the song without understanding what actually the song is meant to convey to us as the listeners.</span></p>