---
layout: full_article
title: "ANALYSIS OF PRODUCT ADVERTISEMENTS ON MAGAZINE WITH VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS"
author: "Ni Putu Asti Pradnya Dewi"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ANALYSIS OF PRODUCT ADVERTISEMENTS ON MAGAZINE WITH VERBAL AND VISUAL SIGNS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Asti Pradnya Dewi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra dan Budaya Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini berjudul &quot;&nbsp;Analisis Iklan Produk di majalah dengan tanda- tanda Verbal dan Visual&quot;. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis tanda-tanda verbal dan visual iklan cetak dan mengetahui pesan yang disampaikan dalam masing-masing dicetak iklan produk . Lebih khusus lagi , hal ini dimaksudkan untuk menganalisis makna dan fungsi tanda-tanda verbal dan visual untuk membantu pembaca memahami pesan dari iklan cetak produk .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Data penelitian ini diambil dari Majalah Flair , edisi Juli 2011 , FHM ( For Him Magazine ) edisi No.161 September 2011 , Fitness First Untuk Guys &amp;&nbsp;Girls Magazine , November / Desember 2012 edition , yang dianalisis berdasarkan teori tanda oleh Chandler ( 2001) dalam bukunya yang berjudul &quot;&nbsp;Semiotika untuk Pemula &quot;&nbsp;. Dia menyatakan bahwa tanda sebagai komposisi penanda dan petanda . Penelitian ini juga menggunakan teori makna yang dikemukakan oleh Leech ( 1974) dalam bukunya yang berjudul &quot;&nbsp;Semantik : Studi Makna &quot;&nbsp;. Dia menyatakan bahwa secara umum iklan ( iklan cetak ) terdiri dari mengikuti komponen standar seperti : judul , ilustrasi , body copy , baris tanda tangan ( logo ) , rincian berdiri , dan makna diklasifikasikan menjadi tujuh jenis dan lima fungsi bahasa .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Hasil analisis menunjukkan bahwa tanda-tanda verbal dan visual berkorelasi dan sangat penting untuk membuat iklan yang baik . Sebagai kesimpulan dari analisis ini adalah bahwa setiap majalah memiliki cara yang berbeda dalam menyampaikan iklannya, baik dari segi struktur dan komponen .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Verbal and Visual Sign, Tanda Verbal dan Visual</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer states that the word “advertising” means drawing attention to something, or notifying or informing somebody or something. Advertisement is a form of communication such as television, radio, newspaper, and magazine. To be effective, an advertisement must first attract attention and gain a person’s interest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There are two important signs that an advertisement must have namely verbal and visual signs. Verbal signs are about texts and visual signs are about pictures. The language in advertisement text has different form of language we use in our everyday lives. It is usually informal word the sentences are short and simple, and contain interactive words. It is because of the commercial function of the advertising language whose function is to send a message from the advertiser to the costumer to do something. This phenomenon makes printed advertisements</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">interesting to analyze because of their creative set of wordings. Visual signs are about pictures which are easier to understand and have more impact than words. They generally offer greater opportunity for the communication of excitement, mood, and imagination.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the background above, there are two problems formulated in this study, as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What verbal and visual signs are presented in each advertisement products on magazine under study?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the function and meaning of the signs that exist in each advertisement of products on magazine under study?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">As formulated in the problems above, the aims of this study can be divided into two points:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To find out the function and meaning of the signs that exist in each advertisement of products on magazine.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the verbal and visual signs found in product advertisement of product on magazine.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this section, methodology is a necessary procedure in conducting a research. Therefore, methodology plays an important role in doing research. It can be used as a guidance to achieve the objective. The methodology used in this research is divided into three points, namely data source, data collection, and data analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">(5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis in this chapter is presented in several parts. First, analysis of verbal and visual signs presented in each advertisement. The second one is the meaning and function analysis in each advertisement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This advertisement was taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Flair</span><span class="font1"> Magazine, July 2011 edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The advertisement of BB Cream.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this advertisement at every sign consists of a signifier and signified. The signifier and signified in verbal signs of advertisement above can be seen through the explanation below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The headline of the advertisement “Discover our BB Cream World. A BB cream that provides total skin treatment to achieve a “power perfection skin” by imparting proactive care to overall skin problems”. Its gives the information that the product is different from the others; this product is power perfections skin, resulting in products with good quality.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The statement of body copy is “Face it Power Perfection.” It is related to the sentence of body copy above, the phrase “Face it Power Perfection.” means, we have to use it because it gives power perfection for our skin and looks like a smooth face man wearing purple shirt in the picture. This is caused by the quality of BB Cream.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signature line (Logo) is “BB Cream”. It shows distinctive characteristics or the identity of the product being advertised.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The standing details “Get cash back Rp. 50 rb for any 1 BB + 1 Any Product ( Buy in The Face Shop)”. That statement describe that you will get the cash back if you buy this BB Cream and other product in The Face Shop to increase sales.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the visual signs of advertisement above can be seen through the explanation bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This advertisement used an illustration of a man. It means that the man is a symbol of masculine but in this product advertisement it looks attractive. This product is expected to be the main attraction of consumers with a power perfection. The model seen posing holding the product with smiling with good smile, slanted eyes, and face as smooth as a woman. This advertisement shows the real picture of BB Cream as the product being advertised. Picture of the product placed at the side of the model, which is the main focal point when the reader sees the advertisement.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the meanings and functions of advertisement above can be seen through the explanation below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement “Discover our BB Cream World. A BB cream provides total skin treatment to achieve a “power perfection skin” by imparting proactive care to overall skin problems”. It reflects the Conceptual meaning and informational function. Because this sentence shows the real meaning about the quality of this product and informs the reader that the cream can make a smooth face by imparting proactive care to overall skin problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The second advertisement was taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">FHM (For Him Magazine)</span><span class="font1">, No.161 September 2011 edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the verbal signs of advertisement 2 above can be seen through the explanation bellow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement is “He moisturises”. The purpose of this headline is introducing a product which is can moisturizing the men face, like facial images of the man in the picture with clean-faced and moisturized.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Body copy of this advertisement consists of several sentences. The first sentence is “And he’s not the only one. Men are now on the benefits of moisturizing”. This statement meant the advertiser suggests and offers a product of facial treatment which is suitable for the type of men faces that can also moisturize all the faces of men, not only the face of the man in the picture. And the second sentence is “Choose the moisturizer to fit your age, lifestyle, and skin type. Put it on. Forget about it. Hassle Free Skincare (At Myer, David Jones and selected Pharmacies giving an information about you must choose the moisturizer that fit your age, lifestyle, skin type. In order to be good and moist face. And that written information from Hassle Free Skincare (At Myer, David Jones and selected Pharmacies”. And the last sentence is Natio oil free moisturizer for men under 35 ,Natio for men SPF 30+ face moisturizer for skin exposed to the sun, Natio for men age renewal moisturizer for men 35 plus. The text besides of the products have been informed that the product is suitable for the types of skin with age categories. So costumer are not wrong when they buy this products.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">“Natio” is represents the brand name or trademark. And the sentence “For Men” indicates that the product is used only for men.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The use of illustrations is a man with clean-faced, white, mustache, slanted eyes and thin brown eyebrows, sideboards, and moisturized face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Related to this product as an advertised, it is intended that this product is suitable for men face to moisturizing and cleaning the face like the man on the picture. There are illustrations of a man style on the picture combed his hair with his fingers. This man’s face and style is very interesting. This illustration can pay attention of the costumer because that is attractive and clean the man face in the men advertisement picture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis of the meanings and functions of advertisement 2 above can be seen through the explanation below:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement is “He moisturized”. It is reflects the thematic meaning and expressive function. Because in this sentence, the advertiser emphasizes and express the feeling that it is a product, which is easily to be presented.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The sentence of body copy is “And he’s not the only one. Men are now on the benefits of moisturizing.” This sentence reflects the conceptual meaning and directive function. Because the advertiser want persuade the reader offer the product of facial treatment directly, which is suitable for the type of men faces that can also moisturize all the faces of men. Not only the face of the man in the picture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Signature line (Logo)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The first sentence “Natio” reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function, because informs about the brand name of this product. The second sentence “For men” is reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function, because show the tagline of that product that use for men only.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The third advertisement was taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fitness First For Guys &amp;&nbsp;Girls </span><span class="font1">Magazine, November/ December 2012 edition. The advertisement of Biore.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement is “Skin to match your confidence” it is giving the statement about the superiority of this product. The sentence “Face the demands of life with perfect skin. Biore complete skincare range with unique and patented technology is designed to deliver solutions for all types of skincare challenges. So when life gets a little unbalanced, have confidence that your skin doesn’t have to”. In the body copy describes this product provide solutions that our face look cleaner and more confident and can be used for all skin types. It shown with short and attractive phrase. There are three logos contained on this advertisement. “Biore” is represents the brand name of product being advertised. “Face Anything” is represents the tagline of this product. And “Biore.com.au</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.facebook.com/BioreAus</span><span class="font1">” give information the website of this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This advertisement featuring an illustration of the real image of this product, which is consists of a woman picture with long blonde hair, smiling face, clear and beautiful face skin as a feature of the product itself. It shows that woman is very beautiful and her face is clean and no dust. The use of the woman model because a woman is more interesting than a men in the terms of appearance. This fits ads advertised by women. In this advertisement also show the picture of Biore product at the right bottom. It is explain that the name and shape of the product, so the costumers know the form of the product.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement is “Skin to match your confidence”. It reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. Because the advertiser try to give a real description about the product as a advertisement.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The body copy of this advertisement is “Face the demands of life with perfect skin. Biore complete skincare range with unique and patented technology is designed to deliver solutions for all types of skincare challenges. So when life gets a little unbalanced, have confidence that your skin doesn’t have to”. The sentence reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. The advertiser gives simple information about the ingredients of food and cooking method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The word “Biore” reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. This word represents the brand name of product being advertised. The statement “Face Anything” in the advertisement consists of conceptual meaning and informational function, because it is represents tagline of the product. And the sentence of “biore.com.au &amp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.facebook.com/BioreAus"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.facebook.com/BioreAus</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1">that is give information the website of this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The fourth advertisement was taken from </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fitness First For Guys&amp; Girls </span><span class="font1">Magazine, November/December 2012 edition. The advertisement of Cocobella coconut water.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Headline of this advertisement is “Introducing Nature’s Hydrator”. The advertiser want introduce the reader to know and consume a healthy drink for a healthy life. In the sentence “100% natural, 5 key electrolytes, more potassium than a banana, replenish lost fluids, zero fat, 3 times more electrolytes than regular sports drinks.” in body copy meant that the advertiser introducing a food product and a healthy food with 6 benefits and advantages of other beverages. Such as 100% natural, 5 key electrolytes, more potassium than a banana, replenish lost fluids, zero fat, 3 times more electrolytes than regular sports drinks. It certainly will make the body fit and healthy. And the sentence “*One pack contains more potassium than one medium sized banana”. that explain, only drink one pack of this product, we can get more potassium than one medium sized banana. There are some information contained in this advertisement. And the cited “Purecocobella.com” is the information of website where we can know more about it and get this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This advertisement shows a real image of the product as an advertised at the lower right corner. The images of the product were among the coconut, so it showing that the pictures of the food product with a good presentation and packaging to attract consumers. In this advertisement female model wear blue top, long black legging. She smile and bite the straw of this product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this advertisement there is a picture of a woman is done her exercise. And there are many of sport equipment behind her. In her forehead look sweating. A model is beautiful, healthy and have a good body. This product very suitable drink after exercise, because during exercise reduced ion of the body. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">beautiful model also can attract the costumers, because many women want to have a good body, healthy and it will increase sales. The images the product is between the coconut with fresh water at the lower right corner. This natural beverage made by coconut and that fresh illustration make costumer or reader want to taste it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Headline analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The headline of this advertisement is “Introducing Nature’s Hydrator”. It is reflects the conceptual meaning and aesthetic function, because the advertiser wants to persuade the reader to buy this product with focusing to the message of this sentence, that we need a healthy food to a healthy life. The images of the product is between the coconut with fresh water at the lower right corner.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Body copy analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The body copy of this advertisement is the sentence “100% natural, 5 key electrolytes, more potassium than a banana*, replenish lost fluids, zero fat, 3 times more electrolytes than regular sports drinks”. This sentence is introducing a healthy drink that has 6 benefits and advantages of other beverages. Such as 100% natural, 5 key electrolytes, more potassium than a banana*, replenish lost fluids, zero fat, 3 times more electrolytes than regular sports drinks. It certainly will make the body fit and healthy. It is reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. And the cited of “*One pack contains more potassium than one medium sized banana”. That is reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function. Because the advertiser try to give a real description about the product as an advertised.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Logo analysis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">“Cocobella coconut water” is reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function, because shows the brand name of product being advertised. At the cited of “Purecocobella.com”. It reflects the conceptual meaning and informational function, because it is shows the information where the reader can get this product and know more about it.</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>BIBLIOGHRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Chandler, Daniel.2001. Theory of Signs: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semiotic for Begginers</span><span class="font1">. </span><a href="http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/semiotic.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/semiotic.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dewi, Ayu Sari.2010. “Analysis of Verbal and Visual Message in English EZINE”. Paper.Denpasar:Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Dyer, Gillian.1982. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising as Communication</span><span class="font1">.London and New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, M.A.K and Ruqaiya Hassan. 1976. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion In English.</span><span class="font1"> London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hornby, Albert Sidney.2005.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary</span><span class="font1">. New York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Oxford University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">International Telecommunication Union. 2001. Switzerland.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.itu.int/gender/about/gender.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.itu.int/gender/about/gender.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kusumawati. 2010. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Penelitian Analisis Pemakaian Gaya Bahasa Pada Iklan Produk Kecantikan Perawatan Kulit Wajah Di Televisi</span><span class="font1">. Fakultas Keguruan Dan Ilmu Pendidikan Universitas Sebelas Maret Surakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2FBF02936350?Ll=true</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Goeffrey.1966.English in Advertising: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Linguistic Study of Advertising in Great Britain</span><span class="font1">.London: Longmans</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, Goeffrey.1974.</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantics: The Study of Meaning.</span><span class="font1"> Hannondsworth, Middlesex. England: Pinguin Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moriarty,Sandra &amp;&nbsp;Friends. 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Advertising Ed.8.</span><span class="font1"> Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Narasoma.2009.”The Analysis of Advertisement Structure with Reference to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Four Advertisement in Man Magazines”.Paper.Denpasar:Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">O’Barr, William M. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertising</span><span class="font1">: Maryland USA. The Johns Hopkins University Press.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/summary/v007/7"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/summary/v007/7</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> .2unit07.html</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Smith, Ruth Ann.1991.The </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Effects of Visual and Verbal Advertising Information on Consumers</span><span class="font1">’ Inferences.</span><a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/4188812"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.jstor.org/stable/4188812</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">10</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">