---
layout: full_article
title: "THE ANALYSIS OF IDIOMS AND COMPARISON IN ADELE'S AND MARIAH CAREY'S SONG LYRICS"
author: "I Putu Reza Wiradharma"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE ANALYSIS OF IDIOMS AND COMPARISON IN ADELE'S AND MARIAH CAREY'S SONG LYRICS</span></h1>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Putu Reza Wiradharma</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jurusan Sastra Inggris Fakultas Sastra Unud</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>ABSTRAK</span></h1>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Ungkapan idiom (Langgam Bahasa) memiliki banyak makna konotasi indah di dalam setiap katanya. Terutama di dalam lirik - lirik lagu, lagu - lagu pop khususnya. Tujuan mendasar dari kajian ini adalah untuk mengetahui ungkapan apa saja yang terkandung dalam lirik lagu tertentu yang dalam kajian ini diangkat lirik lagu oleh Adele dan Mariah Carey.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kunci : Ungkapan, Makna Konotasi, Klasifikasi Ungkapan Langgam Bahasa, Jenis -jenis ungkapan Langgam Bahasa</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Language is a way of any living things including we humans to communicate in order to deliver any kinds of information, expressions, and feelings to each other. In a literary way, humans can express their feelings in forms of writing a literary works such as poetries, novels, and even song lyrics. In my journal, song lyrics are the main subjects of analysis because as we all know we can find lots of combinations of vocabularies and wordings within it. Songs are one of the best kind of entertainment every man can get considering it contain a lot of beautiful words combined with melodies which can last until hundreds of years without decreasing its values and its popularities. In a literary way, we all know about idiomatic expressions of meaning through lexical items for example idioms, and metaphors. These expressions are often used in our daily life without us noticing it. This journal is all about the comparisons of the idioms found particularly in the song lyrics between the singer Adele and Mariah Carey.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problems of the Study</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this journal there are three theories which I conveyed to analyze the song lyrics, they are the types of idioms by Palmer (1956), the classification of idioms by Jennifer Seidl and W. McMordie (1988) and The Meaning Theories by Leech (1974). There were three problems found based on these theories, to find out what are the types of idioms, classification of idioms and the meanings of those idioms. Later, those findings will be compared each other.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The aims of this journal is to find out what are the significant differences between the song lyrics that nowadays pop ballads artist Adele made to the mid nineties artist Mariah Carey. They are particularly in the same genre which is Pop Ballads, but they came from a different era. This journal is about to discover which of the era has more beautiful yet figurative lyrics between the two artists.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Research method is an important process to conduct a scientific study or in this case journal which it is the way of understanding the objects that become the target of subject. Methodology is a procedure that is used in a research in a corresponding way with the approach. It is the way of how researchers approach the problems to find the answer through the findings, collecting, and analyzing the data. The data which are the song lyrics I used are primarily taken directly from the Adele’s and Mariah Carey’s songs. In the Adele’s album I took only the three of her songs out of eleven total in her 21's album. Those songs were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Rolling in the Deep, Dont You Remember, Someone Like You</span><span class="font1">. In the Mariah Carey’s song lyrics, there are of 3 songs, they were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Always Be My Baby</span><span class="font1"> (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Daydream,</span><span class="font1"> 1995)</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">, Hero</span><span class="font1"> (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Music Box,</span><span class="font1"> 1993), and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">My All </span><span class="font1">(</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Butterfly,</span><span class="font1"> 1997). The reason I chose those six songs was because those were the songs which had the deepest emotion and feeling for all their listeners, especially me. Those six songs had different theme and story. These songs were used as the main data which to be analyzed and compared as the object of the study. In order to collecting these song lyrics data, the observation and documentation method are used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Firstly was to download all the song lyrics from the internet website </span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/a/adele.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/a/adele.html</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">for the Adele’s song lyrics and </span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/m/mariahcarey.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/m/mariahcarey.html</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">for the Mariah Carey’s song lyrics and then to note every words or phrases which were identified to be idioms which those notes were analyzed later. The data was analyzed in the qualitative way relating to the theories. The data were clarified to the sources which would provide the information of the idioms, later is to categorize the idioms based on the types, and the meaning of the idioms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of The Idioms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">There are three main theories used in this journal which they are the types of idioms, the classifications of idioms, and the meaning theories.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of the Types of idioms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Palmer stated in his book: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Semantic: A New Outline</span><span class="font1"> (1976), idioms could be categorized into three types: phrasal verb, prepositional verb, and partial idiom. Phrasal Verb is the most common type of idiom in English which is the combination of the verbs and adverbs (Palmer, 1976: 99). In the phrasal verb analysis there were some idioms found for example the expressions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">settled down</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stay away</span><span class="font1"> were found in the Adele's songs and in the Mariah Carey's songs, the expressions </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">letting you fly</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">linger on</span><span class="font1"> were found. The prepositional verbs are a group of words verbs made from a verb followed by another words. Many people consider it to be all multiword verbs or phrasal verbs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It’s the sequences of verb plus such as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stay away</span><span class="font1"> which was found in the one of the Adele's song lyrics and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melt</span><span class="font1"> away found in the Mariah Carey's. The last types of idioms is partial idiom is where one of the words has usual meaning and the other has a meaning of peculiar to particular sequence. We can find the example in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the depths of your despair</span><span class="font1"> in the song lyrics by Adele's and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">letting you fly, Vividly emblazoned in my mind</span><span class="font1"> were found in the Mariah Carey's.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Classifications of idioms</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The classifications of idioms proposed by Jennifer Seidl and W. McMordie were divided the idiom into eight classifications Idioms with nouns and adjectives, Idiomatic pairs, Idioms with prepositions, Phrasal verbs, Verbal idioms, Idioms with key words from special subjects, Idioms with key words from special categories, Idioms with comparisons. Some of these classifications were found. For example, the expressions of nouns and adjectives found in the Adele's song lyrics were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Summer Haze,</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fickle heart.</span><span class="font1"> And in the Mariah Carey's song lyrics were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A matter of time A feeling this strong.</span><span class="font1"> Other expressions were the Idioms with keywords from special categories, they were </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">fickle heart</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">wandering eye</span><span class="font1"> found in the Adele's song lyrics and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">reaches out a hand</span><span class="font1"> in the Mariah Carey's. The expression of idiomatic pairs also found which was </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Your days and your night</span><span class="font1">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of The Meaning Theories</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The crucial point for the theory of meaning was to determine how the conditions of a feelings could be used by one person to communicate with another. There were 3 types of meaning according to Leech (1974), they are the affective meaning, connotative meaning, and the conceptual meaning. The meaning theories of the songs related to the meaning of idioms found in the songs. In my undergraduate thesis, the meaning of the whole songs discussed by finding the idioms and the theme found in the songs. The songs analysis was divided into several part such as intro, verse 1, 2, and 3 etc, chorus/refrain, and bridge. Intro was an introduction, basically used only several lines of the song and rarely found in almost any songs because commonly, any songs begin with the verse 1 and so on. Verse 1, 2, 3, etc, usually had the same rhythms, the words were different because the next verse was following the previous verse and continuing the story. For example in the song </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Someone Like You</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">by Adele presented the condition of a person who finally knew that her ex- lover had engaged a marriage. The person’s feeling was of course sad because she still loved her/his ex- lover very much and all she could do then was just wishing them a good life. In the seventh line of the lyrics, an idiom was found which was </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">turn up out of the blue</span><span class="font1"> which could be classified as the affective meaning, since it expressed the reflection of a personal feelings of the speakers, about their attitude towards the listener or something he was going to talk about (Leech, 1974:18). From another point of view, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">turn up out of the blue</span><span class="font1"> also could be categorized as connotative meaning, since it had the was the value of the communication of an expression.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Comparison of the idioms found</span></h1></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The types of idioms that are found in the Adele's and Mariah Carey's songs are: The phrasal verbs, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">settled down, hold back, turn up, look for, sell me out</span><span class="font1">. The prepositional verbs, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">stay away</span><span class="font1">. The partial idioms, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">turn up out of the blue, the time of our lives, bittersweet this would taste, to seal any scene, missing piece, crystal clear, The scars of your love remind me of us, the depths of your despair.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Mariah Carey's songs are: the phrasal verbs, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">linger on, carry on, reaches out</span><span class="font1">. The prepositional verbs, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">melt away, letting you fly, can't erase a feeling this strong, you'll always be my baby, Vividly emblazoned in my mind, sleepless solitude tonight, drowned in you, reach into your soul</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The classification of idioms found in the Adele's and Mariah Carey's songs are: The noun and adjectives, &quot;Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Summer haze&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The surprise of our glory days&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Fickle heart&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">heaviness in my head&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">missing piece&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The scars of your love&quot;</span><span class="font1">, Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Depths of your despair&quot;</span><span class="font1">. The idioms of special categories, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">out of the, fickle, wandering eye, heaviness in my head, fire starting in my heart, my heart inside of your hand, make your head burn.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In the Mariah Carey's, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A feeling this strong&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A matter of time&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Sleepless solitude&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Noun phrases: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Memory of our song&quot;</span><span class="font1">, &quot;Adjective + noun: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Distant star&quot;.</span><span class="font1"> The idioms of special categories, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">in my heart, inside your heart, reaches out a hand, my heart, Your body next to mine, I'm looking in your eyes</span><span class="font1">. The idiomatic pairs, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Your days and your night</span><span class="font1">. the idioms of comparison, </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">like hope is gone, Like a distant star.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The meaning of the idioms found in both Adele's and Mariah Carey's songs. In the Adele's songs &quot;Someone Like You&quot; there are some meanings analysis found, the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">turn up out of the blue</span><span class="font1"> could be classified as the affective meaning, also can be conveyed as connotative meaning, the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">time of our lives</span><span class="font1"> as well as </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">bittersweet this would taste</span><span class="font1"> could be classified as connotative meaning. In the song &quot;Dont You Remember&quot; some meanings analysis are found, the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">missing piece</span><span class="font1"> could be classified as connotative meaning. In the song &quot;Rolling in the Deep&quot;, there are some meaning analysis found, The idioms </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">see you crystal clear</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the scars of your love</span><span class="font1"> belonged to the affective meaning since it was a reflection of a personal feeling of the speakers, these idioms could also be considered as a connotative meaning. the idiom </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">the depths of your despair</span><span class="font1"> was categorized to the connotative meaning.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The meaning analysis of the Mariah Carey's song &quot;Always be My Baby&quot; found are the idiom </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I’m letting you fly, can’t erase a feeling this strong</span><span class="font1"> was categorized to be a connotative meaning. The idiom was </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">you'll always be my baby</span><span class="font1">, considered to be affective meaning, this idiom was also a connotative meaning. The song &quot;My Hero&quot; are the expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">reach into your soul, the emptiness you felt</span><span class="font1"> could be classified as connotative meaning. The meaning analysis of the song &quot;My All&quot;, there are some meaning theories found The first was </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">sleepless solitude tonight</span><span class="font1"> and </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">drowned in you </span><span class="font1">these idioms was considered to be affective meaning, this idiom could also be categorized to be a connotative meaning. The expression </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">vividly emblazoned in my mind</span><span class="font1"> could also be categorized as connotative meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Firstly, based on the numbers of the types of idioms found on the songs on both artists, Adele's songs contain more idioms than Mariah Carey's. the total number of the types of the idioms found in the Adele's are fourteen idioms, while Adele are only eleven total. According to the classification of idioms, Adele's songs also have more idioms than Mariah Carey's songs. Based on this results, we can clearly say that Adele lyrics representation is more meaningful and deep. This result also states that a based on true story or personal experience driven singers make more beautiful songs. Regarding Mariah Carey at that time (in the 1990s) were making music just for the sake of entertainment only. According to the meaning analysis, both of the artists songs contain affective meanings which mostly are followed also by connotative meanings. The numbers of the meaning theories use in the songs are practically the same considering both artists songs genre are ballads pop.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>References</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Adele 21. Available on</span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/a/adele.html"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/a/adele.html</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">(Cited on “13<sup>th</sup> October 2011”)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Jennifer Seidl &amp;&nbsp;W. McMordie. 1988. English Idioms and How to Use Them. Oxford Univ Pr (Sd).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Leech, geoffrey. 1974. Semantics. Great Britain: Hazel Watson &amp;&nbsp;Viney Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mariah Carey. Available on</span><a href="http://www.azlyrics.com/m/mariahcarey.html"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.azlyrics.com/m/mariahcarey.html</span><span class="font1"> </span></a><span class="font1">(Cited on “25<sup>th</sup> January 2012”)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Palmer, F.R. 1976. Semantics: A New Outline. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>