---
layout: full_article
title: "Illocutionary Acts of Conversation Between Man and Zombie in Movie “Warm Bodies”"
author: "Chresensia Natalia Br Ginting, Made Budiarsa, I Gede Putu Sudana"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">ISSN: 2302-920X</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vol 16.1 Juli 2016: 18-25</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Illocutionary Acts of Conversation Between Man and Zombie in Movie “</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Warm Bodies</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Chresensia Natalia Br Ginting<sup>1*</sup>, Made Budiarsa<sup>2</sup>, I Gede Putu Sudana<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">123</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>123</sup>English Department Faculty of Arts, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[e-mail :</span><a href="mailto:chresensiaginting@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> chresensiaginting@gmail.com]</span></a><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>[e-mail :</span><a href="mailto:madebudiarsa@yahoo.com"><span class="font3"> madebudiarsa@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[e-mail :</span><a href="mailto:igedeputusudana@yahoo.com"><span class="font3"> igedeputusudana@yahoo.com]</span></a><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Didalam penelitian ini, penulis menganalisa Ilokusi yang terdapat didalam ucapan kalimat di karakter zombie di film yang berjudul “Warm Bodies.” Penulis mengumpulkan data dari teks berbahasa inggris dalam film “Warm Bodies”, kemudian mengklasifikasikan ilokusi dan, konteks situasi berdasarkan ilmu teori klasifikasi ilokusi yang dikemukakan oleh Searle (1976), dan teori konteks situasi yang dikemukan oleh Hymes (1972) untuk menemukan pengaruhnya terhadap kalimat ucapan tersebut. Untuk tetap fokus dalam penelitian, penulis membuat batasan batasan untuk menganalisis kalimat ucapan yang terdapat diantara zombie dan manusia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dari analisis tersebut, penulis menemukan lima kalsifikasi dari Ilokusi yang terdapat dalam pecakapan antara zombie dan manusia dalam film “Warm Bodies” yaitu Assertive (keluhan, pernyataan, informasi, bantahan, kritik, deskripsi), Directives (nasehat, perintah, permohonan, peringatan, paksaan, permintaan, undangan), Commisive (janji, tawaran), Expressive (pernyataan maaf, pernyataan terima kasih, pujian), Declarative (penamaan). Setelah menemukan klasifikasi dari ilokusi, kalimat ucapaan tersebut dianalisi dibawah konteks situasi. Semua bagian konteks yang telah disingkat menjadi SPEAKING mempengaruhi kalimat perbuatan tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kata kunci : Ilokusi, konteks situasi, “Warm Bodies”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Language is important thing in communication. As the most effective communication tool, language is also the way for communicating and sending the message. Language has a different way to get the meaning in each terms, times and conditions. In the conversation we could find speech act inside the utterance. Inside the conversation many speech have a purpose to ask his/her interlocutors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Communication is an important aspect in our daily social life. People communicate for conveying information or expressing feeling about something to those they are addressing. In saying something, a person has a certain purpose and the success of communication depends on recognition of the purpose by the hearer. The ability of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the people in communicating each other are different. They have the weakness and the strength of the communication in uttering the statements or the information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pragmatically, a speaker, through his utterance is not only uttering the sounds of the language for communicating but also performs the act of doing something. For instance act of asking, act of giving advice, act of making promise and offering, act of giving order and etc. In other words, one can do action by means of language. The action perform via utterances are generally calls speech act (George Yule, 2000: 47)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Context of situation is an important thing in pragmatic study. Context is a background knowledge assumed to be shared by speaker and hearer and which contributes to hearer’s interpretation of what speaker means by a given utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Illocutionary acts carried out by a speaker making an utterance are the act viewed in terms of the utterance significance within a conventional system of social intraction. Based Searle (1976), illocutionary act can be divided into five general classification. There are declaration, representatives, expressive, directives, commisive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The activity of illocutionary act often be found in movies. This study will analyzed a movie “Warm Bodies”. This movie is chosen because nowadays many literature works especially movies have story using a zombie character. The conversation that used in the movie was done by the characters who had the different creatures. Therefore between their conversations contained a lot of unique speech act. The interesting in particular is how their speech acts impact each other and could be understood by between those different creatures.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the classifications of illocutionary acts that are found in the conversation between man and zombie?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What context of situation underlies in Illocutionary acts were performed by speakers between man and zombie in “Warm Bodies” ?</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The aims of study</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify classifications of illocutionary acts conversation between man and zombie</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze context of situation that underlie in the illocutionary act that are found.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research design</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In doing research, there was certainly a method that was used in order to make the work systematical and structural. The methodology that used in this study is included the following components. They were data source, method and technique collecting data, method and technique analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1 Data source</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In this study, the data was taken from the dialogue of a movie entitled “Warm Bodies”. Directed and written by Jonathan Levine in 2013. It was downloaded from internet in website address, which is from</span><a href="http://www.yifysubtitles.com/movie-imdb/tt1588173"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.yifysubtitles.com/movie-</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.yifysubtitles.com/movie-imdb/tt1588173"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">imdb/tt1588173</span><span class="font3">.</span></a><span class="font3"> In this subtitle, there are more than 400 act utterances occur among the conversation. But, it was just picked 25 as main data to analyze the classification and the context of situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of collecting Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">First, the screenplay that has been downloaded from internet, for the comprehensive data, was read by reading the screenplay, the illocutionary acts within the screenplay were scanned.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, the data which belongs to utterances that emerged as object of this study, utterances of illocutionary acts were noted down to abridge which one from the data would be analyzed and picked as main data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lastly, the illocutionary acts which were found in accordance with their types were classified. The data was written down onto paper and classified into illocutionary acts, whether they were assertive, directive, commisive, expressive, and declarative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Technique for Analyzing Data</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">First, this study is classify what kind of illocutionary acts that appear in the conversation between man and zombie. It used theory proposed by Searle (1974). Then, it was the analysis of the functions of each illocutionary acts found in screenplay based on theory of context of situation. It used the theory of Ethnography of Communication proposed by Hymes (in Schiffrin, 1994).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Types and Context of Situation of Illocutionary Act in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Warm Bodies</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> Movie</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After collecting the data, the data are classified based on the types of speech act. There are five types of speech acts, namely: Assertive, Directive, Commisive, Expressive, and Declarative. It was found that there are a lot occurrences of context of situation onto illocutionary acts. Here are the explanations and some examples of type of illocutionary act on Man and zombie’s dialogue in movie Warm Bodies.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1 Assertive</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Assertive is illocutionary act which try to represent situation or condition and also describe the states or events in the world, such as arguing, asserting, stating, claiming, complaining, describing, informing, reporting etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The examples from the movie:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You said a few days. It’s been a few days, R. I have to go home. (Complaining)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lots of us changing Dreaming. (Asserting)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Boneys chasing me. They’re chasing us. (Informing)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No. Things don’t getting better. Thing get worse. (Arguing)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That’s too m-much. (Criticizing)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But you didn’t eat me. You rescued me. Like, a bunch. It must be hard being stuck in there. You know, I can see you trying. Maybe that’s what people do. You know, we try to be better. Sometimes we kind of suck at it. But I look at you and you try so much harder than any human in my city. You’re a good person, R. Anyway. (Describing)</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Directive</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Directive is illocutionary acts point of this class that they are attempted by the speaker to get the hearer to do something, e.g. asking, advising, begging, forbidding, ordering, requesting, suggesting, recommending, demanding, insisting, and permitting. The examples from the movie:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We could put on a little bit of foundation, Maybe a little blush. Probably a lot of blush. (Advising)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;H-h have to wait. (Ordering)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Please leave me alone. (Begging)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You can’t just do that. It’s dangerous. Jesus, R, are you crazy? The people here, they’re not like me. If they see you, you’ll get killed. (Warning)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I insist. (Insisting)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Well, then you’re just gonna have to go and get me some food. Because I’m starved. Please? I’d be very grateful for some food”. (Requesting)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I was…. I was thinking…. You know, you could sleep in there if you want.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">On the floor. These houses creep me out,so…. Okay.. (Inviting)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Commisive</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Commissive is illocutionary act which point is to commit the speaker to some future course of action, such as committing, promising, refusing, wishing, predicting, threatening, vowing, and volunteering.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The examples from the movie:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;F-f-few d-days. Th-they’ll f-forget. Y-y-you’ll be okay. (Promising)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You need some help? (Offering)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>5.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expressive</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Expressive is illocutionary act that express the speaker's attitudes and emotions towards the proposition. The paradigms of expressive verbs are apologizing, complimenting, condoling, congratulating, deploring, praising, regretting, thanking, and welcoming.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The examples from the movie:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’m sorry. Julie. I’m sorry Julie…. (Apologizing)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thank you. Oh my God . mmm! (Thanking)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Better s-sound. Oh, you‘re a purist, huh? More alive. Yeah. That’s true. Lot more trouble, though. (Praising)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Declarative</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Declarative is illocutionary act that change the reality in accord with the proposition of the declaration, e.g. approving, betting, blessing, christening, confirming, declaring, dismissing, resigning, naming etc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The examples from the movie:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why don’t I just call you “R”? (Naming)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis Context of Situation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example the analysis, one of utterance</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">That’s too m-much. (Criticizing)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setting and Scene</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Airstrip where several airplane park and be zombie’s home. The scene is informal since both of them in the same age.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Participant</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Two participants here are R and Julie whose relation is friend in that time. R is a zombie who saves Julie life because he is falling in love to her.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;End</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">R utterance has a goal to critic Julie act because Julie walk not natural like real zombie and she is grunting too loud.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Act Sequence</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Among zombies group Julie must pretend like zombie, the purpose is to make zombie not suspicious. In the end, Julie changes her walking style.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Key</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The key of the utterance is precise.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Instrumentalities</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The speaker communicates verbally. The utterance is in declarative form.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Norms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The talk was such an ordinary talk for the R because the response shown by Julie is not in accordance with the common situation in his community.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Genre</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The genre of the utterance is a suggestion</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">First, five classifications of illocutionary acts are performed by speaker, found in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Warm Bodies</span><span class="font3"> movie. They are assertive (complaining, asserting, informing, arguing, criticizing, describing, suggesting), directives (Advising, Ordering, begging, warning, insisting, requesting, inviting), commisives (Promising, offering), expressive (Apologizing, Thanking, praising.) and Declarative (naming).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, from the analysis that had been conducted, context of situation take an important part because the context of situation influences action or thought to the speaker’s utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Finally, Genre of this movie could attract the consumer in movie firm by changing the characters of zombie to humanities nowadays. This movie shows zombie and human could talk and understand each other’s even though it has not proper talk and zombie just show few utterances. It can be proved by the analysis of illocutionary act and the context of situation that influences the act.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Ahidjo, U Embugushiki.2010 “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Doing things with words: a speech act analysis a Christian Weeding”.</span><span class="font3">Nigeria.University of Josh.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Allan, Keuth. 1986. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lingusitic Meaning (Volume 2).</span><span class="font3"> London. Routledge and Kegan Paul.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dhianary. 2008 </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Speech acts in Millers’s Death of a Salesman (Undergraduate Thesis)</span><span class="font3">.” Denpasar. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Iliyas, Sanna. 2012. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Facebook Status Updates: A Speech Act Analysis</span><span class="font3">. Academic Reasearch International. Vol.3 No 22 September 2012.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kyunghe, Moon. (2012). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Illocutionary act in office”.</span><span class="font3">Cambride.Cambridge University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, G 1989. Principle of Pragmatic. New York: Longman Group Lomited.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Murni, Sri Minda. 2004. A study of Illocutionary act in stand-up comedy. (serial online). Vol 3, No 4. Available from:</span><a href="http://www.jurnal.unimed.ac.id/"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">www.jurnal.unimed.ac.id </span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">[Accessed 20 May 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nurani. 2010 “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Act Components in The Movie the Proposal (Undergraduate Thesis)”</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar. Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Puspitasari, Srie. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Illocutionary acts in the Movie of “My name is Khan (Undergraduate Thesis)</span><span class="font3"> Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rillof, Ellen. 2011. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Classifying Sentences as Speech Acts in Message Board Post</span><span class="font3">. University of Utah. Salt Lake City</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sarry.2013.</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Act in Film “Tinker Bell And The Lost Treasure” (Undergraduate Thesis).</span><span class="font3"> Denpasar: Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Searle, J.R. 1969 “Expression and Meaning studies in the theory of speech act”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cambridge.Cambridge University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">25</span></p>