---
layout: full_article
title: "THE TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH PREPOSITION ‘FOR’ IN THE NOVEL STARS SHINE DOWN BY SIDNEY SHELDON INTO INDONESIAN IN KILAU BINTANG MENERANGI BUMI"
author: "Silvy Afrina Letsoin"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">THE TRANSLATION OF ENGLISH PREPOSITION ‘FOR’ IN THE</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">NOVEL STARS SHINE DOWN BY SIDNEY SHELDON INTO INDONESIAN IN KILAU BINTANG MENERANGI BUMI</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Oleh: Silvy Afrina Letsoin</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Extension Program English Department Faculty of Letters Udayana University</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Judul makalah ini adalah &quot;The Translation of English Preposition ‘For’ in the Novel Stars Shine Down by Sidney Sheldon.&quot; Tulisan ini terutama bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi terjemahan preposisi 'for' dan untuk menemukan fungsi dan makna dari preposisi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teori utama dari tata bahasa dan terjemahan yang diambil dari</span><span class="font1"> A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(1985) by Quirk. R. et. al and </span><span class="font1">Meaning Based Translation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">(1984) by Larson. Kemudian data diambil dari dua Novel, mereka adalah</span><span class="font1"> The Stars Shine Down </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">oleh Sidney Sheldon dan terjemahannya</span><span class="font1"> Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">oleh Drs. Budjianto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan membaca bahasa sumber, untuk mengetahui penggunaan preposisi dari novel dan menjelaskan preposisi untuk menemukan fungsi dan makna dari preposisi. Akhirnya, data dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif untuk menemukan terjemahannya ke dalam bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Setelah menganalisa data, temuan menunjukkan bahwa preposisi 'for' telah diterjemahkan ke dalam Bahasa Indonesia menjadi untuk, selama, sepanjang, hingga, karena, sehingga, atas, agar, supaya, bagi, kepada, terhadap. Fungsi preposisi yang menyatakan</span><span class="font1"> durasi, tempat, sebab, posisi, penerima, target, dan tujuan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: Preposition, Translation, Function.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Background</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The work of translation plays an important role for the people who are usually faced with sentences or books in English that need to be translated into another language, in this case into Indonesian. Translation is an activity of enormous importance in the modern world and is subject of interest not only to linguists, professionals or amateur translator (Catford, 1965), but also to elementary school, junior high school, senior high school and at university level.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on Larson (1984:2) translation is an operation performed on languages that show a process of substituting a text in one language for a text to another language. The translation consists of transferring the meaning of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">source language into the receptor language. This is done by going from the form of the first language to the form of the second language by way of semantic structure. It is meaning which is being transferred and must be held constant. Only the form changes and the form from which the translation is made will be called target language. Translation consists of studying lexicon, grammatical structure, communication situation and cultural context of the source language text. The process is analyzing it in order determine its meaning and then reconstructing this same meaning using the lexicon and grammatical structure which are appropriate in the target language and its cultural context.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Translation can be defined as a process of trnasferring one language into another language into a target language. Translation is a change of form, but still with the same meaning from the source language into target language (Larson, 1984:3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The reason I choose this topic because translation is also a confusing subject, translation can be defined as a process of transferring one language into another language into a target language. Besides, the present study focuses on the description of translation of the English preposition ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for</span><span class="font2">’ into Indonesian in order to know the variation of its translation in Indonesian.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Problems of The Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background above, the problems that will be discussed are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the functions and meanings of prepositons ‘for’ in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2"> and its Indonesian translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the translations of preposition ‘for’ in Indonesian found in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2"> and its Indonesian translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2"> ?</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>The Aims of the Study</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are to analyze the function of preposition ‘for’ according to the novel in order to know the real meaning of preposition ‘for’ and its translation in Indonesian. The aims of this study are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the functions or the meanings of preposition ‘for’ found in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2"> and its Indonesian translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify and describe the translation of the preposition ‘for’ in Indonesian found in the novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2"> and its Indonesian translation </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Research Method</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The procedures for implementing the research hav been influential rules in determining the success of the study and they are very important for validity of the writing. According to Brown and Rodgers (220:3), “research is an exploration of experience of one kind or another, sometimes fomal and technical”. Qualitative research heps determine the best research design and data collection method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The qualitative research is a field of inquiry that crosscuts diciplines and subject matters. It has a purpose to gather an in-depth understanding of human behavior and the reasons that govern human behavior. Qualitative research seeks out the reason of the topic through the analysis of unstructured information such as interview transcript and recordings, emails, notes, feedbacks forms, photos and videos.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In conducting a research, there are some methods applied in the process of finding, collecting and analyzing the data. The research method in this study deals with three sections namely: data source, method and technique collecting data and method and technique of analyzing data. Each of those sections is presented in detail below.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Data Source</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">In order to have valid and reliable data, the data of this study were taken from printed English novel and its translation into Indonesian. The data were taken from the English novel </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2"> and its Indonesian translation entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2"> by Drs. Budjianto. The source novel was written by Sidney Sheldon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are several reasons of choosing the novel as data source. First, there are many preposition ‘for’ found in the Source Language. Second, the people all over the world, especially those who are very found of reading mystery novel have known who Sidney Sheldon is. Here the novel was published by Gramedia Pustaka Utama which has had a good reputation and well known in the field of publication.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The methods applied to this study are reading and note taking. It was done by observing the preposition ‘for’ in the source language and the target language novel. The term observation is not merely related to the language used in spoken but also in written form. This method has a basic technique called tapping technique, since observation is basically done by tapping. It is also emphasized that the tapping of the language use can be in spoken as well as in written form. In completing the process of collecting data, note taking technique was applied. It was done by taking note on the data card and continued by classification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As it is a novel used as data source, the method and technique described above are considered the most effective way in collecting data. The data were collected through some stages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The first one is preparing the research instruments. Since the data source is novel, the collection of the data applied was the note taking technique. The data were noted down in a note or paper by using writing tools. The novel was read first to have a good understanding of the story. Then the next step was close reading of the data source. Finding out any preposition ‘for’ occuring in the source language and comparing it with the target language. In this stage, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English, novel was read attentively with the focus on the preposition ‘for’ and its translations in the Indonesian novel. The process was continued by identification. The identification is important in order to collect the data which is appropriate for this study. Along with the identification process, it was not merely noting down the preposition ‘for’ becoming the focus of this study but it also necessarily includes the sentence in which the preposition ‘for’ occurs. The data were written on the data card. The last step was the selection of the data. The data further were selected based on the type and classified accordingly. The data reduction was done. In this step, the preposition ‘for’ used as the data were selected and classified based on its function and meaning. Finally, the data source and the target language text were analyzed in order to find the function and the meaning of preposition ‘for’.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The collected data were qualitatively analyzed based on theory as well in accordance with scope of the discussion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">So, the qualitative method is the most suitable method to do the analysis. Qualitative method is exploratory and qualitative data cannot always be put into a on text that can be graphed or displayed as a mathematical term and exploratory research seeks to find out how people get along in the setting under question, what meanings they give to their actions, and what issues concern term. This methodolgy refer to an approach to qualitative research and is an attempt to get deep comprehension of the theory from the data itself rather than from a predisposed hypothesis. The qualitative method means the data described in narrative way.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis made by giving description of the function of preposition ‘for’ and its translation in Indonesian. The analysis of the data from source language was done with the comparison with the data from target language. The preposition ‘for’ found in the source language was compared to its translation in the target language. Consulting the dictionary is required in the process of compares the source language and the target language. Then it has been classified</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">based on it function and meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In fact, the translation of preposition ‘for’ found in the process of comparison between the source language and the target language were collected then anlyzed based on their meaning and function.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Preposition ‘for’ Stating Duration</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">‘For’ in English is preposition. The examples below show ‘for’ as a preposition and its translation equivalents into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">selama, sepanjang,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hingga</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian stating duration.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>’For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Selama</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">One of the functions of ‘for’ is to state duration, which is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">selama</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. Both ‘for’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">selama</span><span class="font2"> are used to express temporal aspect or duration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sepanjang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘For’ as preposition is widely used in the novel of Sidney Sheldon which is entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down</span><span class="font2">, not only translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">selama</span><span class="font2"> but also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sepanjang</span><span class="font2">, both of them express the duration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Hingga</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hingga</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. This word also expresses duration of time in both languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Preposition ‘For’ Stating Cause</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">‘For’ in English is a preposition. The examples below show ‘for’ as a preposition and its translating equivalents into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karena, sehingga</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">atas</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian to state cause.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Karena</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The preposition ‘for’ is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karena</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. Both ‘for’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karena</span><span class="font2"> in this context have the same meaning ‘cause’. ‘For’ expresses either the material cause and the psychological cause (motive) for event.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sehingga</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The preposition ‘for’ is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">sehingga</span><span class="font2"> to express cause. The position of preposition ‘for’ expresses the effect of the event.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Atas</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The preposition ‘for’ which is translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">atas</span><span class="font2"> expresses cause.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Preposition ‘For’ Stating Purpose</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In order to make translation more interesting preposition ‘for’ that states purpose could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">untuk, agar</span><span class="font2">, dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">supaya</span><span class="font2"> to show the purpose of something done.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Untuk</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ also has the equivalent to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">untuk</span><span class="font2"> into Indonesian. In terms meaning both ‘for’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">untuk</span><span class="font2"> have the same meaning as a marker of purpose. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Agar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The English preposition ‘for’ is equivalent to </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">agar</span><span class="font2"> into target language. The function of preposition ‘for’ is marker of purpose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Supaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ could also be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">supaya</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. This also states purpose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Preposition ‘For’ Stating Recipient</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ that states recipient could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bagi, untuk, kepada,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">terhadap.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bagi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bagi</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. The meaning of ‘for’ and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bagi</span><span class="font2"> is associated with recipient.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Untuk</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">untuk</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. That also states the recipient.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kepada</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kepada</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. This world also expresses recipient in both languages.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>‘For’ translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Terhadap</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Preposition ‘for’ is also translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">terhadap</span><span class="font2"> in Indonesian. This word also expresses recipient in both language.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The translation equivalents of preposition </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘for’</span><span class="font2"> into Indonesian found in the novel entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Stars Shine Down by Sidney Sheldon</span><span class="font2"> and its translation in Indonesian entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kilau Bintang Menerangi Bumi</span><span class="font2"> by Drs. Budjianto are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘selama, sepanjang, hingga, karean, sehingga, atas, untuk, agar, supaya, sebagai, bagi, kepada and terhadap’.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The translation equivalents of the preposition ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for’</span><span class="font2"> found in the novel are to state duration, cause, purpose and recipient. The preposition ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for’</span><span class="font2"> used to state duration could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">selama, sepanjang</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hingga</span><span class="font2">. The preposition ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for’</span><span class="font2"> used to state cause could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karena, sehingga</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">atas</span><span class="font2">. The preposition </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘for’</span><span class="font2"> used to state purpose could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">untuk, agar,</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">supaya</span><span class="font2">. And the last is the preposition ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">for’</span><span class="font2"> used to state recipient could be translated into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bagi, untuk, kepada</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">terhadap.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Catford, J.C, 1965</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. A Linguistic Theory of Transltion London,</span><span class="font2"> Oxford University Press</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">K. Pullum, Geoffrey, 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Cambridge Grammar of The English Language</span><span class="font2">, Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Larson, M, 1984</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Meaning Based Translation,</span><span class="font2"> University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk, Randolph and Greenbaum, Sidney, Leek, G, Svartvik, J, 1985</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. A Comprehensive Grammar of The English Language</span><span class="font2">, London, Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Quirk, R. Et. Al, 1972. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Contemporary English,</span><span class="font2"> London, Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">8</span></p>