---
layout: full_article
title: "CONFLICT AMONG PARTIES IN MODERNIZATION OF ECOSYSTEMS AT SUBAKS LOCATED IN BULELENG AND TABANAN REGENCIES OF BALI AT IRRIGATED BY SHABA RIVER"
author: "I Nyoman Arthanegara, I Wayan Ardika, Nengah Bawa Atmaja, Nyoman Sutawan"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3581 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-3581"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-3581"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">CONFLICT AMONG PARTIES IN MODERNIZATION OF ECOSYSTEMS AT </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">SUBAKS</span><span class="font2"> LOCATED IN BULELENG AND TABANAN REGENCIES OF BALI AT IRRIGATED BY SHABA RIVER</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I Nyoman Arthanegara<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0">H</span><span class="font2">, I Wayan Ardika<sup>2 </sup>Nengah Bawa Atmaja <sup>2</sup>, Nyoman Sutawan<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>School for Graduate Study, Udayana University <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Letters, Udayana University <sup>3</sup>Faculty of Agriculture, Udayana University </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:nyoman-lppm@centrin.net.id"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">nyoman-lppm@centrin.net.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Conflict among parties of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem is a conflict of interests resulting from the modernization made by political community with regard to the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pelemahan</span><span class="font2"> of ecosystem. The political and economic communities force modernization on the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem leading to an ideological conflict between modernism and the philosophy of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana.</span><span class="font2"> Modernism has been responsible for the conflict among the parties of ecosystem in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan, pawongan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Participation in group discussion, semi structured interview and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transek</span><span class="font2"> were the methods employed in collecting the data. The triangulation including at least three relevant theories was employed for analyzing the data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Political communities interfere with the development by applying the theory of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">hegemony.</span><span class="font2"> The political community in collaboration with the economic community dominates modernization which is sectoral in nature and the planning and implementation of the development. Partial development approach, which contrasts with the theory of ecosystem (Pollunin, 1996), causes the farming community life process and the cultural values existing in the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> to degrade. The interference of the political community in collaboration with the economic community with the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem is more dominant in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> which is materialistic in nature so that advantages can be obtained by science and technology. Consequently, the philosophical values of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">trihita karana</span><span class="font2"> are broken. Such a conflict takes place due to the different interests in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem , which is full of cultural values for the farming community. Alteration to the land status, the imbalance between the cost spent and the yields produced and the violation of the growing pattern are responsible for the conflict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The institution of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak,</span><span class="font2"> which constitutes the realization of subculture of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem, is swept aside by the political and economic communities. The farming community members that are the members of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> institution are made not to be facilitated to take part in the development process in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> . Modernization in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem done by the political and economic communities is beyond the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> institution causing it to violate the traditional values of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> institution which refer to togetherness regulated by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> rules and regulations. Modernization, which is done by the political and economic societies by science and technology, breaks the unified existence of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2"> in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem environment. Modernization in the development of the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">degrades the spiritual values attached to the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parahyangan</span><span class="font2">. The developmental intervention in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> done by the political and economical communities is not begun from the implementation of the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parahyangan</span><span class="font2">. This contrasts with the cultural values existing in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem. The conflict of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem among the parties results from the failure of modernization. The developmental intervention is only done in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2">, while the subcultures of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parahyangan</span><span class="font2"> of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem are marginalized from their habitats. The failure in developing the infrastructure of the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem in the areas irrigated by Sabha River results from the fact that the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> are functioned to be the developmental objects. In this case, the theory of participatory can offer solutions to the conflict and the developmental failure, especially in the ecosystem of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks </span><span class="font2">irrigated by Sabha River. The reason is that the parties play equal roles in developing</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the environment of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Key word: sustainable, ecosystem, conflik,</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The objective of using the conflict of the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks </span><span class="font2">irrigated by Sabha River located in Tabanan and Buleleng Regencies among the Farming, Political, and Economical Communities as the title of this dissertation is to reveal the complexity of the ecosystem occurring there. The upper part of the river is located in Tabanan Regency, and the central and lower parts are located in Buleleng Regency. The inexplicitness of the data and information concerning the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River has inspired the writer to observe the validity of the data and information documented at the related government’s institutions representing the political communities. The number of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystems spreading along the areas irrigated by Sabha River available at the related government’s institutions varies. The writer has been motivated to conduct this study in order to get the validity of the number of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystems spreading along the areas irrigated by Sabha River.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">stakeholder, participatory and eguallity</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Intellectually and practically, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">refers to a traditional organization functioning to arrange water irrigation in Bali. This definition has inspired the writer to conduct a deep research concerning </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak.</span><span class="font2"> The reason is that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> does not only function to arrange irrigation water. The writer is convinced that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> is rich in sources of biotic and abiotic. It is this that has inspired the writer to conduct such a study as his dissertation. However, some problems Why do conflicts take place among the political, economic and farming communities in the aspect of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> of the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Shaba River, How do the conflicts among the parties in the aspect of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> of the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River take place, What is the implication of the conflicts in the aspects of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan </span><span class="font2">on the ecosystem of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The general objectives of the study concerning “Conflict among Farming, Political and Economical Communities in the Ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Subaks</span><span class="font2"> Irrigated by Sabha River” are</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">to find out the dynamics of growth and development taking place at the regions irrigated by a river in Bali, to describe the condition of the elements of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem based on the values and various activities performed along the regions irrigated by Sabha River in Bali and to identify the relationship between institutional elements, water resources, agroeconomics, and irrigation technique and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana.</span><span class="font2"> The specific objectives of the study are to identify the factors causing the conflicts in the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River; to describe the interrelationship among the elements in the ecosystem of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks </span><span class="font2">irrigated by Sabha River; and to map out the pattern of relationships between the farming communities and God, among the members of the farming communities, and between the farming communities and their environment.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>MATERIAL AND DISCUSSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">This study was conducted employing participatory method that refers to the following principles: a) giving priority to what is neglected, b) community empowerment, c) the local community is the doer and the outsiders are the facilitators, d) equality, learning from each other and appreciating differences, e) optimalizing results, f) practical orientation, g) sustainability and time interval, h) learning from errors, and i) ransparency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The strength of participatory method is situated on how data are collected and h analyzed. The data analysis was systematically done together with the community with the principle of triangulation, in which the data and information were checked and rechecked. Triangulation was done through diversity in team members, sources of information and variation in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">participatory technique and method. The diversity in triangulation intended is as follows: a) the team members were composed of those who are multidisciplinary, male and female, locals and outsiders coming from different disciplines of science, b) the information sources are: the society, location, event or processe. The local community’s role is necessary. The roles of location, the analysis of process and event are too, and c) technique and equipment: interview, discussion, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">transek.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Triangulation or multi-strategy was optically employed using at least five types of triangulation. They are triangulation of data, triangulation of discipline, triangulation of theory, triangulation of methodology and triangulation of analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The parties who have interests in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">the subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River are the farming, political and economic communities. Historically, the farming communities cannot be separated from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> life. While the political and economic communities are the parties who have interests in the resources.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sources forming the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem, which are investigated in the scope of this study, include the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2">, which constitutes the forming elements, and functions as the ecosystem networks among institutionalization, agroeconomics, water resources, and irrigation technique. Trihita Karana constitutes a boundary frame, and binder binding all the realizations of every activity done by the farming communities around the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem. All the elements forming the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem are sorted in the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2">. The subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> realizes the activities done by the farming communities associated to God. Every activity done around the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem starts from the subculture of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2">. The subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> realizes the harmonious relationships between man and his fellow-beings, and among institutions. As a whole, institutionalization, as one of the elements forming the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem, is the real implementation of the concept of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2">. The subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> constitutes the relationship pattern between the farmers and their environment around the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem, which includes the relationship between the farmers and water resources, agro-economics, and irrigation technique, which are always in the corridor of religious cultural values. The intervention of the parties in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem causes a clash between local ideology and modernism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conflicts over land in the areas irrigated by Sabha River take place downstream, as the utilization of land for irrigation channels that takes place at Gerogak Distrik. The parties involved in such conflicts are the Department of Public Work, Bureau of Land Affairs, the farming , and the economic communities. The Department of Public Work has built some irrigation channels to expand the farming areas at Gerogak District. For this interest, the farmers’ land has been freed. The process of freeing the land has been done by paying for compensation. Some of the landowners, in fact, have freed their land without any compensation for building irrigation channels</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Violation of growing pattern is one of the things that have been responsible for the conflict that takes place among the farming community members. The intervention of the political communities in the growing pattern aspect is intended to increase growing intensity by applying technology including the use of shortage superior seeds, high dosage fertilization and the three-time a year</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">growing frequency. Wibowo (2007: 218) states that the growing pattern applied by the political communities has left every thing traditional and meaningful behind. The reason is that the three-time growing pattern a year has not given any opportunity to the land to reacquire its fertility. In addition, the three-time growing pattern a year has made traditional meaningfulness extinct in the subak ecosystem. This exceeds the post reality and negatively affects the environment. The conflict resulting from the violation of growing pattern has taken place in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> where heterogeneous plants are planted. The reason is that every type of plants has a different need. Grape plantations need bigger rates of flow of water. The other second crops do too. In addition, the growing pattern among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks </span><span class="font2">located in the upper part, the middle part and the lower part of Sabha River has not been facilitated. This has been responsible for the conflict taking place among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">. The determination of growing pattern and the arrangement of rice and grape growing patterns should be immediately made, as this has created latent conflicts among the farming communities in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem (DISIMP, 2005, Department of Agriculture, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Water is one of the resources which has been the object of struggle among the the parties which have interests in it. The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> that is located at the upper part of the river and close to the water resources dominantly control the water. The arrangement of doors that are permanently installed is dominantly done by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">, which are located in the upper part. The unavailability of irrigation manage ment among the related </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">, which are bound to awig-awig (local regulations) made and approved</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">together, causes the conflict to take place among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Competition taking place among the parties using the irrigation water flowing from one channel without any clear regulations frequently causes the conflict to happen. It is difficult to solve such a conflict. The reason is that there is no binding that can collectively facilitate the water allocation management. The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem in the areas irrigated by Sabha River has not been formally organized by a higher </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak gede</span><span class="font2">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conflict caused by the struggle for water resources, in fact, takes place between PDAM and the farming communities. In a focused-group meeting attended by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">, it is shown that an organization in the form of a higher </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak gede</span><span class="font2">) is really needed. It is hoped that the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak gede </span><span class="font2">, as an institution, can facilitate the irrigation water management among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2"> in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem is in general binding in nature both inward and outward. What is meant by inward is that it is responsible for the pattern of relationship among the farmers or </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">karma</span><span class="font2"> (members) in an institution. All the facilities and infrastructures unifying the farmers in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem are included in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font2"> (local regulations). Such regulations constitute a frame limiting and binding the farmers’ movement. In this way, any violation done by the farmers in a unified ecosystem of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> can be minimized. So can any violation among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak-gede</span><span class="font2"> (higher </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak)</span><span class="font2"> members. What is meant by outward is that the members should also be responsible for the communities existing outside the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem. The implementation of the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> corresponds to the pattern of relationship between</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the farmers and the communities outside the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The development facilitated by the political and economic communities in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem along the areas irrigated by Sabha River greatly contrasts with the theory of ecosystem. The development in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> done by the political communities is not made equal to the development done in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan.</span><span class="font2"> Imbalance facilitation of the development done by the political communities in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak </span><span class="font2">ecosystem has caused the existence of cultural values attached to the sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> marginalized. In accordance with the theory of conflict (Moor, 1996), the imbalance in development causes various types of clashes which potentially lead to conflicts. The parties have not paid any attention to the existence of holy places belonging to several </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> or to the holy places built for the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks </span><span class="font2">located in the same irrigation area. They have not paid any attention to the rituals performed for the interests of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem in the areas irrigated by Sabha River either, where they have interests. The development that is unequally designed viewed from ecosystem badly affects the functions of the ecosystem network. This means that the function and meaningfulness of the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> as the network of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem have been made damaged.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESEARCH NOVELTY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">The novelty of this study: First, a conflict of land function which is caused by the use of the farmers’ land for irrigation channels, a conflict of growing pattern among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> and non </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> institutions, a conflict of water resources among the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> and non </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> institions, and a conflict of modernized subculture of irrigation</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">technique which is caused by partial approach take place in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan </span><span class="font2">sub culture of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem. This is not in accordance with the farmers’ knowledge and philosophically, a clash between modernism and traditionalism cannot be avoided.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The area of Sabha river are Tukad Sabha, Tukad Bakah, Tukad Jehe, Tukad Getas, Tukad Panes, Tukad Titab, and it has 55 subak.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Palemahan aspect develop by economic oriented and base by ideology of capitalism, and farmer community group did activities vase by philosophy of Tri Hita Karana,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modernization is source of latent conflict of political community with farmer community, and source of conflict economic community with farmer community. And Source of conflict inheren of subak and among subak,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pawongan aspect of subak-subak at area of Sabha river like is human resourches not touch by develop</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ment of political community and economic community,</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Participatory theory as once alter</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;native for used solving problem of conflict among stakeholder in modernization ecosystem subak by Sabha river area.</span></p></li></ul>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESEARCH CONCLUSION</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Modernization in the agricultural mechanism has marginalized the existence of the traditional agricultural equipment in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem. In addition, the economic communities more dominantly play a role in the modernized mechanism of agriculture, in which the farmers are treated as consumers. The collaboration of the political and economic communities has marginalized the farming</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">communities in the development of irrigation infrastructure of the sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2">. This is called collusion that is based on buraucratism and technocratism which synergy with capitalism referred to by the economic communities with the objective that great benefit will be gained. The modernization in irrigation infra structure of the sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> has swept the farming communities away from their environment, and has changed the forms of the local symbols created by the farmers. The consequence is that the transcendent values of the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">artefak </span><span class="font2">realizations of the sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> at the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sabha River</span><span class="font2"> have been made to disappear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2"> at the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subaks</span><span class="font2"> irrigated by Sabha River bound to the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font2"> (local regulations) has collided with formal regulations, the governmental regu lations and the regional regulations. The </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">awig-awig</span><span class="font2"> is local in naure, while the formal regulations are national in nature. Interinstitutional conflict has been caused by the non-existence of a higher </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak gede</span><span class="font2">) at the same irrigation area and the non-existence of an institution arranging the area of a river (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak agung</span><span class="font2">). The sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> has been marginalized in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">subak</span><span class="font2"> ecosystem, because the modernization made by the political communities have only been done in the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan.</span><span class="font2"> The sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhyangan</span><span class="font2"> has not been touched by modernization, making modernized infrastructure of the sub culture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2"> considered not to have religious values. Because spirituality has been neglected by the economic and political communities, the subculture of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paryhyangan</span><span class="font2"> has been marginalized. The philosophy of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trihita Karana</span><span class="font2"> has been destructed by modernization, resulting a conflict</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">among the parties at the subcultures of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">palemahan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">pawongan</span><span class="font2">, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">parhya ngan</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">I would like to take this opportunity to express my great thanks to Prof. Dr. I Wayan Ardika, MA., as my promoter, Prof. Dr. Nengah Bawa Atmaja, MA. as co-promoter I and Prof. Dr. Nyoman Sutawan, M.Sc., as co-promoter II who have attentively given me support, encouragement and guidance starting from the proposal writing to the last process of completing this dissertation report. I would also like to deliver my high appreciation to The Bier Foundation, and Rector of Udayana University, Director of Post-Graduate Program Udayana University and staff, and the Head of Cultural Studies Doctorate Program of Udayana University and staff.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Best, Steven dkk. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Posmodern: Interogasi Kritis</span><span class="font2">. Malang: Boyan Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiman, Arief. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pembangunan Dunia Ketiga</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budimanto, Arif, dkk. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Corporate Social Responsibility: Jawaban bagi Model Pembangunan Indonesia Masa Kini</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Indonesia Centre for Sustainable Development (ICSD).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiman, Hikmat. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lubang</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hitam Kebudayaan</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brouwer, M.A.W. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi Budaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dasar.</span><span class="font2"> Bandung: PT Alumni.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brouwer, M.A.W. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Alam</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manusia dalam Fenomenologi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jakarta: PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, Lester R. Christopher Flavin, Sandra Postel. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Saving The Planet: How To Shape an Environmentally Sustainable Global Economy.</span><span class="font2"> New York: W.W. Norton &amp;&nbsp;Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, Lester R. 1993. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jangan Biarkan Bumi Merana.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bryant, Coraile dan Lousie G, White.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">1982. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen Pembangunan untuk Negara Berkembang.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta: LP3ES.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bocock, Robert, 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Komprehensif untuk Memahami Hegemoni</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Percetakan Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bouman, P.J. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ilmu Masyarakat Umum</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Pembangunan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiman, Hikmat. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hak Minoritas: Dilema Multikulturalisme di Indoensia</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Yayasan Interseksi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Capra, Fritjof. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Tao of Physics: Menyingkap Kesejajaran Fisika Modern dan Mistisisme Timur.</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Jalasutra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Capra, Fritjof. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Titik Balik Peradaban: Sain, Masyarakat dan Kebangkitan Kebudayaan. </span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Yayasan Bentang Budaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Capra, Fritjof. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaring-Jaring Kehidupan: Visi Baru Epistemologi dan Kehidupan. </span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Pajar Pustaka Baru, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chang, William. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Moral Lingkungan Hidup. </span><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: PT Kanisius.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chilcote, Ronald H., 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teori Perbandingan Politik Penelusuran Paradigma</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT. RajaGrafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chapman, Audrey R; Rodney L. Petersen; Barbara Smith-Moran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bumi yang Terdesak Perspektif Ilmu dan Agama Mengenai Konsumsi, Populasi, dan Keberlanjutan</span><span class="font2">. Bandung: PT Mizan Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cleveland, Harland. 1995. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lahirnya Sebuah Dunia Baru</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coward, Jr. E. Walter. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Irrigation and Agricultural Development in Asia</span><span class="font2">. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darmaedi, Dedy. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Alphabetical List of Plant Species Cultivated in the Bali Botanic Garden.</span><span class="font2"> Jakarta: Indonesian Institute of Science Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darmawan. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Lembaga Swadaya Masyarakat: Menyuarakan Nurani Menggapai Kesetaraan</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Kompas Media Nusantara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darsoprajitno, H. Soewarno. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ekologi Pariwisata “Tata Laksana Pengelolaan Objek dan Daya Tarik Wisata</span><span class="font2">. Bandung: Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dasman, Raymond F dkk. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip Ekologi untuk Pembangunan Ekonomi. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DHV. Consulting Engineer, et all. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Water Research Study for human resettlement</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: IUIDP.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dietz, Ton. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengakuan Hak Atas Sumber daya Alam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar Offset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dikbud Provinsi Bali. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Buku Petunjuk Prajuru Subak dan Sri Purana Tatwa</span><span class="font2">. Denpasar: Dinas Kebudayaan Provinsi Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dillon, H.S. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pertanian Membangun Bangsa</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Pustaka Sinar Harapan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Djamal Irwan, Zoer’aini. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-Prinsip Ekologi dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Organisasi Ekosistem, Komunitas, Dan Lingkungan. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Durno, Janet, dkk. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainable Agriculture for the Lowland. </span><span class="font2">Bandung: Seasan.\</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Eghenter, Cristina dan Bernard Sellato. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan dan Pelestarian Alam: Penelitian Interdisipliner di Pedalaman Kalimantan</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: WWF-Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakih, Mansour. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Runtuhnya Teori Pembangunan dan Globalisasi</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Insist Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Featherstone, Mike. 2000.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Posmodernisme dan Budaya Konsumen.</span><span class="font2"> Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fischer, H. 1980. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Anthropologi Kebudayaan Indonesia.</span><span class="font2"> Surabaya: PT Pembangunan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fukuyama, Francis, 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guncangan Besar: Kodrat Manusia dan Tata Sosial Baru</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fox, Warwick. 1990. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Toward a Transpersonal Ecology.</span><span class="font2"> Boston &amp;&nbsp;London: Shambhala.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gabriel, J.F. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Fisika Lingkungan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jakarta: Hipokrates.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Galtung, Johan. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Studi Perdamaian: Perdamaian dan Konflik Pembangunan dan Peradaban</span><span class="font2">. Surabaya: Pustaka Eureka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Giddens, Anthony. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Constitution of Society: Teori Strukturasi untuk Analisis Sosial</span><span class="font2">. Pasuruan: Penerbit Pedati.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Huntington, Samuel P. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Benturan Antarperadaban: Dan Masa Depan Politik Dunia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yoyakarta: Qalam.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">IIED. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">PLA Notes: Participatory Learning and Action.</span><span class="font2"> London:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">International Institute for Environment and Development.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">JBIC. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Decentralized Irrigation System Improvement Project in Eastern Region of Indonesia. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: KIMPRASWIL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josef Eiler, Franz. 1993.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Berkomunikasi Antara Budaya</span><span class="font2">. Flores-NTT: PT Nusa Indah.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">J. Van Baal, dkk. 1969, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bali Further Studies in Life, Thought, and Ritual</span><span class="font2">. The Hague: W. van Hoeve Publishers Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kayane I. 1989. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Water Cycle and Water Use in Bali Island</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Japan: Institute of Geoscience, University of Tsukuba Ibaraki.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kirkpatrick S, 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Revolusi Hijau.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sebuah Tinjauan Historis-Kritis Lingkungan Hidup di</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Amerika</span><span class="font2">. Editor Koesnadi Hardjosoemantri. Penerjemah Matheos Nalle. Terjemahan dari The Green Revolution, The American Environmental Movement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Koentjaraningrat. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kebudayaan, Mentalitas, dan Pembangunan. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Korten, Frances F dan Siy Jr. Robert Y. 1988. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Transforming a Bureaucracy: The Experience of The Philippine National Irrigation Administration</span><span class="font2">. Manila: Ateneo De University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p>