---
layout: full_article
title: "SIMBOLICAL MEANING IN STEINBECK’S SHORT STORY “FLIGHT”"
author: "I Gede Lanang Rat Supradinata"
categories: sastra
comments: true
---

<a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>SIMBOLICAL MEANING IN STEINBECK’S SHORT STORY “FLIGHT”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">By</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Gede Lanang Rat Supardinata</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Program Non Reguler Sastra Inggris</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fakultas Sastra</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam studi ini karya penulis terkenal Amerika John Steinbeck dengan judul Flight dipilih untuk dibahas. Tokoh utama dalam cerita ini adalah Pepe seorang remaja riang yang digambarkan bersifat sangat malas dan gampang-gampangan dan tidak suka kesibukan. Ibunya menunggu dan menunggu dia untuk mengambil suatu kehidupan yang lebih serius. Pembahasan dalam cerita pendek ini menggunakan metode penelitian deskriptif. Sumber data primer dalam penulisan ini adalah cerita pendek itu sendiri yang berjudul Flight tentang teori sastra yang dikemukakan oleh William Kenney (1966) dalam bukunya How to Analyze Fiction, dan buku Theory of Literature yang ditulis oleh Rene Welek and Austin Waren (1962), sedangkan buku Interpreting Literature oleh Knickbocker. K.L and H. W. Reninger (1993) dipakai sebagai pendukung kedua teori tersebut di atas. Hasil dari penulisan ini menyatakan bahwa cerita pendek Flight banyak terdapat arti-arti symbol dan seperti yang dapat dilihat dengan jelas, John Steinbeck telah menggunakan banyak teknik dan contoh simbolisme untuk membantu menggambarkan akhir dari cerita pendek, Flight. Beberapa contoh arti simbolik termasuk warna, arah, dan alam ditemukan dalam cerita pendek ini.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Key word: hitam, symbol, kematian</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font0"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1.</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Background of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature refers something creative, imaginative, and expressive of which the material is language. It is created based on human consciousness and imagination which is translated by the artist into a concrete form. One of the important aspects of literature is its relationship with human life because it expresses and shares human life as well as human experiences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In literature, there are many things that can be analysed both intrinsically and extrinsically, there are elements to study such as theme, setting, character, plot, point of view, style and tone, structure and technique, and so forth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Extrinsically, it can be concerned with the author’s biography, social and cultural status, personal experience with life and language, moral values, and so forth</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Novel is one of the forms of literary works; it is a fictional piece of prose that is usually written in a narrative style. Novels tell stories, which are typically defined as a series of events described in a sequence. It has been part of human culture for over a thousand of years, although its origins are somewhat debated. Regardless of how it began, the novel has risen to prominence and remained one of the most popular and treasured examples of human culture and writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, a short story known as </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> which is written by the American author John Steinbeck is analyzed. It is the story of young Pepe Torres, an unsophisticated youth from an isolated farm along the California coast. He wants very much to be considered a man. A deeper understanding of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> is then discussed by studying Steinbeck’s autobiography.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Problem of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The problems discussed are formulated as follows,</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What symbolical meaning does Steinbeck want to convey to the readers in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2">?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How does the life experience of the writer help understand the story?</span></p></li>
<li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aims of the Study</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study is intended to fulfil three aims: the general, specific, and academic aims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The general aim of this writing is to apply the theories related to novel in order to get better understanding of John Steinbeck’s short story entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight, </span><span class="font2">meanwhile the specific aim of this writing is to find out what message the writer wants to deliver.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The last is an academic aim, that is, to apply the theory of literature studied in the English Department to write a scientific work which gives contribution to this department, so this writing can be used as a reference to help students who are interested in analysing fiction.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There are three points covering this section: data source, method and technique of collecting data, and method and technique of analyzing data.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Source</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from the story entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> written by John Steinbeck (Adventures in American Literature. 1968. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World, Inc.). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> is generally considered one of Steinbeck's best works of short fiction, written at the height of his career. His energetic narrative style gives </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> its suspense and symbolical meanings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study were taken from the main character in the short story entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> by John Steinbeck, published in 1938 in The Long Valley, a collection of stories set in the Salinas Valley in California. All the information was collected through library research and note taking, and the important step in collecting the data was reading the story repeatedly, in order to find out the message the writer wants to deliver.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>4.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed according to the theory to find out the symbolical meaning and the other relevant information obtained from other sources is used to support the analysis of the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data were collected from the data source then through the data collection, they were analyzed by using the theory of William Kenney. 1978. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction</span><span class="font2">, and theory of Warren and Wellek. 1962. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> tells the story of Pepe, a jovial teenager who is described many times as very lazy and easy going. His mother waits and waits for him to take life more seriously.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The story starts with Pepé showing off his knife skills, with the knife he inherited from his father, to his brother and sister. He was then interrupted by his mother telling him he must go into town to get medicine for the house. She set him up with a horse and some money, and sent him on his way “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">You must ride to Monterey. The medicine bottle is empty. There is no salt. Go thou now. Catch the horse</span><span class="font2">” (Steinbeck. 1968: 577). Later that night he returned home from his short trip and revealed to his mother that he had accidentally killed a man with his knife. She got up in frenzy and immediately began to prepare him for his evasive journey to the mountains, because he could not stay there and risk being caught.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pepe is often compared to his hardworking father by his mother, who desires for her son to be more like her deceased husband. Pepe’s holding his father’s knife to murder is symbolic of the completion of his childhood and entrance into adulthood. Unfortunately, he did not use his knife just as his father had, but he used it to take the life of another. The maternal figure in this story is used by Steinbeck in order to convey the idea of Pepe’s rising power as a man. Pepe’s mother was clearly shown to be his caretaker in the opening of the story. She scolds him, feeds him, and looks after him. However, when Pepe is trusted to go to the city by himself, his mother surrenders her hold on the family. In an attempt to have her boy become a man, she gives him a great responsibility. Pepe eagerly accepts this opportunity, but is confronted with the face of death instead of a small journey. Pepe’s mother put her trust into Pepe, and he did not disappoint her, because in the end, Pepe made the journey and left boyhood behind him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Symbolism is the use of words symbolically such as dark meaning something unknown. When the writer uses one thing to stand for another we call it a symbol (Knickerbocker and Reninger, 1963:309).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this short story, symbolism is used throughout the story in a variety of ways, including the indication of the ending. The most used piece of symbolism in the story is the usage of black. Black is in many ways associated with the element of death. Some examples of this includes the black handle on the long blade “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The long heavy blade folded back into the black handle</span><span class="font2">” (Steinbeck. 1968: 576), Pepe’s black hair “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pepe had a tall head, pointed at the top, and from its peak</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">coarse black hair grew down like a thatch all around</span><span class="font2">” (Steinbeck. 1968: 576), the black string of jerky he chews on “ . . .</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">he reached into the flour sack and brought out a black string of jerky.... he chewed slowly and drank occasionally from the water bag</span><span class="font2">” (Steinbeck. 1968: 581) and his father’s black coat “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Your father’s black coat, Pepe. Here put it on</span><span class="font2">” (Steinbeck. 1968: 579). With all these things combined, he is symbolically welcoming death in his future with the darkness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Other pieces of symbolism include the use of nature such as the use of water. In the story, Pepe’s water bag is hung over the horse’s shoulder which ended up leaking. It symbolizes that Pepe’s life is slowly leaking away from him. Another piece of symbolism is when Pepe loses his tools that define his humanity, he is left with no choice but to crawl on the ground like an animal, wriggling like a snake and “worming” his way along “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">He moved with the instinctive care of an animal. Rapidly he wormed his way toward one of the big outcroppings of the granite on the hill above him”</span><span class="font2"> (Steinbeck. 1968: 584). This symbolism because it represents the way his dad died ten years earlier when he was bitten and killed by a rattlesnake. More pieces of symbolism can be found when Pepe comes across the trees of the mountainside. The top of the trees appear as wind bitten and pretty much dead, symbolizing that the further up he goes, the closer he is to his death. The majority of the symbolism used throughout the story, each tells a tale of a bleak future with the outcome more than likely resulting in death and Pepe’s demise due to his inability to cope with the treacherous conditions of the wilderness.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Perhaps the most repeatedly used symbol in &quot;Flight,&quot; is black. In literature many authors use black to represent death. There are numerous examples in this short story. Some of these include the black handle on the long blade, Pepé's black hair and the black jerky. Another example may be found when Pepé puts on his father’s black coat, which represents death. When Pepé puts on the coat he is literally covering himself with death. Another fine example is the trail in which Pepé travels. Steinbeck describes the path as a well-worn black path. By traveling on this path he is in fact taking the road of death. Furthermore Pepé's</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">appearance also helps foreshadow the ending. Steinbeck describes him as having a black hat that covers his black thatched hair.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Throughout the story Steinbeck emphasizes nature symbolism. Nature symbolism includes a variety of things. One very popular symbol is water. Because of the fact that we, as humans, require water in order to live, water represents life. An example of this in the story would be Pepé's water bag that he hung over his horse's shoulder. The water leaked onto the horse's shoulder. This meant Pepé's life was actually leaking away. It just so happened that when the horse was shot it was in the same shoulder. The most obvious example of nature symbolism would be when Pepé is traveling up the mountain. When he first starts out he is traveling very close to the river. As he continues with his journey, the path in which he travels has the tendency to turn more and more away from the river. In reality this means Pepé is moving further away from life and closer to his inevitable death. These are just a couple of situations in the story </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Flight</span><span class="font2"> that help the reader catch a glimpse of the ending of the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliography</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Adventures in American Literature. 1968. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;&nbsp;World.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Advance Leaner’s Dictionary of International. 1995. New Student Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forster, E. M. 1974. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Aspects of the Novel</span><span class="font2">. Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd. Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyse Fiction</span><span class="font2">. New York: Monarch Press. Knickerbocker,, K.L. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interpreting Literature</span><span class="font2">. USA: Holt, Rinehart, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Winston, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Morner, Kathleen. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">NTC’s Dictionary of Literary Terms</span><span class="font2">. Chicago: NTC Publishing Group</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stanford, Judith. A. 2003. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Responding to Literature; Stories, Poems, Plays, and Essays. Fourth Edition.</span><span class="font2"> New York: The McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tarigan, Henry Guntur.1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-prinsip Dasar Sastra</span><span class="font2">. Bandung:Angkasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1963. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Cox and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wyman Ltd.</span></p>