---
layout: full_article
title: "Language Style Used By The Main Characters In Green Book Movie"
author: "Ni Made Sanimawati, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni, I Made Netra"
categories: stilistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-86292 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/id-86292"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-86292"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4">ISSN: 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Vol. 02, No.01: Oktober 2022, pp-80-88.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">STILISTIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Journal of Indonesian Language and Literature</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>LANGUAGE STYLE USED BY THE MAIN CHARACTERS IN </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">GREEN BOOK</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Made Sanimawati<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni<sup>2</sup>, I Made Netra<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font1">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>*</sup>Surel:</span><a href="mailto:sanimawati@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">sanimawati@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2022.v02.i01.p07"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2022.v02.i01.p07</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Artikel dikirim: 24 Agustus 2022 ; diterima: 20 September 2022</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>LANGUAGE STYLE USED BY THE MAIN CHARACTERS IN GREEN BOOK MOVIE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract. </span><span class="font1">The aims of this study is to find out the types of language style and find out the dominant types of language style used by the main characters in Green Book Movie. The data were taken from the movie entitled Green Book. The data were collected by documentation and note-taking techniques. This study used mixed method for analyzing the data. The data were analyzed using theory of language style proposed by Martin Joos (1967) and the theory of factors influence the used of language style by Holmes (1992) as support theory. In presenting the data, this study applied both formal and informal techniques and methods. The result of the study shows that is found twenty data of language style that used by the main characters and all types of language style were can found in the movie used by the main characters. While each of the characters not used one out of five types of language style. The dominant type of language style is casual style which was used by an actor named Tony Lip. Meanwhile, the factor that influences the use of language style are setting, participant and function</span><span class="font4"><sup>.</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: language style; factor influence; dominant type; characters</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Language is tools of communication. Language has an important thing in humans’ life, because without language they cannot interact each another or with the society and it is difficult for them express their thought. They were communicate by using meaningful noises, gestures, and signals. In an interaction, the use of language allows a person to sustain relationships with other individuals.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Holmes (1992) the varieties of language contain of language, dialects, and styles. Stylistics variation used by the people whereas they talk in in various ways in different social contet. Style is a type of language variety use by people in their speech, and it is undeniable that everyone has their own style to show their individuality. The style of the language used and choosed is depends of context and situation of the utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The study of language style has been done before. It is the anaylisis of language style that found in film. In the article, Tololiu (2017), identify the language style used by all of the characters in the film, including the types of styles language and the factors that affect the character to use the language style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In different study, Dewi (2019) focuses on amylase of the type language style and the dominant type of language style that use in the movie. These studies compare the two different films in the same genre that is romantic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There are study of language style that focused on analyse the style and the characteristics of woman language by Mahardiani (2018). In her study, she identifies and describes the types of woman language style and the characteristics of women’s language were used in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The article written by Dong (2016) that anylaze a poem. In the study there are two types of style used in identify the poem; formal and informal style. The result of this study are found the stylistic analysis I terms of linguistics level of lexicology, grammar, and lexicology, the purpose of this study is to objectively describe, properly analyze, and fairly evaluate the poem's foreground linguistics elements.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Another article written by Rashid (2013) entitled “A Constrasitive Study of Language Style al-Tawkid vetween Malay and Arabic Language”. The study used theory of Lado (1957) which is make result that this study try to make the student easy to understand language style in Arabic language by contrastive study that used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Every person has a different personality and characteristics, it can be seen from the language or the choice of words used. People may change the language they were used based on the the context of situation; participant, topic, setting, and function of the language used. The use of language style can found in every daily conversation or the dialogue of the movie that used by the character. Sometimes, the style used by someone to reply other people in conversation has misunderstanding. Thus, it is interesting to know the reason of the style used and choose. Therefore, this study analyzed the types used by the main characters that contain analyzed of factor influence the used of the style by the main characters and found the dominant types of language style used by the main characters.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data in this is study is spoken and reading data that was taken from the dialogue and subtitle in the movie. The film Green Book is a biographical comedydrama film directed by Peter Farrelly and released in 2018. The plot is based on the true story of Don Shirley, an African American classical and jazz pianist on a tour through the Deep South, and Tony Lip, an Italian American bouncer who serves as Shirley's driver and bodyguard.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study used the documentation and note taking as a technique of collecting data. The method used to analyze the data in this study was mixed method. Mixed method is applied both if the method such as qualitative and quantitative method. According to Sudaryanto (1993:145), there are two types of methods that can be used to present the analysed data which are formal and informal methods. Related to the statement, this study presented the data use several steps; (1) the data that have been obtained it elected based on the classification of language style by Martin Joos (1967), (2) the data explained the screenshot of the movie scene that contains subtitles, (3) the data calculated by counting each type of language style written in table form.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis was done on the theory of language style proposed by Joos (1967) that divided the types of language style into five style; frozen, formal, consultative, intimate, and casual. This study also used the theory of context of situation purposed by Holmes (1992) as the support theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language Style Used by The Main Characters</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Frozen style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1.1- 1(Don Shirley) (01:00:35 – 01:00:40)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don Shirley: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Thank You. Louisville, thank you for your warm hospitality! </span><span class="font2">Audience: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Bravo!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The situation of this speech happened at the opera house in Louisville. After Don Shirley and two of the band members finish the show. All the audience give their applause to them and said “Bravo” as their amazed expression. Don Shirley said thank you for all of audience, and Louisville (the city where the event took place). He also thanked the people of the city for their warm hospitality. Although, there are many things happened not well to Don Shirley as the colour man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The sentence “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Thank You. Louisville, thank you for your warm hospitality” </span><span class="font2">can be concluded that Don Shirley used the frozen style because that speech does in very formal situation and cannot be change. Besides of that, the conversation also lack of participation so the other hearer does not permit to responses. It all is the characteristic of Frozen Style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the words that said by Don Shirley, the factor that influencing him to use the frozen style is the social context or the setting. The setting of the play took a place in opera house and was attended by upper middle class. In that show, Don Shirley and his band put on a very mesmerizing piano performance. Everyone present was</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">very impressed; they gave a very loud applause. Therefore, Don Shirley would like to thank them for their hospitality.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Formal Style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 2.2-1 (Tony Lip)(00:05:27 – 00:05:33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mr. Loscudo: “Here. Take this. Put it in your kick.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Lip: &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“No, No, Thanks. It was a pleasure Mr. Loscudo, really.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The situation of this conversations happened between Tony Lip and Mr. Loscudo as their refuter visitors of the bar that Tony works. Loscudo lost his had that that has been entrusted to the guarding girl, but Tony took it and brings it back to him to have a lot of money tips. When Tony met Loscudo, he pretended to have found Loscudo's hat and had given the guard girl a warning. Mr. Loscudo believed and immediately gave him a tip. But tony acted as if he didn't want a tip and said to Luscudo &quot;No, No, Thanks. It was a pleasure Mr. Loscudo, really!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The language style used by Tony to Loscudo is formal style it can be seen from the sentences “Mr” that indicate the formal style because the structure of the sentences shows less intimacy. In the conversation the speaker also really careful to use the choice of words, pronunciation and Tony used the word “Mr” to call Loscudo. The factor that influenced Tony Lip to use a Formal Style is participants. The participant is Mr. Loscudo that has an upper social class than tony. In that situation, tony works as a bouncer in the bar that is always visited by Mr. Loscudo, Tony comes to him to give him his hat and he gives tony tips as thank for it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 2.1-2 (Don Shirley)(00:14:34 – 00.14:44)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don Shirley : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Mr. Vallelonga. Sorry to keep you waiting”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Lip : “oh”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don Shirley : “I’m Dr. Donal Shirley”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Lip : “Tony”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don Shirley </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">: Yes. Please sit down</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation between Tony lip and Don Shirley happened at Shirley's office. At that time, tony came to his office to join the interview job as Shirley's driver. After filling out some documents, tony went to his office room. Tony was surprizing with Don Shirley collection and his furniture that was really weird. After a while, Don Shirley come and gives a warm welcoming to Tony Lip.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In that conversation, Don Shirley used Formal Style, it can be seen from the sentences “Mr. Vallelonga. Sorry to keep you waiting” and “Yes. Please sit down” it indicated to be Formal Style because he use sentences structure that shows less intimacy, the speakers are very careful to use the choice of words, pronunciation, and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the pronouns he used to call tony Lip as “Mr. Vallelonga”. The factor that influencing the speaker used Formal Style is participant and setting. The participant is Tony Lip. In that situation, Don Shirley tended to speak formally to Tony because it was their first meet. Shirley also wants to show his a good manner character as a musician. The setting of the situation is interviewing Tony Lip that applied a job as Don Shirley driver.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Consultative Style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3.2-1 (Tony Lip) (00:19:28 – 00:19:57)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Lip: Guess he should have known better</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Augie: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hand asked me look into it. I spoke to Podell. Whole thing was, uh over</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a piece of ass, right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony Lip: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The situation of this conversation happened at Lounge bar that usually visited by Tony Lip and his co-worker. Tony went to the Lounge bar after had interviewed from Don Shirley office. While waiting for his drink, the bartender said that Augie (Tony’s boss in Copa Bar) asking about him and he is waiting at the room. With doubt and worried about what his ex-boss will said, he went to the room and he opened the curtains. Augie and his colleagues were surprised by Tony. Augie told Tony about the guy that he has been punched at the night in Copa as one of Charlie the Hand's crew. Hand told him to look into it. He said to Podell, if he did, it would be a waste of time. Tony agrees with him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">These conversations indicate a Consultative style, it can see from his expression and the word choice of Tony to replay Auggie statement. He put a little smile on his face and just said “Yeah” which is suitable with the standard signal of Consultative style. Even though the situation of the conversation is not run in a semi-formal situation, it is a relaxed situation. The factor that influencing the utterance used a Consultative style is function. Tony wants to show his agreement with what Augie said. Beside of that, his expression also shows that Tony does not have comfort while talking with him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 3.1-2 (Don Shirley) (00:29:23 – 00:29:35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don : “and can you see to it that there’s a bottle of Cutty Sark in my room every night?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony : “every night? Well, if you ever need help with that…”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don : “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I won’t</span><span class="font2">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation happened in minute 29, in that time don told tony about what he do when they arrived in the city. Tony should check and make sure everything is well</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">such as the piano should Steinway and there is should a bottle of Cutty Sark in Don Shirley's room every night. Tony offers himself that maybe Don Shirley needs a friend to drink Cutty Sark with. But curtly Don does not want it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Language style used by Don Shirley is Consultative style it can be seen from the sentence “I won’t”, this is the expression of refuse of offer. In the conversation also shown that Tony supplies background information and Don participates by responses short response. The factor that influence the used of consultative style by the character is participant and setting. The participant in this conversation is Tony. In the scene is story of the first day trip of both of them together. As a boss Don explain about what job Tony should done in this project. In their first day, Don feel not so close with Tony and also because of he looks like doesn’t have a great attitudes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intimate Style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4.2-1(Tony Lip) (00:26:01 – 00:26:08)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony : “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dee</span><span class="font2">, put this in a bank today. It’s half my pay”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dolor : “Oh. Here. There’s a couple of sandwiches for you and Dr. Shirley”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation happened when Tony said his goodbyes to Dolores for his trip to The Deep South Tour with Dr. Shirley. The concert company came to Tony's house before Dolores came to bring meals for him, they explained in full detail what jobs Tony had to undertake on this tour. They paid Tony half his salary upfront as a guarantee that he would protect Deep Soth and Don Shirley's tour. Tony then gave the money to Dolores, and told her to put it in the bank so that they could save to pay the house rent.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As seen in conversation above, Tony uses Intimate style, it can be seen from the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Dee” </span><span class="font2">that come from extraction of Darling. The speaker uses that word because he had close relationship with the hearer that is between husband and wife. The conversation also indicates as a private language that the characteristic of Intimate style. The factor that influencing the used of intimate style by Tony is a participant. The participant is Dolores, that a Tony wife. In that conversation Tony wants to say goodbye because he will take a long trip for work. He supposed used Dee, as the extraction of word Darling to express his love feeling to his wife.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Casual Style</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 5.2-1 (Tony Lip) (00:34:07 – 00:34:18)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don : “what are. What are you doing?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony : “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">gotta </span><span class="font2">take a leak, Doc.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don : “Here? Now?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony : “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">you want me to piss my pants</span><span class="font2">?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation between Tony and Don Shirley happened when they were on the road when on the way to the next city. Don was reading the newspaper surprised to hear the blinker sound is on, he ask what tony wants to do. Tony said that he want to piss. Don can't believe what Tony said. He was confused and felt strange how Tony pee on the side of the road could.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation indicates casual style, it can see from the sentences “gotta take a leak, Doc”. Tony does slang to his sentence. Meanwhile in sentence “You want me to piss my pants?” Tony does a ellipsis. Both of them are the characteristic of the casual style. The situation of the conversation runs in relaxes conversation. The factor that influencing the used of casual style in this conversation is participant. The participant is Don Shirley which day by day they were getting close as best friend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 5.1-2 (Don Shirley) (00:46:00 – 00:46:34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Don : “Do not drive, Mr. Vallrlonga. Put it back. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Feel better</span><span class="font2">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tony : “No”</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This conversation takes place in the car; Tony and Don had a quick stop at a convenience store. When he got out of the car, Tony saw a gemstone fell on the ground. Tony took it and put it in his pocket. Unfortunately, this is seen by Oleg. When Tony shopped inside, Oleg told Don about that. After Tony came back Don told him to return the gemstone. Tony did not want to because he did not think it was stealing, because he picked up a gemstone that fell on the ground instead of picking it up from the box. Don kept asking Tony to put it back. Hardly, Tony finally returned the stone. Don asks about Tony, is he feels better? Tony curtly said no. Don put a little smile on his face because he said Tony upset and act like that.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The language style used by Don in this conversation can indicate as Casual style since the words “feel better?” it is ellipsis. The situation of the conversation runs in relaxes time, even though they have been arguing. Both of that indicate as casual style since they are suitable with the characteristic of casual style. The factor that influencing the used of casual style in this conversation is function. Don asking about Tony feeling’s after he told him to put the gemstone that he found. This is the function of participant that is gives the speaker information about his feeling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dominant Types of Language Style Used by The Main</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1. The Dominant Types Used by The Main Characters</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Types of Language Style</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Frequency</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Don Shirley</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Tony Lip</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Frozen Style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Formal Style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Consultative Style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Intimate Style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Casual Style</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Total</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">20</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The tables above shows that the frequency types of language style in total found 20 data. From 20 data, there are 14 data found in used of language style by Tony Lip and 6 data found in used by Don Shirley. In Tony Lip data, he never used frozen style. The lowest style he used is formal style that only found 1 from the scene. There are 2 data found in consultative style used by Tony, 2 intimates style, and the highest frequency of language style used is intimate style that found in 14 data. Meanwhile, Don Shirley only has 2 data for casual style, 2 data formal style and 1 data for consultative and frozen style. In Don Shirley utterance that is not found for intimate used.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the findings, there all of types of language style can be found in Green Book Movie. Meanwhile, each of character only used 4 types of language style. The data found in this study is 20 data. There is 6 data from Don Shirley; 2 casual style, 2 formal style, 1 consultative style, 1 frozen style and there is no intimate style found on his utterances. Whereas, the data was found for Tony Lip is 14 data; 1 formal style, 2 consultative style, 2 intimate style, 9 casual style and there is no frozen style found in his utterances. The factor that influence or the cause the use of language style by the main characters are consists of four factor. They are participant, setting, function and topic.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DAFTAR PUSTAKA</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Abrams, M. H., &amp;&nbsp;Harpham, G. G. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Glossary of Literary Terms (9<sup>th</sup> edition.</span><span class="font2">). USA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ananda, R., &amp;&nbsp;Fadhli, M. 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Statistik Pendidikan (Teori dan Praktik Dalam</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pendidikan).</span><span class="font2"> Medan: Widya Puspita.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dewi, N. M. A. J. 2019. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style Used in Romantic Movie</span><span class="font2">. Faculty of Arts, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dong, B. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Formality of the style, Maturity of The Artist – Stylistic Analysis of A Poem in Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory Practice in Language Studies, 6(1), 97-101.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hall, D. 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">To Read Literature Fiction, Poetry, Dream</span><span class="font2">. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Wiston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Culture, and Communication.</span><span class="font2"> United States of America: Prentice-Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jendra, I. 2010. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics: The Study of Societies’ Languages</span><span class="font2">. Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Joos, M. 1967. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Five Clocks.</span><span class="font2"> Harcourt Brace and World Inc. New York Mahardiani, P.U. 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Language Style of Woman in Pitch Perfect Movie</span><span class="font2">. Journal Humanis, Udayana.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mayerhoff, M. 2006. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Routledge, Oxon, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MovieGan.(2018). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Nonton Green &nbsp;Book</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://5.182.210.145/movies/green-"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://5.182.210.145/movies/green-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">book-2018/</span><span class="font2">, Accessed on October 25<sup>th</sup> 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pickering, J. H., &amp;&nbsp;Jeffry D. H. 1962. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Concise Companion to Literature</span><span class="font2">. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>AUTHOR PROFILE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Made Sanimawati </span><span class="font2">is a student of English Literature Program at University of Udayana batch 2018. In 2018, she participated in many committees, work on PKM twice that organized by faculties and study programs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Ketut Sri Rahayuni </span><span class="font2">is a lecturer at the English Department, Faculty of Humanities Udayana University. She was graduated from Udayana University for bachelor degree and postgraduate degree. She is the secretary of BIPAS Program in Faculty of Humanities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Made Netra </span><span class="font2">is a lecturer at English Department Faculty of Humanities Udayana University. He was graduated from Udayana University for bachelor degree, postgraduate and doctor of linguistics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">88</span></p>