---
layout: full_article
title: "Positive Politeness Strategies in “Ratatouille”"
author: "Ida Ayu Komang Irmila Riyasa Puteri, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama, I Made Winaya"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-98519 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-98519"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-98519"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 6 No. 2, September 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2022.v06.i02.p05"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2022.v06.i02.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">63</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Positive Politeness Strategies in “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ratatouille</span><span class="font4">”</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Ida Ayu Komang Irmila Riyasa Puteri<sup>1</sup>, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama<sup>2</sup>, I Made Winaya<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font0">]</span><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Email: </span><a href="mailto:milariyasa99@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">milariyasa99@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font0">]</span><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Email: </span><a href="mailto:ngrpart77@yahoo.com"><span class="font2">ngrpart77@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">[</span><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup></span><span class="font0">]</span><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Email: </span><a href="mailto:winayamade1@gmail.com"><span class="font2">winayamade1@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract: </span><span class="font2">This study entitled Positive Politeness Strategies in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> is interesting to be discussed as an object analysis due to the application of positive politeness strategies used in the social interaction. The aims were to analyze positive politeness strategies used by the characters, and to describe the factors influencing the characters chose positive politeness strategies. The data were taken from the script of the movie. The data were collected through documentation method by note-taking technique. The utterances which were used as the data were the utterances of the conversation between the characters which were applied the positive politeness strategies. Furthermore, the theory of politeness by Brown and Levinson (1987) used to analyze the positive politeness strategies and the factors influencing the choice of positive politeness strategies in the conversation between the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie. Based on the theory mentioned above, there were fourteen strategies of positive politeness strategies were found among the characters’ dialogue in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie. Moreover, there were two factors influencing the choice of positive politeness strategies, namely the payoffs and the relevant circumstances: sociological variables.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font2">politeness, politeness strategies, positive politeness strategies, factors, movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Language is a system used for communication in social life. Language is the speech-sounds combined into words by the expressed ideas. Language makes human being more intimate with their communicating partner for sharing certain things.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">However</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">,</span><span class="font2"> people always face many differences in society such as social status, age, gender, and ethnicity. To convey their messages, thoughts, and feelings people need to adjust and maintain their language by the terms of politeness. Politeness is an important perspective in human life that associated with norms of social behavior, such as courtesy,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">rapport, deference and distance. It concerns all of the state of mind that impacts individuals in their life. Now and then, individuals do not think about it, while it could be a key to create a great discussion and construct a harmonious communication with other individuals.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech (2014:3) clarifies politeness as a form of communicative behavior found very generally in human languages and among human cultures; indeed, it has been claimed as a universal phenomenon of human society. Politeness is not obligatory. People can be non-polite: they normally will not behave politely unless there is a reason to be polite (even if</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the reason is something vague, such as following convention).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown and Levinson (1987:101) confirm that positive politeness is redress directed to the addressee's positive face, his perennial desire that his wants (or the actions/acquisitions/values resulting from them) should be thought of as desirable. Brown and Levinson divide those positive politeness into fifteen positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study proposed to produce the appropriate politeness strategy considering the phenomena above, in order to find out how to be a respectful and polite person towards other people. Therefore, this study focused on finding the positive politeness strategy used by the character in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2">. Among to the strategies introduced by Brown &amp;&nbsp;Levinson (1987), this study was particularly investigated only those of positive politeness strategies which has the function to safe the hearer’s face, to give importance to the hearers’ face, to minimize the potential threat of an FTA, and to make the relationship friendly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therefore, this study was intended to see what strategies of positive politeness used by the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie and what factors influencing the characters in choosing positive politeness strategies. Thus, can be concluded that the title of this study is Positive Politeness Strategies in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Problems of the Study</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In following, it can be formulated the problems of the study to analyze:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What types of positive politeness strategies are used by the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What factors &nbsp;&nbsp;influence the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">characters to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;choose those</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">strategies?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Aims of the Study</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the problems presented above, so the aims can be resulted. The aims of the study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To identify the types of positive politeness strategies used by the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To explain the factors influencing the characters to choose those strategies.</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>II.RESEACH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In this chapter, it would be presented the research methodology. It would be covered with the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and the last one is a method and technique of presenting data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The main data in this study were taken from the script of the movie entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2">. Politeness phenomena do not as it were happened in everyday conversations, but moreover in the dialogues found in a motion picture. Movies, similar to literature, show activities, pictures and words duplicating life. The story was very interesting. The movie was chosen because it contained a lot of conversation used by the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie indicating politeness, especially positive politeness. It can be concluded that a motion picture was chosen as the object of this research since it could be a medium to appear the social interaction of creatures’ genuine lives. Hence, motion picture empowers individuals to observe how languages are employed. In this case, a motion picture would be chosen as the information source in this study. It had a great storyline that told about how a rat named Remy dreams of becoming a great French chef. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> is an animationcomedy movie from America produced by Pixar and released by Walt Disney Pictures in 2007. The movie won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and was nominated for four more, including Best Original Screenplay and voted as one of the 100 greatest motion pictures of the 21<sup>st </sup>century. The movie was a box office success and grossed $620.7 million.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Data were collected through documentation method by note-taking technique. Firstly, watching and listening every conversation which clearly expressed by the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie repeatedly. Second, reading and note-taking all the conversation among characters which contained positive politeness strategies. After that, classified or categorized the data into fifteen strategies of positive politeness strategies based on the theory proposed Brown and Levinson (1987). Finally, the analysis was being analyzed based on the data that had been found.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Method and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The data were analyzed based on the classification of problems in this study. The qualitative method was applied in this data analysis. The collected data in this study were analyzed descriptively. The procedures of data analysis to describe the positive politeness strategies occurred in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font2"> as follows: first, the data were classified into positive politeness strategies based on the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Second, explanation about the data was given. Third, describing the factors that influence the characters in choosing positive politeness strategies based on the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Fourth, made a conclusion in order to obtain the aims of this research based on the result of data that had been analyzed.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The analysis was done in order to determine the use of positive politeness strategies, and the factors that influence the use of positive politeness in the movie. In presenting analysis, the data were analyzed by descriptive method. First, the data were categorized into positive politeness strategies based on the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Second, the dialogues in the movie were shown orderly. Third, the words or sentences being analyzed were typed in bold. Fourth, the data from each problem were presented descriptively in the interpretation and analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Analysis of Positive Politeness Strategies in “Ratatouille”</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter presents the results of the research. The section presents and describes the examined data from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Ratatouille”</span><span class="font2"> movie. The data found are related to the positive politeness strategies and what factors influencing the choice of positive politeness strategies. This chapter provides an explanation of the analysis based on the theory proposed by Brown and Levinson (1987). Besides, this section also presents some examples to support the explanations of positive politeness strategies and what factors influencing the choice of positive politeness strategies in “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ratatouille</span><span class="font2">” movie. There are some examples for the analysis to make the explanations clear.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 1: Notice, Attend to H (his</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">interest, wants, needs, goods)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Remy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">: Flour, eggs, bean… Oh lemon.</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">sugar, vanilla</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Small twist of</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Emile</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Whoa, you</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">can smell all</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">that? You</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">have</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">a gift.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:02:22)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above took place at the pile of food trash. The participants in this conversation were Remy and Emile. Before that, Remy was smelling and guessing correctly all the ingredients of leftover cake in the trash, which all the rodents were trying to gather. Emile noticed Remy‘s condition by asking him about his gift as a rat who could smell correctly all the ingredients in some leftover food in the pile of food trash. In this case, by Emile’s utterance </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Whoa, you can smell all that?” </span><span class="font2">showed the manner of maintaining and satisfying Remy‘s wants or interests. Moreover, Remy would feel good and happy because he knew that his brother Emile noticed and believed if a rodent like him was the one and only who had a highly developed sense of tasting and smelling leftover food which still worth to eat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows that Emile employed positive politeness strategy 1, namely notices, attends to the hearer (his interest, wants, needs, goods). Emile understood with Remy’s feeling that he needed someone to entertain him. It could be seen from his utterance that he noticed Remy’s super power at smelling food. Thus, Remy’s positive face was fulfilled. Emile fulfilled of Remy interests by the compliment. Emile directly by saying “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Whoa, you can smell all that? You have a gift.” </span><span class="font2">It did not matter since they had a close relationship and the situation was informal.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 2: Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">François : Easy to cook. Easy to eat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gusteau makes Chinese food. Chine-easy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Skinner : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Excellent work</span><span class="font2">, François, as usual. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:41:53)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">François : It’s good. Isn’t it?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data 2</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In this conversation, François and Skinner wanted to make new frozen food innovation (Chinese food). Then, Skinner thought that this innovation was good. Therefore, Skinner was curious about the next innovation of his frozen food. Then, François revealed his presentation about Skinner’s next frozen food. Skinner was surprised and responded in an exaggerated way by saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“Excellent work, François…” </span><span class="font2">He exaggerated his statement because he wanted to show his appreciation to François in having a good work. Thus, François’s positive face had been saved by Skinner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From those explanations above, it could be concluded that the speaker, Skinner, applied the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">positive politeness strategy, namely the strategy 2, namely exaggerates (his approval) with the hearer. In this case, Skinner understood François’s needs and fulfilled his wants by giving him an exaggerated approval.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 3: Intensity Interest to H</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Remy : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You gotta taste this. This is… It’s got this kind of … It’s burny, melty, it’s not really a smoke taste. It’s a certain, it’s kind of like a… It’s got, like, this “baa-boom, zap” kind of taste. Don’t you think? What would you call that flavor? (00:06:57)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Emile : &nbsp;&nbsp;Lighting-y?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data 3</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows that Remy employed one kind of positive politeness strategy. Those, strategy 3, namely intensify interest to hearer. Remy explained his idea about burning cheese to Emile happily. Emile was not well experience in smelling food therefore he was interested with Remy’s idea. He thought that it was impossible for him to smell the burning cheese as a precious cheese as Remy did. Emile perceived Remy’s opinions slowly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Remy employed strategy 3 in order to claim common ground with Emile. He delivered this strategy by explaining his opinions briefly. It was completed with the highly developed sense of Remy, therefore Emile would be interested and involved in the discussion deeply. It showed that Remy shared some of his wants. He intensified the interest of his own contribution to the conversation by making good story and giving brief explanation. He tried to convince Emile that the burning cheese smelled very good. Thus, Emile would listen to his explanation. He would be interested and involved in the middle of the event being discussed</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 4: Use In-Group Identity Markers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Emile : Wait, wait, wait you read?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Remy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Well, not excessively.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Emile &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Oh, man! </span><span class="font2">Does Dad know?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:0 :05)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows that Emile employed positive politeness strategy 4, namely using</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">in-group identity marker. Emile showed his attention to Remy’s condition if rodent like Remy could read a book. His utterance showed that he really shocked about Remy. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“man” </span><span class="font2">which was used to address Remy indicated that Emile implicitly claimed the common ground with Remy. It was used to claim the group solidarity. Thus, Emile had saved Remy’s positive face to be appreciated. Using address form could minimize Remy’s positive face because shows solidarity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the explanations above, it could be concluded that the speaker, Emile, applied the positive politeness namely the strategy 4, using in-group identity marker. In this case, Emile wanted to give sympathy to Remy. He wanted to safe Remy’s positive face by using group identity marker. He addressed Remy with </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“man”</span><span class="font2">. Thus, the hearer’s positive wants had been fulfilled and satisfied because the potential threat of an FTA was minimized.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategy 5: Seek Agreement (to find and try to approval by the opponent said)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Colette : This is no time to experiment. The customer are waiting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Linguini : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You’re right. </span><span class="font2">I should listen to you. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:50:01)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Data 5</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows that Linguini employed positive politeness strategy 5, namely seeks agreement, safe topics. Colette thought that was not the perfect time to do experiments in making food for the customer because they were waiting overlong. Colette was the only female chef at Gusteau’s restaurant, Colette had a responsibility to help Linguini to make some food. Linguini took a notice and agree to what Colette’s said.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the explanation above, Linguini showed solidarity by indicating to Colette that they shared some specific wants. He had safe Colette’s positive face by saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“You’re right. I should listen to you.” </span><span class="font2">He highly respected Colette’s statement. Linguini satisfied Colette’s desire to be right in the conversation by saying the word </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“You’re right.” </span><span class="font2">In order to minimize the potential threat of an FTA to Colette’s utterances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Factors Influencing the Choice of Positive Politeness</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Payoffs</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Gusteau &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;Who is next in command?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Remy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;The sous chef. There The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">sous is responsible for the kitchen when the chef’s not around. Saucier, in charge sauces. Very important. Chef de partie, demi chef de partie, both important. Commis, commis, they’re cooks. Very important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Gusteau : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You’re a clever rat. </span><span class="font2">Now, who is that? </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:20:14)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Data 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above used positive politeness strategy which is influenced by the payoffs factor. Gusteau could avoid or minimize the debt of FTA because he gave Remy a compliment by saying “</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You’re a clever rat.” </span><span class="font2">Gusteau wanted to satisfy Remy’s needs (to be notice). Thus, Remy positive face was not threatened by the speaker because it can be seen in their mutual shares. He minimized the FTA by assuring Remy that he considers himself to be of the same kind that he liked Remy and wanted to fulfill Remy’s wants.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Distance</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Anton : Very well, since you’re all out of perspective and no one else seems to have it in this bloody town, I’ll make you a deal. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You provide the food. I’ll provide the perspective. </span><span class="font2">Which would go nicely with a bottle of Cheval Blanc 1947. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(01:26:21)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mustafa : I’m afraid I… Mmm… Your dinner selection?</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Data 2</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above shows that Anton employed positive politeness strategy 14, namely assume or assert reciprocity which is influenced by the circumstance factor namely the social distance. There was a social distance between Anton and Mustafa. They have not known each other well, consequently their relationship was not close. Anton was a restaurant critic and Mustafa was a waiter. Thus, the reason Anton as the speaker used positive politeness strategy to the hearer, Mustafa.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Colette : This is no time to experiment. The customer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">are waiting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Linguini : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You’re right. </span><span class="font2">I should listen to you. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:50:01)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>Data 3</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Data 3 shows the use of positive politeness strategy 5, namely seeks agreement, safe topics. The conversation was influenced by the circumstance namely the power rating, the power rating between Linguini and Colette was different. Colette was the senior chef and Linguini was the new chef. Linguini was seeking agreement by saying </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">“You’re right.” </span><span class="font2">The power that Linguini had, made him to be more polite to Colette and it became the factor he used positive politeness strategy in his utterance. Therefore, their relationship even friendly and he could minimized the conflict between them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark42"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark43"></a>d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ranking of Imposition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Git : Is there a problem over here?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Remy : </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No, there is not. </span><span class="font2">Wait here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">(01:11:22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Data 4 shows the use of positive politeness strategy 6, namely avoid disagreement, white lies. Git was Emile’s rat friends and Remy was Emile’s younger brother. The ranking of imposition was influenced the employment of this strategy because the conversation happened in Remy’s working place and Remy felt annoyed with Git because he showed up again to ask some food for his other neglected rodent friends. Hence, the ranking of imposition influenced Remy to be less polite to Git as his brother’s friend.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark44"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark45"></a>IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the data that have been analyzed and presented in the previous chapter, it can be concluded that there were fourteen strategies of positive politeness strategies found from the 28 data. Those strategies are strategy 1 namely notice, attend to the hearer (his interests, wants, needs, goods); strategy 2 namely exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with the hearer); strategy 3 namely intensifies interest to the hearer; strategy 4 namely use in-group identity marker; strategy 5 namely seek agreement; strategy 6 namely avoid disagreement; strategy 7 namely presuppose / raise / assert common ground; strategy 9 namely asserts or presupposes the speaker’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">knowledge and concern for the hearer’s wants; strategy 10 namely offers/promise; strategy 11 namely be optimistic; strategy 12 namely includes both the speaker and the hearer in the activity; strategy 13 namely give (or ask for) reasons; strategy 14 namely assumes or asserts reciprocity; 15 namely and give gifts to the hearer (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In accordance with the second problem, there were two factors influencing the characters use positive politeness strategies, those are the payoffs and relevant circumstances. The first factor is payoffs: the speaker can minimize the FTA by assuring the hearer that the speaker considers himself to be of the same kind, that he likes the hearer and wants to fulfil the hearer wants. The second factor is relevant circumstances which include social distance (D), power rating (P) and the ranking of imposition (R).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pradnyani, et al. (2017). Positive Politeness Strategies in Animation Movie “Home” Directed by Tim Johnson</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud</span><span class="font2">, 19 (1), 198205.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Septyaningsih, Ani. (2007). Analysis of Positive Politeness Strategy in the Film Entitled “in good company” (a pragmatics study)</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">Surakarta: Sebelas Maret University</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Watts, Richard J. (2003). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, G. (199 6). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. London: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">V. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;REFERENCES</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Archia, Jeihan Jade. (2014). A Pragmatic Analysis of Positive Politeness Strategies as Reflected by the Characters in Carnage Movie. Yogyakarta: Yogyakarta State University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, P. &amp;&nbsp;Levinson, S. (1987). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Eelen, Gino. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Critique of Politeness Theories: Volume 1</span><span class="font2">. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. (2013). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men and Politeness</span><span class="font2">. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kousar, Shazia. (2015). Politeness Orientation in Social Hierarchies in Urdu</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font2"> Pakistan: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Society, Culture and Language</span><span class="font2">, 86-96</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kurniawan, Nurdy. (2015). An Analysis of Positive and Negative Politeness Strategies in an Interview of Mark Rutte on Metro TV’s Face 2 Face with Desi Anwar Program</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font2">Jakarta: Syarif Hidayahtullah State Islamic University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G. (2014). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Pragmatics of Politeness</span><span class="font2">. United States of America: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Miller, J. (2001). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Speech Acts in Literature</span><span class="font2">. Stanford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mu, Yuting. (2015). The Application of Politeness Strategies in English and Chinese Movie Reviews. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of English Linguistics</span><span class="font2">, 5 (6), 105-114.</span></p>