---
layout: full_article
title: "Modality in the Novel of The Lord of The Rings and its  Translations in Indonesian Language"
author: "Komang Adi Mahendra"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84074 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-84074"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84074"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p05"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Modality in the Novel of </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">The Lord of The Rings</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> and its Translations in Indonesian Language</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Komang Adi Maendra</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar, Bali </span><span class="font1">e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:adi.maendra@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">adi.maendra@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This study aims to identify the meanings and techniques used in translating the modality from SL (English) to TL (Bahasa) in the novel of The Lord of The Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien. The data in this study were taken from the original novel of The Lord of The Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien in English version and its translation in Indonesian language. The theories applied to analyse the data are the types of modality proposed by Kreidler (1998) and the translation procedures proposed by Newmark (1988). The data in this study were analyzed using qualitative descriptive approach to find out the result of the problems. The observation method was chosen to apply in this study by reading the SL and TL novel carefully to get the general idea of the content of the story and then observing closely the data consist of modality. The data in this study were presented descriptively used informal method. It meant the data would be presented by giving some descriptions to convey the meanings and translations of the modality. The results are the modality expressed some meanings and used some translation procedures. Modal must expressed unavoidable obligation and strong advice or orders to oneself, it used modulation procedure. Modal should expressed criticism and giving an opinion about something, it used reduction and couplets procedure. Modal have to expressed idea of obligation and used modulation procedure. Modal ought to expressed desirability and used modulation procedure. Modal can expressed ability and giving permission, it used modulation and shift procedure. Modal could expressed ability and used reduction and expansion procedure. Modal may expressed permission and used couplets procedure. Modal might expressed permission and possibility, it used reduction and literal translation procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Auxiliary Verb; Modality; Novel; Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font3">--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi makna dan teknik yang digunakan dalam menerjemahkan modality dari SL (Inggris) ke TL (Bahasa) dalam novel The Lord of The Rings karya J. R. R. Tolkien. Data dalam penelitian ini diambil dari novel The Lord of The Rings karya J. R. R. Tolkien dalam versi bahasa Inggris dan terjemahannya dalam bahasa Indonesia. Teori yang digunakan untuk menganalisa data adalah jenis-jenis modality yang dikemukakan oleh Kreidler (1998) dan prosedur penerjemahan yang dikemukakan oleh Newmark (1988). Data dalam penelitian ini dianalisa dengan menggunakan pendekatan deskriptif kualitatif untuk mengetahui hasil permasalahannya. Metode observasi dipilih untuk diterapkan dalam penelitian ini dengan membaca novel asli dan terjemahannya secara cermat untuk mendapatkan materi utama tentang isi cerita dan kemudian mengamati data-data tentang modality tersebut dengan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">seksama. Data dalam penelitian ini disajikan secara deskriptif dengan menggunakan metode informal. Artinya, data akan disajikan dengan menggunakan beberapa deskripsi untuk menyampaikan makna dan terjemahan modality tersebut. Hasilnya adalah modality mengungkapkan beberapa makna dan menggunakan beberapa prosedur penerjemahan. Modal must menyatakan kewajiban yang tidak dapat dihindari dan nasihat atau perintah yang kuat kepada diri sendiri, modal must diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur modulation. Modal should menyatakan kritik dan memberikan pendapat tentang sesuatu, modal should diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur reduction dan couplets. Modal have to mengungkapkan gagasan tentang kewajiban dan diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur modulation. Modal ought to menyatakan keinginan dan diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur modulation. Modal can menyatakan kemampuan dan memberikan izin, modal can diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur modulation dan shift. Modal could menyatakan kemampuan dan diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur reduction dan ekspansion. Modal may menyatakan izin dan diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur couplets. Modal might menyatakan izin dan kemungkinan, modal might diterjemahkan menggunakan prosedur reduction dan terjemahan literal</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kata Kerja Bantu; Modality; Novel; Terjemahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Language is very important for connecting people around the world. Language can be used as the means to convey the meaning of the message from some sentences on the text or conversation among one person to another. The message can be interpreted into many different meanings according to the form of sentences and the person you are talking with. The meanings of a language cannot be translated freely because it can make us produce bad communication with everybody. Everybody has their basic vocabulary and they know how to combine the words to make the sentence meaning. To understand the different meaning of the sentences and conversations, we have to be a good translator for getting the true meaning from the message. To be a good translator we have to learn the process of translation itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The translation is a process in which the concept of meaning in one language is transferred to another language. It plays an important role as there are many translation products in everyday life. As translation is a dual act of communicating; then it presupposes the existence of not a single language but at least two different languages, the source language (SL) and the target language (TL) and it requires a sophisticated knowledge of both the source language and the target language. The purpose of translation is to transfer the concept of meaning of the SL into the TL text which is done by going from the form of the SL to the form of the TL byways of semantic structure. The concept of meaning is generally expressed in the form of sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A sentence is a group of words that expresses the statement and question or command from everybody. A verb and a subject are usually had by a sentence and maybe a simple sentence has consisted of just one clause or a complex sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The complex sentence maybe consisted of two or more clauses. (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1990: 231) explains that sentences are divided into four major types of syntactic. They are declaratives, interrogatives, imperatives, and exclamations. Declaratives are sentences that the verb is present and precedes by a subject. Statements are primarily associated with the sentences. Interrogatives are generally associated with a discourse function of questions that are used to get information. Imperatives are sentences that normally have not grammatical subject because the base form is a verb. A directive is primarily their discourse function because these sentences aim to instruct someone to do something. And exclamations are sentences that use the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">what</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">how</span><span class="font3"> in their initial phrases. Exclamations are primarily expressed in these sentences that show the extent to which the speaker is impressed by something. The verb in a sentence is usually helped by an auxiliary verb to make its meaning clear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">An auxiliary verb is a verb that helps another verb for making a complete structural sentence. The modal verb cannot stand alone without another verb or we know it as a full verb in a sentence. There are many modals in English such as can, could, may, might, must, will, would, shall, should, ought to, have to, etc. All the modals above can be found in some literary works such as the novel.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word novel comes from the Italian which is called Novella, it means the new staff that small. The novel has developed in some great countries such as America and England. The novel naturally expanded in the area from other forms of narrative non-fiction such as letters, biographies, and history. The novel is not only based on the data nonfiction, the author of novel can replace the data according to the desired imagination. Modality in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the novel have similar functions with the modality found in the students writing or corpus data, their functions are to help another verb for making a complete structural sentence.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were analyzed using qualitative descriptive approach to find out the result of the problems. The observation method was chosen to apply in this study by reading the SL and TL novel carefully to get the general idea of the content of the story and then observing closely the data consist of modality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were taken from the original novel of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Lord of The Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien</span><span class="font3"> in English version and its translation in Indonesian language. These novels were chosen as data source because it is one of the famous novels around the world and it is also an interesting novel to be analysed. There are many kinds of modality in this novel which fulfil the need for the data in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Documentary method was applied in collecting the data in this study. The relevant data in each chapter from the novel were documented then they were sorted out and identified based on its classifications. The data were conducted by doing these following steps: First, collect the data from both novels. Second, find out the relevant data based on the topic study by reading and understanding the idea. Third, read the data several times in order to be understood and get the meaning to identify and classify the modality. The observation method was applied in this study by reading the SL and TL novel carefully to get the general idea of the content of the story and then observing closely the data consist of modality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data analysis is a process of collecting, modelling, and transforming the data with the goal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of highlighting the useful information, suggesting the conclusion, and supporting to make the decision. First, the data were identified. Second, the data were classified into some groups to find the meaning easier. Third, the data were analyzed descriptively and quantitatively based on the main theory of Kreidler (1998) and the supporting theory of Newmark (1988).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data in this study were presented descriptively used informal method. It meant the data would be presented by giving some descriptions to convey the meanings and translations of the modality found the novel of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Lord of The Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This analysis aims to identify the meanings and techniques used in translating the modality from SL (English) to TL (Bahasa) in the novel of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Lord of The Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">a. Necessity and Obligation</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Must</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-1) SL; “In an envelope, if you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> know,” said Bilbo impatiently, “there on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!” he hesitated. “Isn’t that odd now?” he said softly to himself. “Yet after all, why not? Why shouldn’t it stay there?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Di dalam amplop, kalau kau </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mau</span><span class="font3"> tahu,” kata Bilbo tak sabar, “di sana, di atas perapian. Oh tidak! Ada di sini, di saku bajuku!” ia ragu. “Bukankah aneh rasanya sekarang?” kata Bilbo perlahan kepada dirinya sendiri. “Ya, bagaimanapun, kenapa tidak? Kenapa cincin ini tidak tetap di sini saja?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“In an envelope, if you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> know.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the unavoidable obligation. It is something unavoidable from the above conversation quote. Where the ring is in an envelope and it might be somewhere, if you want to know about the ring you must wait the speaker find it then give it to you.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “In an envelope, if you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must </span><span class="font3">know.” which is translated into “Di dalam amplop, kalau kau </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mau</span><span class="font3"> tahu.” uses the modulation procedure. It shows the translator used different perspective in conveying the message by changing the point of view. The word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3">” has closest meaning to the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus</span><span class="font3">”, “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mesti</span><span class="font3">”, and “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pasti</span><span class="font3">” rather than “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mau</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">( 3-2) SL; “Very well,” said Bilbo, “it goes to Frodo with all the rest.” He drew a deep breath. “And now I really </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> be starting, or somebody else will catch me. I have said goodbye, and I couldn’t bear to do it all over again.” He picked up his bag and moved to the door.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Baiklah,” kata Bilbo, “cincin akan beralih pada Frodo dengan semua barang lain.” Ia menarik napas panjang. “Dan sekarang aku benar-benar </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus</span><span class="font3"> pergi, atau akan ada yang memergoki aku. Aku sudah mengucapkan selamat tinggal, dan aku tidak tahan kalau harus mengulanginya lagi.” Ia mengangkat tasnya dan beranjak ke pintu.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“And now I really </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> be starting, or somebody else will catch me.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the strong advice or orders to oneself. The advice or order is Bilbo must leave immediately from that place because somebody else will see him if he stays too long.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “And now I really </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> be starting, or somebody else will catch me.” which is translated into “Dan sekarang aku benar-benar </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus</span><span class="font3"> pergi, atau akan ada yang memergoki aku.” uses the modulation procedure where the verb phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must be starting</span><span class="font3">” and noun phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">somebody else</span><span class="font3">” in the SL are translated into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus pergi</span><span class="font3">” and “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ada</span><span class="font3">” to the TL. It shows the translator used different perspective in conveying the message by changing the point of view. The verb phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">must be starting</span><span class="font3">” and noun phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">somebody else</span><span class="font3">” have closest meaning to “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus mulai</span><span class="font3">” and “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">orang lain</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Should</span></h2></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-3) SL; “Baggins is his name, but he’s more than half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Memang nama belakangnya Baggins, tapi dia lebih dari separuh Brandybuck, kata orang. Aku tak mengerti kenapa seorang Baggins dari Hobbiton mencari istri jauh-jauh di Buckland, yang penduduknya aneh-aneh.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the criticism. It criticizes the condition why any Baggins of Hobbiton seek for a wife from Buckland, whereas the folks there are so queer.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.” which is translated into “Aku tak</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">mengerti kenapa seorang Baggins dari Hobbiton mencari istri jauh-jauh di Buckland, yang penduduknya aneh-aneh.” Uses reduction procedure where the verb phrase “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should go</span><span class="font3">”, article “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">a</span><span class="font3">”, and word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">there</span><span class="font3">” in the SL are omitted to the TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">( 3-4) SL; I don’t know half of you half as well as I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> like, and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather difficult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them were trying to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL; Sebagian dari kalian tidak aku kenal sebaik yang kuinginkan, dan aku menyukai kurang dari separuh dari kalian sebesar separuh dari yang pantas kalian peroleh. Ini agak tak terduga dan rumit kedengarannya. Ada bunyi tepuk tangan di sana-sini, tapi kebanyakan dari mereka berusaha memikirkan ucapan Bilbo tadi, dan mereka-reka apakah itu suatu pujian.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I don’t know half of you half as well as I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> like, and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses giving an opinion about something. The opinion is he did not know well half of you.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “I don’t know half of you half as well as I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> like, and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve.” which is translated into “Sebagian dari kalian tidak aku kenal sebaik yang kuinginkan, dan aku menyukai kurang dari separuh dari kalian sebesar separuh dari yang pantas kalian peroleh.” uses the couplets procedure where two different procedures combined to the TL. Modulation procedure is applied to change from active into passive form in “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I don’t</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">know half of you</span><span class="font3">” in the SL into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Sebagian dari kalian tidak aku kenal</span><span class="font3">” to the TL, and using different perspective in conveying the message “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">as well as</span><span class="font3">” into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sebesar</span><span class="font3">” but actually it has closest meaning to “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sebaik</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa. Reduction procedure is applied to omit the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3">” to the TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>iii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Have to</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-5) SL; “I did mean to but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">have had to</span><span class="font3"> change my mind. I may be away for a good while; but I’ll come and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan’t often be visiting the Shire openly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Memang sebenarnya maksudku begitu, tapi aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa</span><span class="font3"> mengubah niatku. Mungkin aku akan pergi cukup lama; tapi aku akan datang dan menemuimu lagi, sesegera mungkin. Tunggulah aku! Aku akan menyelinap diam-diam. Aku tidak akan sering-sering lagi berkunjung secara terbuka ke Shire. Tampaknya aku sudah mulai tidak disukai. Katanya aku mengganggu dan merusak kedamaian. Bahkan beberapa orang menuduhku mendorong Bilbo pergi, atau lebih buruk dari itu. Kalau mau tahu, katanya ada persekongkolan antara kau dan aku untuk memperoleh harta Bilbo.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“I did mean to but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">have had to</span><span class="font3"> change my mind.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">have had to</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the idea of obligation. Gandalf has to change his plan. He should not</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">often visit the Shire again because the people there did not like him anymore and have said that he is a nuisance and a disturber of the peace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “I did mean to but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">have had to</span><span class="font3"> change my mind.” which is translated into “Memang sebenarnya maksudku begitu, tapi aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa</span><span class="font3"> mengubah niatku.” uses modulation procedure to change the point of view in the modal “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">have had to</span><span class="font3">” into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa</span><span class="font3">” where it has the closest meaning to “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa. It shows the translator used different perspective in conveying the message.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-6) SL; “No, but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">had to</span><span class="font3"> badger you,” said Gandalf. “I wanted the truth. It was important. Magic rings are well, magical; and they are rare and curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think you have had it quite long enough. You won’t need it any more. Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Tidak, tapi aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa </span><span class="font3">mendesakmu,” kata Gandalf. “Aku ingin kebenarannya. Itu penting. Cincin ajaib memang... yah, ajaib; dan mereka langka dan aneh. Secara profesional aku tertarik pada cincinmu, boleh dikatakan begitu; dan aku masih tertarik. Aku ingin tahu di mana cincin itu, kalau kau mengembara lagi. Juga menurutku</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">kau sudah memilikinya cukup lama. Kau tidak membutuhkannya lagi, Bilbo, kecuali kalau aku salah.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“No, but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">had to</span><span class="font3"> badger you,” said Gandalf. “I wanted the truth. It was important.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">had to</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the idea of obligation. Gandalf has to urge Bilbo to tell him about Bilbo’ s ring powers. Gandalf wants the truth because he was very interested in the ring.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “No, but I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">had to </span><span class="font3">badger you,” said Gandalf. “I wanted the truth. It was important.” which is translated into “Tidak, tapi aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa</span><span class="font3"> mendesakmu,” kata Gandalf. “Aku ingin kebenarannya. Itu penting.” uses modulation procedure to change the point of view in the modal “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">had to</span><span class="font3">” into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">terpaksa</span><span class="font3">” where it has the closest meaning to “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">harus</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa. It shows the translator used different perspective in &nbsp;&nbsp;conveying &nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">message.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>iv. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings &nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;Techniques in</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ought to</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-7) SL; “He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he offered to &nbsp;once, just before the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">party. But he does not really want to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before I die, and the Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ought to </span><span class="font3">be comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, except</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when he gets used to being on his own. It’s time he was his own master now.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Tentu dia akan ikut aku, kalau aku memintanya. Bahkan dia mengusulkannya satu kali, tepat sebelum pesta. Tapi dia sebenarnya belum benar-benar ingin. Aku ingin melihat alam liar lagi sebelum aku mati, dan Gunung-Gunung; tapi Frodo masih mencintai Shire, dengan hutan-hutan, padang rumput, dan sungai-sungai kecilnya. Dia </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan</span><span class="font3"> lebih nyaman di sini. Aku mewariskan semuanya kepadanya, tentu, kecuali beberapa hal. Kuharap dia bahagia, bila sudah terbiasa sendirian. Sudah saatnya dia menjalani &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hidupnya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sendiri</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">sekarang.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“He </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3"> be comfortable here.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses desirability. Bilbo wants Frodo to stay at Shire because he loves everything there; the woods, fields, and little rivers. He should feel cosy there with all the legacy have been given.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “He </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3"> be comfortable here.” which is translated into “Dia </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan</span><span class="font3"> lebih nyaman di sini.” uses the couplets procedure where two different procedures combined to the TL. Modulation procedure is applied to show the translator used different perspective in conveying the message by changing the point of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">view. The modal “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3">” is like “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3">”, &nbsp;they are often used</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">interchangeably. It has closest meaning &nbsp;&nbsp;to “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sebaiknya</span><span class="font3">” and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">seharusnya</span><span class="font3">” rather than “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">akan</span><span class="font3">” in Bahasa. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Expansion &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">applied to describe the addition of “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lebih</span><span class="font3">” where it can be found in the SL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">b. Possibility and Probability</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Can</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-8) SL; “Then you’ve heard more than I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> speak to,” answered the Gaffer. I know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems no lack of it, but I know of no tunnel making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. TL; “Kalau begitu, kau lebih banyak mendengar daripada yang aku tahu,” jawab si Gaffer. “Aku sama sekali tidak tahu tentang permata, Mr. Bilbo royal sekali dengan uangnya, dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kelihatannya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dia &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tidak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">kekurangan, tapi aku tidak tahu tentang terowongan apa pun. Aku bertemu Mr. Bilbo ketika dia kembali, sekitar enam puluh tahun yang lalu, saat aku masih remaja.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Then you’ve heard more than I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can </span><span class="font3">speak to.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the ability. It is all knowledge or everything Gandalf has known.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “Then you’ve heard more than I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> speak to.” which is translated into “Kalau begitu, kau</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">lebih banyak mendengar daripada yang aku tahu.” uses modulation procedure. It shows the translator used different perspective in conveying the message by changing the point of view. The clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">I can speak to</span><span class="font3">” is translated into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">aku tahu</span><span class="font3">” but actually in case it means “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">aku bisa bicarakan</span><span class="font3">”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">( 3-9) SL; “Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,” argued the miller, voicing common opinion. “He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish folk that visit him; dwarves coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.”</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Ah, tapi sekarang harta kekayaannya pasti sudah bertambah, lebih banyak daripada yang pertama kali dibawanya,” debat si tukang giling, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;menyuarakan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pendapat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">umum. “Dia sering pergi jauh. Dan lihatlah orang-orang aneh yang mengunjunginya; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kurcaci-kurcaci</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">datang di malam hari, dan penyihir pengembara itu, si Gandalf, dan sebagainya. Kau </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh</span><span class="font3"> omong sesukamu, Gaffer, tapi Bag End itu tempat yang aneh, dan penghuninya lebih aneh lagi.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“You </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses giving permission. The miller gives</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">permission to Gandalf where he can say anything that he wants about Bag End.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “You </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.” which is translated into “Kau </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh </span><span class="font3">omong sesukamu, Gaffer, tapi Bag End itu tempat yang aneh, dan penghuninya lebih aneh lagi.” uses shift procedure. It is applied to describe the change of grammatical category clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">what you like</span><span class="font3">” in the SL into word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sesukamu</span><span class="font3">” to the TL.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>ii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Could</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-10) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Not &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Brandybucks of Buckland live in the Old Forest, but they’re a queer breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big river and that isn’t natural. Small wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins, there was never much to tell of him, till he was drownded.” TL; “Memang kaum Brandybuck dari Buckland tidak tinggal di dalam Old Forest, tapi tampaknya mereka memang keturunan aneh. Mereka suka bermain-main dengan perahu di sungai besar itu dan itu tidak wajar. Tidak heran kalau terjadi masalah,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">menurutku. Meski begitu, Mr. Frodo itu seorang hobbit muda yang sangat ramah. Sangat mirip Mr. Bilbo, dan bukan hanya dalam penampilannya. Bagaimanapun, ayahnya seorang Baggins. Mr. Drogo Baggins seorang hobbit sopan dan terhormat, tak banyak yang bisa diceritakan tentang dia, sampai dia tenggelam.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could </span><span class="font3">wish to meet.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the ability. It is the ability that you want to meet Mr. Frodo because he is a nice young hobbit.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> wish to meet.” which is translated into “Meski begitu, Mr. Frodo itu seorang hobbit muda yang sangat ramah.” uses reduction procedure where the clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">you could wish to meet</span><span class="font3">” in the SL is being omitted and it is not translated to the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-11) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; “If that’ s being queer,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">then we </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’ s some not far away that wouldn’ t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that everyone’ s going to be invited to the party, and there’ s going to be presents, mark you, presents for all this very month as is.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Kalau itu kau sebut aneh, ada lagi yang lebih aneh di sekitar sini. Ada orang-orang yang tinggalnya tidak terlalu jauh dari sini, yang tidak mau menawarkan segelas bir pada teman, walaupun mereka tinggal di dalam liang berdinding emas. Tapi di Bag End mereka mengikuti aturan kesopanan dengan baik. Sam bilang semua akan diundang ke pesta, dan akan ada hadiah-hadiah, camkan itu, hadiah untuk semuanya bulan ini juga.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“If that’s being queer, then we </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could </span><span class="font3">do with a bit more queerness in these parts.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses the ability. It is the ability that we can do something a bit more queerness around this place.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“If that’s being queer, then we </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">could </span><span class="font3">do with a bit more queerness in these parts.” which is translated into “Kalau itu kau sebut aneh, ada lagi yang lebih aneh di sekitar sini.” uses reduction and expansion procedure. Reduction procedure is applied to describe the omission of clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">we could do</span><span class="font3">” in the SL, expansion procedure applied to describe the addition of clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kau sebut</span><span class="font3">” which cannot be found in the SL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>iii. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">May</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(3-12) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; Together we score one</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">hundred and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total; One Gross, if I</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of his guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure they had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in a package.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; Berdua jumlah usia kami seratus empat puluh empat. Jumlah kalian dipilih sesuai dengan angka ini; Satu Gross, kalau aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh</span><span class="font3"> memakai istilah ini. Tidak ada sorak-sorai. Ini konyol. Kebanyakan tamu, terutama kaum Sackville-Baggins, merasa tersinggung, karena merasa yakin mereka diundang hanya untuk melengkapi jumlah yang dibutuhkan, seperti barang-barang dalam paket.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total; One Gross, if I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> use the expression.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses permission. He was asking permission to use the expression of One Gross for showing the number of your aged.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total; One &nbsp;Gross, &nbsp;if I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> use the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">expression.” which is translated into “Jumlah kalian dipilih sesuai dengan angka ini; Satu Gross, kalau aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh</span><span class="font3"> memakai istilah ini.” uses the couplets procedure where two different procedures combined to the TL. Reduction procedure is applied to describe the omission of the adjective “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">remarkable</span><span class="font3">” in the SL. Translation label procedure applied</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">in “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">One Gross</span><span class="font3">” which is translated into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Satu Gross</span><span class="font3">”, the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Gross</span><span class="font3">” is written in inverted commas signify the use of translation label procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-13) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; It is also, if I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> be</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; Hari ini juga, kalau aku boleh menunjuk pada sejarah kuno, adalah ulang tahun kedatanganku naik tong di Esgaroth di Danau Panjang; meski waktu itu aku tidak ingat bahwa hari itu hari ulang tahunku.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">“It is also, if I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses permission. He was asking permission to refer to ancient history.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “It is also, if I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake.” which is translated into “Hari ini juga, kalau aku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh</span><span class="font3"> menunjuk pada sejarah kuno, adalah ulang tahun kedatanganku naik tong di Esgaroth di Danau Panjang.” uses the couplets procedure where two different procedures combined to the TL. Reduction procedure is applied to omit the verb “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">allowed</span><span class="font3">” in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL, and expansion procedure applied to add the word “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">adalah</span><span class="font3">” to the TL. Through-translation procedure is applied to translate literally in the “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Long Lake</span><span class="font3">” into “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Danau Panjang</span><span class="font3">”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>iv. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meanings and Techniques in Translating Modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Might</span></h2></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3 -14) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; “There isn’t no call to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway, there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say, &nbsp;among &nbsp;those queer</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bucklanders, &nbsp;being &nbsp;brought up</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">anyhow in Brandy Hall.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Tidak &nbsp;masuk &nbsp;akal segala</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">omongan tentang mendorong dan menarik itu. Perahu memang pada dasarnya &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;berbahaya, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kalaupun</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">orang-orang di dalamnya duduk diam tanpa banyak macam-macam. Pokoknya begitulah, Mr. Frodo menjadi anak yatim piatu, terdampar di antara kaum Bucklander yang aneh itu, diasuh di Brandy Hall.”</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Anyway, there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses permission. You are permitted to say that Mr Frodo is an orphan boy, stranded &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;among &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;queer</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Bucklanders, and grew up in Brandy Hall.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sentence “Anyway, there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall.” which is translated into “Pokoknya begitulah, Mr. Frodo menjadi anak yatim piatu, terdampar di antara kaum Bucklander yang aneh itu, diasuh di Brandy Hall.” uses reduction procedure because the clause “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">as you might say</span><span class="font3">” is being omitted.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">(3-15) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SL; “Elves and Dragons” I</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">say to him. “Cabbages and potatoes are better for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters, or you’ ll land in trouble too big for you,” I say to him. “And I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say it to others,” he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL; “Peri dan Naga” kataku padanya. “Kol dan kentang lebih baik buatmu dan buatku. Jangan mencampuri urusan majikanmu, atau kau akan mendapat masalah yang terlalu besar untukmu,” begitulah kukatakan padanya. “Dan itu </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh </span><span class="font3">kukatakan pada yang lain-lain juga,” tambah si Gaffer sambil memandang si orang asing dan si tukang giling.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt;</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“And I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say it to others.” The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence expresses possibility. It is the possibility that what had Gandalf said to the miller will be repeated to the other people too.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">&gt; </span><span class="font3">The sentence “And I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> say it to others.” which is translated into “Dan itu </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh</span><span class="font3"> kukatakan pada yang lain-lain juga.” &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;uses &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;literal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">translation procedure it converts the grammatical of the SL into the TL without overriding authority as the translator.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The meanings of modality found in the novel of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Lord of The Rings </span><span class="font3">expressed some messages. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> expressed the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;unavoidable</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">obligation and the strong advice or orders to oneself. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">should </span><span class="font3">expressed criticism and giving an opinion about something. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">have to</span><span class="font3"> expressed the idea of obligation. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3"> expressed the desirability. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> expressed the ability and giving permission. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> expressed the ability. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> expressed the permission. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> expressed the permission and possibility.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There were some techniques used in translating the modality from SL (English) to TL (Bahasa). The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">must</span><span class="font3"> used modulation procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">should</span><span class="font3"> used reduction and couplets procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">have to </span><span class="font3">used modulation procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ought to</span><span class="font3"> used modulation procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">can</span><span class="font3"> used shift and modulation procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">could</span><span class="font3"> used reduction and expansion procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">may</span><span class="font3"> used couplets procedure. The modal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">might</span><span class="font3"> used literal translation and reduction procedure.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Referens</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Azzar, B. S. 1989. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding and Using &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Grammar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second Edition. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Regents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Johansen, S. et al. 2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;London: &nbsp;&nbsp;Edinburg</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kreidler, C. W. 1998. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">English Semantics</span><span class="font3">. London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font3">. London: &nbsp;&nbsp;Prentice</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Quirk, R. and Greenbaum S. 1990. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Student’s Grammar of the English Language</span><span class="font3">. Harlow: Longman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sukur, S. G. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Complete English Grammar for The TOEFL</span><span class="font3">. Yogyakarta: Indonesia Cerdas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Swan, M. 1980. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Practical English Usage</span><span class="font3">. Walton &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Street: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wishon, George E. and Julia M. Burks. 1980. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Let’s Write English</span><span class="font3">. Revised Edition. New York: Litton Educational Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">46</span></p>