---
layout: full_article
title: "A Sustainable Tourism Development Strategy in Manggarai Regency"
author: "Virginia Felizia Muljono, Dewa Gde Satrya"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-87706 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-87706"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-87706"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.9. No.2. (2022): 174-183</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Sustainable Tourism Development Strategy in Manggarai Regency</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Virginia Felizia Muljono, I Dewa Gde Satrya*</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Tourism Study Program, Ciputra University Surabaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">*Corresponding Author: </span><a href="mailto:dewa.gde@ciputra.ac.id"><span class="font1">dewa.gde@ciputra.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v9i2.87706"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v9i2.87706</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Article Info</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Submitted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">June 17<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">September 17<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Published:</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">September 30<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The tourism development in Manggarai Regency, East Nusa Tenggara Province, on the one hand can improve the local economy, but on the other hand it needs to be carried out using the principles of sustainable tourism development. The purpose of this study is to describe the strategy of sustainable tourism development in Manggarai district after the Covid-19 pandemic. The research method is qualitative. The conclusion of this study is that Manggarai district has great potential for tourism development in aspects of culture, nature, and religion. The strategy for the development of sustainable tourism is first from the community perspective, using an emotional cultural approach to create a strong sense of belonging. In terms of infrastructure, it needs to be improved to increase the satisfaction of the community and tourists.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font1">: development strategy; sustainable tourism; community based tourism.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Background</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">One of the provinces whose tourism aspects are being developed by the Indonesian government is the province of East Nusa Tenggara or abbreviated as NTT. NTT Province is one of the provinces whose tourism infrastructure is being developed by the government and is included in 10 New Balis destinations, namely the city of Labuan Bajo, which is located in West Manggarai Regency, Flores Island. Tourism development in the province of East Nusa Tenggara will certainly help boost the economy; the province of NTT can become a heaven for Indonesian tourism, and the government needs to know the principles of sustainable destination development so that the results are obtained can </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">be positive (Toda, 2017). The city of La-buan Bajo is certainly very well known by tourists and researchers for its distinctive animal, namely the Komodo Dragon whose habitat is only in the province of East Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia. Besides Komodo, the city of Labuan Bajo also has many natural beauties such as islands that can be explored by tourists. Some of the islands in Labuan Bajo that can be visited are Komodo island, Kanawa island, Rinca island, Padar Island, Manta Island, pink sand beach, and so on depending on the tour package taken by tourists. These are the main attractions of Labuan Bajo, so the government is very interested in developing the city of Labuan Bajo as one of the 10 New Balis. The development of the city of Labuan Bajo is intensified by the government to become a sustainable tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">destination along with 10 other new Bali destinations (Madrid, 2019).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In addition to the city of Labuan Bajo, the province of East Nusa Tenggara has many tourist destinations that can be explored and developed even more, such as Sawah Lingko or Lodok, Wae Rebo village, and other destinations located in the Manggarai district. However, of the many tourist destinations that can be developed and preserved on the island of Flores, there are still not many destinations that attract the attention of the government and local and foreign tourists to develop. One of the districts that have tourism potential is the Manggarai district, which is famous for the Wae Rebo tourist village or what is called the village above the clouds. Not only Wae Rebo, but tourist destinations in Manggarai district are very diverse and it is a pity if they are not developed and cared for properly. Some destinations such as Sawah Lingko or Lodok, have a unique shape like a spider's web. Lately, Lingko Rice Field is very popular with tourists and local people because of its shape like a spider's web, which is certainly different from the terraced rice fields in general. In addition, there is also the Liang Bua cave which is a prehistoric site that is often used for research purposes. Few tourists know about the prehistoric site of the Liang Bua cave. Currently, the Manggarai district has as many as 43 tourist attractions that can be developed to be visited by national and foreign tourists (Badan Pusat Statistik, 2021). Of the 43 attractions, only a few have been developed and promoted by the government, also due to a lack of awareness of the importance of developing a tourist destination by the local community. In addition, the preservation of these destinations is arguably still not optimal, there are even attractions that are neglected and not cared for.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The research, entitled &quot;The Strategies for Sustainable Tourism Development in Manggarai Regency after the Covid-19</span></p>
<div>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font1">175</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">Pandemic,&quot; aims to further exploration of tourism destinations in Manggarai Regency so that they can be developed and preserved. In addition, due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the tourism aspect has certainly decreased drastically so tourism revitalization activities are needed by the government and the community. The application of sustainable tourism will certainly be very important to do because Manggarai has many attractions that can be developed and preserved by the government and the community so that it can bring prosperity. With the existence of sustainable tourism after the Covid-19 pandemic, people can be more familiar with the potential that arise from tourist destinations or attractions to improve their welfare.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The development and revitalization of a destination so that it can become sustainable tourism after the pandemic will not be perfect without the help of the local community. This research is expected to find out what strategies can be used to help to develop and preserve tourist destinations and can help local communities with a better understanding of what strategies can be used to develop these tourist destinations after the Covid-19 pandemic. In the conducted research, the subject under the study is the local community of the Manggarai district while the object under the study is the tourism destination of the Manggarai district. The variables used in this study are sustainable tourism destinations and tourism after the Covid-19 pandemic. The purpose of this study is to describe the strategy of sustainable tourism development in Manggarai district after the Covid-19 pandemic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">LITERATURE REVIEW</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>The Sustainable Tourism</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The research conducted by Guzeloglu &amp;&nbsp;Gulc (2021) where they say that sustainable tourism is an approach that</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">natural and cultural conservation practices in Manggarai must also be carried out to preserve natural resources while maintaining the integrity and authenticity of ecosystems in unspoiled areas as tourist destinations, as stated by KC (2017) and Wiharso, Yuliana &amp;&nbsp;Supriono (2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In its implementation, sustainable tourism is inseparable from green tourism. As stated by Prabawa (2017) that green tourism as one of the forms and labels of sustainable tourism encourages the realization of knowledge and experience-based tourist activities in an environmentally responsible manner, preserving local culture to encourage increased involvement of local communities through local businesses. and ultimately support the economic growth of local communities. This kind of tourism practice is appropriate to be implemented in Manggarai Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Community involvement in tourism management in Manggarai Regency is a necessity because tourism is carried out entirely to improve the welfare of local communities. Therefore, sustainable tourism requires the application of communitybased tourism, as stated by Giampiccoli &amp;&nbsp;Saayman (2018) that Community-Based Tourism (CBT) is a form of tourism that appears to offset the negative impacts of conventional or mass tourism such as leakage and the fall of local control over natural resources</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The approach that took by the researcher is qualitative. Sugiyono (2017) said that qualitative research is a research method based on postpositivism or enterprise philosophy. This qualitative approach was carried out because the object of this research, namely the Manggarai district is still rarely discussed in terms of its tourism development, tourist destinations are still not getting enough attention from the government, the community, and other tourism </span><span class="font1">176 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2">protects the integrity of culture, ecological processes, biodiversity, and living systems by protecting the environment where humans interact with the intact and unchanging environment. where all resources can meet the economic, social and aesthetic needs of the people and tourists in the area visited. This understanding agrees with the research of Tahiri, Kovaci, &amp;&nbsp;Bushi (2020) says that sustainable tourism is the opposite of mass tourism. Sustainable tourism focuses on quality, sustainability, and balance. With quality in sustainable tourism, the values got by the tourists can improve the quality of community life. Sustainable tourism cannot exist without the sustainability of Natural Resources, culture, and society. Tourism aims to create a balance between all parties involved in the development of sustainable tourism so that there would be a promising long-term plan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sustainable tourism is a tourism practice responsible for managing the interests of current and future generations of tourists. Conservation of nature, local culture and community involvement are important elements in sustainable tourism. This is in line with Sunarta &amp;&nbsp;Arida (2017, p.17) who say that sustainable tourism is tourism that prioritizes the interests of the current generation without forgetting the interests of future generations. Which means that there will be similarities in the fulfilment of the needs of the present generation and future generations. Sustainable tourism minimizes negative impacts on the environment. This is in line with Setiono et al. (2020) stating the accommodation and new investments in the tourism sector should not have a bad impact and can integrate with the environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sustainable tourism is relevant and needed by Manggarai district, because it is closely related to ecotourism as stated by Baroroh (2019) to maintain economic and social interests that prioritize environmental sustainability involving the participation of local communities. In addition, </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">actors, and they still want to dig deeper into what strategies can be used for development. post-Covid-19 sustainable tourism in Manggarai district.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The method that took by researchers is the case study method. The case study method is used in this research to find out the strategies that can be done for the development of sustainable tourism which of course must be investigated from various perspectives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study uses purposive sampling (Campbell et al., 2020) with 10 key informants from all elements of Penta helix (Government, Academicians, Business, Society) (Cabrera-Flores et al., 2020) with the aim of getting a comprehensive perspective on sustainable tourism development strategies in Manggarai Regency, the 10 key informants are as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Tabel 1. </span><span class="font2">Key Informants in this Study</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Government </span><span class="font1">Temporary Secretary of the Manggarai Tourism Office</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Society &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">The co-founders of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Live-In application, the Regent of Manggarai, and Father Inosensius Sutam</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Industry &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">Owner of Spring Hill</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Resto and Bungalow, Secretariat of Todo tourism village, owner of Flores Exotic Tours, and Sister of The Good Shepherd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Academia &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">The Principal of the Sadar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Wisata Vocational School and Ary Suhandi (Director of Indonesian Ecotourism Network / INDECON)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The Manggarai Regency is located on the island of Flores, East Nusa Tenggara Province. Manggarai Regency has a government center in Ruteng City which is the capital of Manggarai Regency. The area is 7,136.4 km2 and has a population of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">382,422 people. Manggarai Regency has a total of 12 sub-districts. Most of the residents of The Manggarai Regency adhere to Catholicism so there are many churches and monasteries, but they still preserve their traditional culture such as caci, weaving, burrows, traditional houses, and so on which have now become tourist attractions (Mengenal Manggarai n.d.).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the results of interviews and observations, an analysis of strategies that can be used for sustainable tourism development after the COVID-19 pandemic in Manggarai Regency is following Pentahelix, namely Government, Society, Industry, and Academia. The informants have answered most of the topics posed by the researchers, although some informants did not answer some questions due to limited time. There is a shift in tourist interest due to the Covid-19 pandemic towards heritage or culture as much as 63% based on a report from the BOP by the Regent Meldyanti's Society, therefore Manggarai Regency is intensively building community-based sustainable tourism. In line with this development, the Society of Father Ino said that there were 7 principles emphasized by the Bishop of Ruteng. First of all, tourism must respect human dignity and rights, and be friendly to human dignity and rights. Then the second principle is the principle of local community participation while opening up to others so that they are friendly to others. The third is the cultural principle of respecting the development of local culture, of course, while opening yourself up to other cultures, yes here it must be culturally friendly. Then the fourth, yes, respect or preservation of the environment, so it is environmentally friendly. Then the fifth, tourism must respect moral and religious values, so be friendly to religion and ethics. Then the sixth, there must be cooperation and transparency, so be friendly with justice and honesty. The seventh, of course, is the principle of using science and technology that </span><span class="font1">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">is humane, so that it is friendly to science and technology from a human perspective. From the Government itself, in line with the Covid-19 pandemic, researchers found efforts to develop sustainable tourism strategies carried out by the government, especially the submission of CHSE certificates in hotels, restaurants, and other tourist attractions. It is very necessary to develop SOPs for tourism actors and a code of ethics for visitors as conveyed by Academia, the founder and director of INDECON Pak Ary, where he stated that apart from tourism actors or managers, visitors also need a code of ethics so that they do not damage the existing culture. This is also in line with several businesses such as Spring Hill Resto and Bungalow, where Ms. Carolyn is very passionate about cleanliness in restaurants and hotels, as well as the semi-outdoor concept which maintains good air circulation for guests' comfort.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">One thing that is crucial and needs to be considered is the basic understanding of tourism. According to the founder and director of INDECON, Mr. Ary, the foundation of thinking that should be tourism is not making money or bringing in a lot of guests, but how the culture of the community can always be preserved so that guests do not damage, and the destination can always be sustainable. This is encouraged by taking the right and patient approach because building sustainable tourism cannot be instantaneous, it takes years for people to feel the value of tourism itself. Culture is the main thing that must be fought for and preserved, profit and tourists are bonuses from hard work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">During the pandemic, the government is also encouraging the creative economy of weaving, then there is the development of destinations based on nature and culture, local cuisine, and training of local people as tourism actors, in the marketing department. The current government's efforts are still very focused on developing destinations as sustainable tourism, as well </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">as training and cognitive education for the community as tourism actors because there are still many local people who have not received a good education and still do not understand what the positive impacts of tourism development in Manggarai Regency are. This of course will greatly help the development of sustainable tourism in Manggarai Regency, because foreign tourists are often very disturbed by the attitude of the people who have not been educated and are considered impolite, such as begging for money when tourists come. The Society for the Regent of Manggarai Regency, Ms. Meldyanti, said that currently, to develop destinations in each region, an excavation of the history of Manggarai had begun to be buried. This is also in line with the creative economy industry that is currently being worked on in several locations in Manggarai Regency, where people are taught to sing songket cloth. Weaving, of course, already exists from ancestral heritage, but what is taught here is to weave cloth that has a deep meaning, whether it's telling the history of Manggarai, a family, or the character of a person because the ancestors used to represent their language through weaving. Mrs. Meldyanti also collaborated with UNIKA St. Paulus, to obtain the copyright for MPIG or the Manggarai woven Geographical Indication Protection Society and cooperated with the NTT Manggarai bank to register the motifs with the KEMENKUMHAM. Apart from that, like what was conveyed by Mr. Adri-anus Husen, Mrs. Meldyanti is also intensively providing cognitive training to local communities and wants to use young people to carry out their interests and talents in the tourism area. Industry Secretariat of the Todo Tourism Village, Mr. Adrianus in his village is aggressive in preserving the traditional village and handicrafts of the local community that has been around for generations, as well as highlighting the history of Todo itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In line with what has been conveyed by the Secretary of the Department of Culture and Tourism, Mr. Adrianus Husen, that a promotion will be carried out, and the submission of Mrs. Regent Meldyanti who wants to use the interests and talents of young people in Manggarai Regency in the field of photography and video, very good in this regard for marketing tourism in Manggarai Regency with the talents of these millennial children. Research conducted by Santoso et al. (2021), showed that promotional videos greatly affect the desire to visit the brand image. Promoting videos by inviting young people who have the desire to promote tourism in Manggarai Regency is highly recommended so that Manggarai Regency can further encourage other Regencies in the New Normal era. Academia The head of the Ruteng Tourism Awareness Vocational School, Pak Wil-helmus also strives to encourage his students to have knowledge, skills, and competencies in the world of tourism by providing various five-star facilities needed for learning. This is very important to form awareness among young people in schools from an early age about the good impact of sustainable tourism development. Industry Secretariat of the Todo Tourism Village, Mr. Adrianus or Kak Ardi is also intensively collaborating with Swiss Tour to promote the Todo tourist village.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Society Pak Maulidan CEO Livein also proposed a strategy for approaching village communities, where he said that it was very important for the community to have a sense of belonging to have the desire to do something, so there was a need for a cultural approach. Where people need an emotional approach, how are they involved in each process? The same thing was said by Academia, the founder and director of INDECON, Mr. Ary, who said that what was preserved was the culture of the community itself, not building tourism that brought in a lot of guests, which could </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">damage the destination. Culture is certainly very closely related to local communities, and this cannot be forced on the community it takes a long process to build a strong community mentality.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The approach process taken by IN-DECON in each of its ecotourism projects includes planning, capacity building, product development, marketing, and institutions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Planning</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Planning includes what the community needs, what areas cannot be disturbed, collaboration with anyone, required regulations, and so on.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Capacity Building</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Capacity building includes training for cooking, what skills they need, and what kind of management they should know and learn.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Product Development</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Product Development includes tourism products that can be offered for tourism, whether it be crops, handicrafts, culinary, scenery, traditional ceremonies, and so on.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Marketing</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">How to market products that have been developed by the community and whether the marketing done is the same as what happened or is it just for promotion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Institutional</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Institutions that can remind people of culture, of what brings prosperity to the place, and institutions that can help develop culture and tourism. Are institutional, stakeholder, and community goals aligned?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Approaching the community through the Church is also very helpful because the people of The Manggarai Regency are mostly Catholic and are very loyal to what the Church commands. This is also one of the obstacles for the government when it wants to enter the community</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">because the community's perception of the government is a project. Meanwhile, when the Church enters, the community will perceive it as a service, so they are very hesitant to enter and direct the community. This needs cooperation between tourism stakeholders in Manggarai Regency. In addition, Mr. Maulidan also said about the importance of cooperation from every stakeholder involved in tourism in Manggarai Regency who has the same orientation. This is of course a very important point. The same orientation can unite the vision and mission when developing sustainable tourism because some of the obstacles that occur when tourism development is carried out in Manggarai are the goals of different stakeholders because they have different understandings about what they want to bring. where is this tourism? The same thing was said by Industry, the owner of Spring Hill Resto and Bungalow, Carolyn's mother, where she said that cooperation and support from others are very much needed for business continuity. Said Industry PT. Flores Exoctic Tours, Mr. Leonardus, it is very important to have a travel pattern to calculate all aspects of destination access from anywhere, length of trip, road conditions, what can be seen, what objects are traversed, uniqueness of the objects traversed, funds needed, and so on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This is because access in Manggarai Regency is still very lacking, especially access to small villages which are sometimes very rocky and can only be passed by walking or by motorbike. This was also explained by the Good Shepherd Industry, Sister Natalia who was worried about the infrastructure that was still inadequate to be considered a tourist attraction because some safety had not been maintained, and there was still much that needed to be added and improved to maintain cleanliness as well. Mr. Maulidan also emphasized that when developing tourism, one cannot only focus on one or two things but </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">also must be able to focus on all aspects. Infrastructure development is very important, human empowerment is very important, and the preservation of culture and nature is also very important so all must work together.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In line with education, Carolyn's mother was also mentioned at the beginning, Industry Spring Hill Resto and Bungalow, where she said that it was very important for local people to be educated about tourist destinations for tourists to these places. He also said that to educate tourists about a destination, a sign or information about the destination is needed. For Liang Bua, it will be very helpful if there is a small museum near Liang Bua and there are officers who can be guides so that the tourist experience can increase again. For religious tourism, the strategy thought by the Society of Father Ino said that it would be better if Church events were integrated with local culture such as a shared palm leaf procession, not just one parish, and so on. Then there are nature tours that have been run by Industry PT. Flores Exotic Tours, Mr. Leonardus, where has several packages for his guests such as cycling, endemic bird watching, Adventure tours, and others based on nature. In addition, the Good Shepherd Industry also stated, Sister Natalia that coffee plantation tours will also be very interesting for tourists visiting the Good Shepherd because they will not only see coffee plantations, but they will also be invited to see the coffee processing process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the results of the study, it can be concluded that the Manggarai Regency has enormous potential for sustainable tourism development after the Covid-19 pandemic, especially in culture, nature, and religion, especially when Covid-19</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">attacks the world, tourist interest has changed towards traveling in small groups with natural and cultural tourism destinations.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The culture of the Manggarai Regency really must be preserved, and its authenticity is maintained because it includes the history of ancestors, traditional ceremonies, weaving, culinary, traditional houses, and so on which are distinct values in the culture of the people of Manggarai Regency.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In addition to culture, Manggarai Regency also has potential in other fields such as nature, where Manggarai Regency is very rich in extraordinary natural scenery such as rice fields, waterfalls, rivers, animals, and so on which of course must be preserved so that these views do not disappear. In addition, there is also Liang Bua which is an ancient site in Manggarai Regency.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">• &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most of the people of the Manggarai Regency are also Catholic and Manggarai Regency has many churches, presbyteries, monasteries, and also the Maria Cave so there is great potential for religious tourism.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The role of local communities is certainly very large because they are the vanguard of any tourism development. The obstacle that often occurs is that people do not understand what tourism means and feel that tourism is not important in their lives. The local community is the subject and not the object where they are the ones who get the impact from the results of this sustainable tourism development. Therefore, they must also have a sense of belonging along with this development so that they can realize the importance of preserving their culture and feel the impact of preservation itself. Not only the community, but the government, business, academia, the tourism community, and other tourism actors must also be able to understand what the real foundation of tourism is so that they</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">have one common goal of direction where sustainable tourism is to be developed. Tourism is not only talking about how to bring in guests and earn profits to increase the economy but more about how tourism helps bring back the culture of the local community that is almost lost and preserves that culture, along with the natural surroundings.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Suggestion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The suggestion from this research is, that the strategy for the development of sustainable tourism after the Covid-19 pandemic is first from the community perspective, where people are still intensively encouraged for activities and training to prepare themselves to welcome tourism after the pandemic. The approach taken to the community should also be culturally emotional so that they can have a strong sense of belonging. Second, in terms of history and culture, which are still being studied for history and culture that is almost extinct, as well as the culture that still exists until now is still being sought to be preserved so that it can become an added value for sustainable tourism. Then not only the development of communities and destinations but also the supporting infrastructure to be improved so that the satisfaction of the community and tourists can increase. This of course must go according to good planning. With the right travel pattern, it will be easier to identify areas that need improvement and additional information and infrastructure.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Badan Pusat Statistik. (2021). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jumlah Daya Tarik Wisata Menurut Kabupaten/Kota 2018-2020</span><span class="font2">. Badan Pusat Statistik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Badan Pusat Statistik. (2021). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jumlah Kunjungan Wisatawan Mancanegara per bulan ke Indonesia Menurut Pintu Masuk, 2017 - sekarang (Kunjungan), 2021</span><span class="font2">. Badan Pusat Statistik.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Baroroh, K. (2019). Pembelajaran Berbasis Masalah &nbsp;Ekowisata Pada Mata</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pelajaran &nbsp;Ekonomi &nbsp;SMA. &nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ekonomi &amp;&nbsp;Pendidikan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">16</span><span class="font2">(2), 69-80.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cabrera-Flores, M., López-Leyva, J., Peris-Ortiz, M., Orozco-Moreno, A., Francisco-Sánchez, J., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Meza-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Arballo, O. (2020). A Framework of Penta-Helix Model to Improve the Sustainable Competitiveness of The Wine Industry In Baja California Based On Innovative Natural Resource Management</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. E3S Web of Conferences, 167, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;06005.</span><span class="font2"> DOI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">10.1051/e3sconf/202016706005.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Campbell, S., Greenwood, M., Prior, S., Shearer, T., Walkem, K., Young, S., Walker, K. (2020). Purposive Sampling: &nbsp;Complex or Simple?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Research Case Examples. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Research &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nursing,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">174498712092720.</span><span class="font2"> DOI: 10.1177/1744987120927206.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Giampiccoli, A., &amp;&nbsp;Saayman, M. (2018). Community &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;based &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">development model and community participation. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">African Journal of Hospitality,Tourism and Leisure</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">7</span><span class="font2">(4), 1-27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Guzeloglu, F. T. &amp;&nbsp;Gulc, A. (2021). Sustainable Tourism Projects in Turkey. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Academy of Management Learning and Education, The 5</span><span class="font2">(1):55-74.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">KC, A. (2017). Ecotourism in Nepal. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Gaze: &nbsp;Journal of Tourism and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Hospitality</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font2">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1-19.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.3126/gaze.v8i0.178"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.3126/gaze.v8i0.178</span></a><span class="font2"> 27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Madrid. (2019). Menpar Arief Yahya: 10 Bali Baru Semua Berkelanjutan. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">GenPi</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diakses &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dari</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.genpi.co/berita/5646/me"><span class="font2">https://www.genpi.co/berita/5646/me</span></a><span class="font2"> npar-arief-yahya-10-bali-baru-semua-berkelanjutan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mengenal Manggarai. (n.d.). Pemkab Manggarai. Diakses pada 4 Juni 2022, dari </span><a href="https://www.manggaraikab.go.id/men"><span class="font2">https://www.manggaraikab.go.id/men</span></a><span class="font2"> genal-manggarai/.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Prabawa, I. W. S. W. (2017). Konsep Green Tourism Dan Trend Green Tourism Marketing (Studi Literatur Kajian Green Tourism Dan Implementasinya). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Kepariwisataan</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">16</span><span class="font2">(1), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;47–53.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.52352/jpar.v16i1.81"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.52352/jpar.v16i1.81</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sanjaya, R. B. 2018. Strategi Pengembangan Pariwisata Berbasis Masyarakat Di Desa Kemetul, Kabupaten Semarang. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Master Pariwisata (JUMPA)</span><span class="font2">, [S.l.], p. 91</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">110, July 2018. ISSN 2502-8022.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Santoso, H. N., Widyawati, C., &amp;&nbsp;Adityaji, R. (2021). The Role of The Promotional Video &quot;Wonderful Indonesia: A Visual Journey&quot; On Brand Image and Tourist Visiting Interest To Wakatobi. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Tourism, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Culinary, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Entrepreneurship (JTCE), Vol. 1,</span><span class="font2"> No. 1, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;April &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2021, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;48-60.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.37715/jtce.v1i1.179"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.37715/jtce.v1i1.179</span></a><span class="font2"> 9.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Setiono, T.S., Afrizal, T., Supriyono, E., Wendra, M.W., &amp;&nbsp;Nurfitriani, A.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2021). Implementasi Pengelolaan Pariwisata Berkelanjutan di Kota Semarang. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Perspektif, 10(</span><span class="font2">1): 26-35.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sugiyono. (2017). Metode Penelitian Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&amp;D. Bandung: CV Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sunarta, N. &amp;&nbsp;N.S. Arida. (2017). Pariwisata Berkelanjutan. Cakra Press. Bali. 166 p.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Tahiri, A., Kovaci, I., &amp;&nbsp;Bushi, F. (2020) Sustainable Tourism Development – Analysis of Tourism Development In Kosovo. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ACC Journal 26</span><span class="font2">(2).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">DOI: 10.15240/tul/004/2020-2-007.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Toda, Hendrik. (2017). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keanekaragaman Nusa Tenggara Timur Sebagai Provinsi Pariwisata Berkelas Dunia. Jurnal Administrasi Publik Volume 8,</span><span class="font2"> Nomor 1, Juni 2017, 8 (1). pp. 1-102. ISSN 2087 – 8923. e-ISSN 2549-9319.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wiharso, Yuliana, E., &amp;&nbsp;Supriono, E.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(2020). Pengelolaan Ekowisata Mangrove Berdasarkan Daya Dukung Ekosistem &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Persepsi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Masyarakat. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Matematika Sains Dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Teknologi</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font2">(1), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;48-60.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.33830/jmst.v21i1.7"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.33830/jmst.v21i1.7</span></a><span class="font2"> 01.2020.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">183</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>