---
layout: full_article
title: "The Translation Process of Machine Translation  for Cultural Terms on Balinese Folktales"
author: "I Putu Ambara Putra"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84073 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-84073"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84073"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p04"><span class="font4">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Translation Process of Machine Translation for Cultural Terms on Balinese Folktales</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I Putu Ambara Putra</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Denpasar, Bali </span><span class="font1">e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:ambarap2@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font5" style="text-decoration:underline;">ambarap2@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract—</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">The goal of this study is to determine the capability of Google Translate in term of translating cultural terms. This study is conducted to analyze the translation performed by one of the well-known machine translation, Google Translate. The data is collected from the translation of seven traditional Balinese folktales chosen in random via online, namely Manik Angkeran, Kebo Iwa, Lubdaka, Tampaksiring, Origin of Bali, Origin of Singaraja, and Pan Balang Tamak. The data of the study is the translation on cultural terms translated by Google Translate. The cultural terms are classified with Cultural Term Classification Theory by Newmark. The analysis is conducted by comparing the translatied text and the original text to identify the translation method utilized by Google Translate in translating cultural term into English. The Translation Method Theory and Classification by Newmark is used to identify the method of translation utilized by Google Translate. The methods then is used in order to determine the tendency of Google Translate in the translation toward cultural terms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font5">: </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cultural term; machine translation; traditional folktales; translation method; translation tendency</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak—</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui kemampuan Google Translate dalam menerjemahkan istilah kebudayaan. Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk menganalisis penerjemahan yang dilakukan oleh mesin penerjemahan yang cukup dikenal, Google Translate. Data dikumpulkan dari terjemahan tujuh cerita rakyat Bali yang dikumpulkan secara acak dan daring, berjudul Manik Angkeran, Kebo Iwa, Lubdaka, Tampaksiring, Sejarah Bali, Asal Mula Singaraja, dan Pan Balang Tamak. Data dari penelitian ini adalah terjemahan pada istilah kebudayaan yang diterjemahkan oleh Google Translate. Istilah-istilah kebudayaan diklasifikasikan dengan Teori Klasifikasi Istilah Kebudayaan oleh Newmark. Proses analisis dilaksanakan dengan membandingkan teks terjemahan dan teks asli untuk mengetahui metoda penerjemahan yang digunakan Google Translate dalam menerjemahkan istilah kebudayaan ke Bahasa Inggris. Teori dan Klasifikasi Metoda Penerjemahan Newmark digunakan untuk mengidentifikasi metoda penerjemahan yang digunakan oleh Google Translate. Metode tersebut lantas digunakan untuk menentukan kecenderungan pada Google Translate dalam menerjemahkan istilah kebudayaan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">: cerita rakyat tradisional; istilah kebudayaan; kecenderungan penerjemahanmesin penerjemahan; metoda penerjemahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">In modern era, communication has advanced further. Technology has been a great support, especially in term of language. Introducing a machine translation (MT), communication in term of breaking the language barrier had been easier and practice. From the history of the development progress, MT has four approaches; direct approach, rule-based approach, corpus-based approach, and lastly hybrid approach (Cheragui, 2012). MT has been developed since 1933 until 1956 as a one-word dictionary translation, but due to the further development, MT began to be developed with input of statistic given by users as a corpus data, while also learning from example-based data, thus gave birth to corpusbased and example-based model in late 1990 (Hutchins, 1995).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Hutchins and Somers (1992) defines machine translation as a process of translation from SL to TL with computerized system and, with, or without human assistance. Other also explains that machine translation is an automatic system that collect information from translation and compiled all the data as a corpus in which is used to translate an input from certain language, and creates the output without human intervention (Craciunescu, 2004). Machine translation is part of artificial intelligence, or AI, which is developed by mimicking human’s brain as to create a creative problem solving in term of language transference (Sofer, 2009). One of many machine translation is Google Translate, a commonly known and used around the globe. Google Translate has been around since around 2006 as a statistic-based machine translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Despite the advancement, language barrier is still persisting, especially in cultural terms. Mona Baker (1992:21) describe culture as an abstract or concrete idea which is associated with religion, belief, social custom, and even food. Culture is a specific knowledge and special characteristic of a certain group of human from different location on the world, it means different place and different ethnic possess different</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">customs, ideas, or concepts about live. Culture affects the mind of people in that said group, especially language. Like culture, one language is unique from others. However, difference in culture sometimes conflict with communication, especially between different cultures. To solve this problem, translation is required.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translation in machine point of view is automated, thus no human intervention is required. Nida and Taber (1982:12) argue that translation is an effort to reproduce messages from source language to target language by finding the closest natural equivalent, first in meaning, then in grammatical unit. MT on basic level performs mechanical substitution on a word in one language to another language desired by user. However, this is also a factor that makes MT and human translators are not even close to be considered rival. Without an emotion to process the expression, MT would never be able to emulate the correct message into TL, unless human translators decide to intervene the translation result. This in fact is supported by Champollion (2001), in addition of those above, he states that ‘</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">computer will never understand, but it can translate</span><span class="font5">’. It is referred toward the incapability of MT being unable to understand the context of the text. Johnson (2004:67) claims that automatic translation relies on the implications created by human translator in ‘pre-editing’ of the source text into a ‘sublanguage’ and based on that the translation program can function successfully, and also in the subsequent ‘post-editing’ of the text. This explains the reason behind the achievements of machine translation in analyzing and processing technical scientific text while at the lowest performance at transferring ‘linguistic ambiguity’ in the process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In term of translation, Larson (1984) states that translation is a process of changing a form of word from one language into another form in other language. Translation brings the word from source language into the target language without changing the context or meaning, or simply changing it completely, as long as it is satisfied the mean by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">using an equivalent word on target language. Bell (1991:6) explained that translating is the replacement of representation of a text in one language by representation of an equivalent in second language. This statements lead into a conclusion that every translation requires equivalence between TL and SL. Catford (1951:1) states translation may be defined as the replacement of textual material in one language (SL), by textual material in another language (TL). In context of MT, the expression or word is simply word or expression that has a closest meaning possible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In translation, machine translation is considered able to translate cultural term, however it is limited in strategy. With limited strategy, the result produced by machine translation, which in this case is Google Translate, tends to translate the cultural term with limited methods, even though there are around eight translation methods that can be utilized by machine translations; 1) literal translation, 2) word-for-word translation, 3) faithful translation, 4) free translation, 5) communicative translation, 6) semantic translation, 7) adaptation, and 8) idiomatic translation (Newmark, 1998).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The study has planned as a qualitative study. </span><span class="font4">Creswell (2009) states in qualitative research, the final report has a flexible structure and the data is analyzed in inductive manner. In qualitative approach, the researcher makes a knowledge claims based on mostly on many variation of individual experiences, social meanings, and historical constructions on developing theory and patterns, or perspective of the participatory. </span><span class="font5">From seven Balinese Folklores which was selected in random</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">before from many online sources, the data is gathered in form of sentences contained cultural terms as the secondary data. The cultural terms was then translated into English text as the primary data. The data, which are the cultural terms translated by Google Translate then observed, identified, and finally classified by comparing the original text in Indonesian with the translation in English in order to determine the translation method utilized by Google Translate. The methods are compiled and classified in order to determine the tendency for the translation performed by Google Translate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The theory used in this study is Cultural Classification Theory by Newmark (1998). There are five classification of cultural terms, namely 1) ecology, 2) material of culture, 3) social culture, 4) organization, custom, activities, and beliefs, and 5) gestures and habits. This study also uses Translation Method Classification Theory by, again, Newmark (1998). There are eight translation methods, which then deivided by two strategy with opposing tendencies in translating. The strategies are namely SL-emphasized translation and TL-emphasized translation. Each strategy holds four strategy, which can be seen below.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">SL-Emphasized</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">TL-Emphasized</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Word-for-word</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Adaptation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Literal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Free</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Faithful</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Idiomatic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Semantic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Communicative</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Diagram 1. </span><span class="font5">Newmark’ s V Diagram of</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translation Method</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data are presented separately, starting from cultural terms collected from the folklores. The next presentation covers of data about translation method utilized by Google Translate in translating the cultural terms from Indonesian as a source language (SL) to English as a target language (TL). The number of translation methods are used to determine the tendency of translation used by Google Translate.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cultural Terms</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The cultural terms were collected from seven randomly chosen Balinese folklores, and thus elaborated briefly in descriptive qualitative method. The five terms are found as follow, 1) ecology, 2) material culture, 3) social culture, and 4) organization, custom, activities, leisure, and belief, and lastly 5) habit and gesture.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ecology</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">According to Newmark (1988:96), term of ecology is categorized by a nature-related and geographical feature items with the absence of political and commercial value, but still represented the culture it comes from. Flora, fauna, weather, lands, and body of waters such as lake or river are cultural terms commonly found in Balinese folktales. There 21 data are related with ecology, and here is one of the example.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Sidhimantra pun bergegas menuju </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Gunung Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : Sidhimantra rushed to </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Mount Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The translation above is done by Google Translate on one of the most known and sacred highest peak in Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Balinese people believes the volcano has its peak reaching toward the sanctuary where gods and other divinities are living. According to Pringle (2004) Pura Besakih is located on its slope. Google Translate has translated </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung Agung </span><span class="font5">into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mount Agung</span><span class="font5">, by translating the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mount</span><span class="font5">. Even though the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Agung </span><span class="font5">has a translation in English, which is </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Great</span><span class="font5">, Google Translate does not translate the word. Theoretically, Google Translate is able to distinguish a name and translatable word, and retains the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Agung</span><span class="font5"> from SL due to it is being a name of a location, thus the system prevents it from translating it to avoid confusion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Material Culture</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1988:97) categorized all items into this classifications from food, clothing, housing, means of transportation, as well as communication devices. The material culture found from the folktales are categorized as any items that are related toward daily necessities, kitchenware, buildings, human settlements, and artifacts. Some are unique with the culture it belongs to, while some items own each of its own concept compared to the equivalent translation in TL. Below is one of the 45 examples of material culture-related term.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Ia lalu pulang dan memecahkan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">celengan</span><span class="font5">nya</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : He then went home and broke his </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">piggy bank</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The original text, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">celengan</span><span class="font5"> is translated by Google Translate as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">piggy bank</span><span class="font5">, and both has the same concept in term of money-saving device and pig-like model. However, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">piggy bank</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">celengan</span><span class="font5"> are not a direct translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">toward each other. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Piggy Bank</span><span class="font5"> is, according to Burton (2020), originated from Middle Ages when pots and other clayware are used to store money. The clay material is called </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pygg</span><span class="font5">. As the word evolves, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pygg</span><span class="font5"> gradually pronounced as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pig</span><span class="font5">, then many England potters began to produce money jar in a shape of a pig to humor the origin word. There are also translation suggested by Google Translation. The highest frequency are </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kitty</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">savings</span><span class="font5"> as an uncommon suggested translation, and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">moneybox</span><span class="font5"> as rarest suggested translation, but </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">piggy bank</span><span class="font5"> is the most used and common translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Culture</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">According to Newmark (1988:95), any terms that belong to social culture is related to any kind of human interactions and the means of communication under the regulation of one’s custom and culture, as well as the complexity of the pattern. From the folktales or stories the data gathered from, terms associated with social culture are found in form of kinship among people, or human as the social being, including the way of people addressing the other based on social hierarchy, nobility, and role inside the community. There are 17 terms associated with social culture from the folktales, one of the data can be seen below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">patih </span><span class="font5">Kerajaan Majapahit yang bernama Gajah Mada memang bertekad untuk menyatukan Nusantara</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">The governor </span><span class="font5">of the Majapahit Kingdom, Gajah Mada, was determined to unite the archipelago</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">patih</span><span class="font5"> is referred toward the vice leader under the ruler of the king. The term is used by those who are appointed to rule a certain area under the legal ruler of current king. This practice had been done since long ago by ancient kingdom in Indonesia, especially Majapahit. According to Soedarso (2014) </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">patih</span><span class="font5"> has an equal status as current governor in current government system of today’ s Indonesia. In term of translation, Google Translate has translate the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">patih</span><span class="font5"> as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">governor</span><span class="font5">. The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">governor</span><span class="font5"> is considered as a bit broader, if compared with </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">patih</span><span class="font5">. In many story that includes kingdom-themed conflict, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">patih</span><span class="font5"> is also described as the one who lead an army, while on the contrary, the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">governor</span><span class="font5"> are not even related to military. Even so, both are still the same title of one who assume the control over some area under the ruler of the kingdom as an acting ruler.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Organization, Customs, Activities, and Beliefs</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1998:95) states any items that are related with the political and administrative &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aspect, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;social</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">organization, religion, history, and artistic terms that belong specifically to a certain culture, country, or nation are classified into this cultural term classification. In this study, 22 data related to this term has been found, below is one of the data sample.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">patih </span><span class="font5">Kerajaan Majapahit yang bernama Gajah Mada memang bertekad untuk menyatukan Nusantara</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">The governor </span><span class="font5">of the Majapahit Kingdom, Gajah Mada, was determined to unite the archipelago</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Google Translate has made translation on </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">roh</span><span class="font5"> into a term of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">spirit</span><span class="font5">. The explanation is since the term from original text is translated and transferred with the specific term from TL with an equal concept. The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Roh</span><span class="font5"> is adapted from Arabic </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Ruuh</span><span class="font5">, which is meant as the one who controls over the body and mind. From the story, titled Lubdaka, the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">roh</span><span class="font5"> is told levitating on the sky as it is confused to where it should go, due to Lubdaka once a cruel hunter, believed that the bad karma led Lubdaka into the void realm. Balinese people has a belief when one has died, the spirit the left the mortal body and hovering about on the realm of spirit, called </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pitraloka</span><span class="font5">. The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">spirit</span><span class="font5"> from TL, however is referred toward the soul or the force that causes the mortal body to life, or giving life to any living being.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Habits and Gestures</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">To &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;express &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;complex &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">complicated emotions such as discontent, anger, confusion, happiness, or suspicion, human has special way in expressing it, such as through body movements and gestures. In this classification of cultural terms, gestures and habits are classified toward the specific behaviors and habits of an individual in a certain situation. Habit that is seen in consistent succession is deemed as custom, which eventually becomes the culture. There are only 5 data found from the folktales.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : disinilah Beliau melakukan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">semadi </span><span class="font5">dan mendapatkan pawisik untuk menciptakan air penawar racun, kini air ini dikenal dengan nama </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tirta Empul</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : this is where he did </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">meditation </span><span class="font5">and got pawisik to create antidote water, now this water is known as Tirta Empul</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">semadi</span><span class="font5"> is referred toward an action of the one who is considered the expert in religion, such as high priest, or </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Rsi</span><span class="font5">. Accordingly from the story, most figures of religions or even god has done this when in doubt or requesting for supernatural assistance or spiritual interference. In literal explanation, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">semedi</span><span class="font5"> is an exercise done by anyone releasing any kind of thought that causes distraction, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;stress, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;anxiety</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Vitahealth, 2008). During the process of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">semadi</span><span class="font5">, someone enters the deepest part of the mind to reflect, think, and find a solution for the any problem. The term is translated by Google Translate into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">meditation</span><span class="font5">, which has the exact meaning with the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">semedi</span><span class="font5"> in sense of clearing the mind to find a solution and guidance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation Method and Tendency</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Along with the cultural terms, the data are also observed and identified to find the method utilized by Google Translate to translate the cultural terms. The utilized translation method are word-for-word translation, literal translation, faithful translation, semantic translation, free &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;translation, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;adaptation</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">translation. The tendency of the translation utilized by Google Translate in translating cultural terms from Indonesian into English is determined by two translation emphasize; SL-emphasize and TL-emphasize.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Word-for-word Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Google translated has utilized this method of translation on 9 data. In term of preserving the culture from SL, both</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">literal translation and word-for-word translation methods are utilized the same. In its application, word-for-word translation method utilized by Google Translate is exactly as Newmark has stated in word-for-word method, in which word-for-word translation method maintains the grammar rule in SL, forcing it into TL (Newmark 1988: 46). One of the translation results are displayed below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Sidhimantra pun bergegas menuju </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Gunung Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : Sidhimantra rushed to </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Mount Agung</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The translation done by Google Translate on </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung Agung</span><span class="font5"> in SL into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mount Agung</span><span class="font5"> into TL is categorized as word-for-word translation method. In this data, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mount</span><span class="font5">, and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Agung</span><span class="font5"> is just transferred into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Agung</span><span class="font5">. In term of grammatical order, Google Translate has brought the rule of SL and fit it with the TL sentence. The translation is done without regarding the context for TL reader, thus creating a completely direct result of translation for the ecology-related term of SL, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Gunung Agung</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1988:46) stated, this method of translation converses the SL grammar construction into closest TL equivalents. The differences between literal and word-for-word is seen from how Google Translate had translate the term by utilizing this translation method. The terms are translated while maintaining the culture of SL by adapting the grammar structure of the TL. There are 43 data translated by Google Translate with literal translation method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The result of the translation are presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Sehingga tempat ini juga dinamai dengan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Pura Tirta Empul </span><span class="font5">Translated : So this place is also named </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Tirta Empul Temple</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The process performed by Google Translate in translating </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pura Tirta</span><span class="font5"> Empul into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tirta Empul Temple</span><span class="font5"> is classified as literal translation method since the translation has brought the term from SL while adapting the grammar of the TL. The word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pura</span><span class="font5"> is translated by adapting an equivalent word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">temple</span><span class="font5">, both word are the modifier of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tirta Empul</span><span class="font5">, a tourism object famous in Bali. The literal translation method is belonged to SL-emphasized classification, which shows the tendency of the MT in translating a name of place or cultural location. The word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Tirta Empul</span><span class="font5"> itself is not translated since Google acknowledge the term as a name, thus transferring the word as the way it is into TL.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Faithful Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1988:46) states, this method of translation converses the contextual meaning in disregard of the context in TL, in order to produce a precise translation result. Any translation performed by Google Translate without changes is considered as faithful translation method in a hypothesis that Google Translate retains the cultural term as the way it is in SL. There are 35 data translated with this method by Google Translate. Below is one of the data that has been translated with this method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : mayat bertumpukan seperti gunung, maka tempat ini namai </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Dusun Sawa Gunung</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : corpses are piled up like mountains, then this place is named </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Dusun Sawa Gunung</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In term of faithfulness, the aspect of translation is not limited in the unchanged linguistic aspect, but also the cultural concept in term of meaning. The translation of place or cultural location is deemed as not translated term, thus causing the data untranslated. However, the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dusun</span><span class="font5"> is actually translatable with suggested translation choice of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">village</span><span class="font5"> as the most common, while </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">backwoods</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">country</span><span class="font5"> as uncommon suggestions provided by Google Translate statistic. The reason for the untranslated word despite of being able to be translate might be caused due to the MT considered the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Dusun</span><span class="font5"> as part of the name, thus the program had refused to translate it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semantic Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Among the translation methods that belonged to SL-emphasized translation category, semantic translation methods is the most flexible method of translation in term of preserving the culture from SL. The translation performed by Google Translate has shown that the cultural terms translated by utilizing this method are conversed into a neutral expression in TL. Google Translated utilized semantic translation method only on 5 data. The data below is one of the translation with this method.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Sidhimantra membunyikan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">genta </span><span class="font5">seperti petunjuk dalam mimpinya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : Sidhimantra sounded the </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">bell </span><span class="font5">like a clue in his dream</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The SL term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">genta</span><span class="font5"> is referred toward a holy bell used by Hindu priest/priestess while incanting the prayer, leading the other prayers, and only seen used in a special ceremony. In KBBI, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">genta</span><span class="font5"> means 1) a metal-made cup upside down with a small bat which upon hitting the metal cup, causes a high pitch sound to reverberate, 2) a big bell commonly found on church, and 3) a bell attached on cattle, especially cows. On the other hand, the term is translated as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bell</span><span class="font5">, which according to Merriam Webster, it is 1) a thing that resembled a bell, 2) metallic device that gives reverberating sound when hit, 3) a percussion that gives a sound similar as bell when struck. From the translation Google Translate has used semantic translation method by translating the term into a neutral expression in TL. This translation method is used to maintain the culture from SL by translating the term with a word from TL with broader meaning. Also, the term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">genta</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bell </span><span class="font5">have few similarities in aspect of causing a reverberating sound upon hit, however in context, </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">genta</span><span class="font5"> and </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bell</span><span class="font5"> are not related. The suggested translation for this could be </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">holy bell</span><span class="font5"> as to emphasize the context of the holiness of the </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">genta</span><span class="font5"> from the story.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Free Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark (1988:46) states free translation crafts its own style in translating the text, including a changes in form or contents. In the practices, the translation of the cultural terms has undergone a significant changes after Google Translate utilized this method. The changes is done replacing the terms into a complete a term or expression that far from related with the culture in SL. So far only 5 data are translated with this</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">translation method by Google Translate. The translation method has produced the data presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : patih Kerajaan Majapahit yang bernama Gajah Mada memang bertekad untuk menyatukan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Nusantara</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : The governor of the Majapahit Kingdom, Gajah Mada, was determined to unite the </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">archipelago</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Nusantara</span><span class="font5"> is translated into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">archipelago</span><span class="font5"> by Google Translate, which is categorized as free translation. The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Nusantara</span><span class="font5"> is referred toward a country Indonesia, however in Majapahit Era, the term had been referred toward the territory of Southeast Asia. The translation of the term into </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">archipelago</span><span class="font5"> is done by Google Translate by replacing it with a term that is not related in meaning, let alone context, as the term has nothing to do with each other. However the word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">archipelago</span><span class="font5"> has similar concept and synonymously being a cluster of islands since Indonesia consists of many islands, despite it was misinterpreted as </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">archipelago</span><span class="font5">, (Gaynor, 2007).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation Translation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">There are 12 data that has been translated with this method. In term of closest tendency in translation toward TL, the adaptation translation method is considered as the correct method of translation among other TL-emphasized translation. In the process of translation, the cultural terms translated by Google Translate in utilizing this process has translated into a the culture of TL. It is the way to achieve equivalence which is in accordance with the culture of TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(Newmark, 1998:46). The translation of this method can be seen below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Original : Ia &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lalu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pulang &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">memecahkan </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">celengan</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">nya</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translated : He then went home and broke </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">his </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">piggy bank</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Despite both term has something to do with word </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pig</span><span class="font5"> (</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">celeng</span><span class="font5"> in Indonesian), etymologically the terms are not related at all. In each practice, both are used to save money, or coins which is another form of currency. The term </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">celengan</span><span class="font5"> is popularized due to how money-saving device in SL culture is shaped after a swine animal. However, in case of </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">piggy bank</span><span class="font5">, the origin of the term is derived from a pun, or word play of the material commonly used to craft the thing, named </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pygg</span><span class="font5"> or clay. The translation is done by Google Translate by utilizing adaptation translation method, which is by transferring the term from SL and replace it with equivalent term from SL culture.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Based on the findings and discussions presented above, from seven Balinese folktales which are chosen in random. The folklore are Manik Angkeran, Kebo Iwa (there are two version of the folktales), Tampaksiring, Lubdaka, The Origin of Bali, The Origin of Singaraja, and Lastly Pan Balang Tamak, five cultural terms had been found with total 1 10 terms from the folktales. For the translation strategy, Google Translate is able to translate few cultural terms from traditional folktales. There are 6 methods out of 8 translation methods proposed by Newmark that has been utilized by Google Translate to translate the cultural terms. The utilized methods are word-for-word translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">method, literal translation method, faithful translation method, semantic translation method, free translation method, and adaptation translation method.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>5. References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Craciunescu, O., </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font5">. 2004. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Machine</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Computer-Assisted Translation: &nbsp;&nbsp;A New Way of</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Translating?</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sofer, Morry. 2009. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">The Translator’s Handbook Seventh Revised Edition, </span><span class="font5">Rockvile</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">,</span><span class="font5"> Maryland, Schreiber Publishing, Inc. p. 155-156</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Larson, M. 1984. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: &nbsp;A Guide to Cross</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Language Equivalence</span><span class="font5">. Boston: University Press of America Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font5">. New York: Prentice Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Approaches to Translation.</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Great Britain:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Prentice Hall International (UK) Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Nida, E. A. 1964. Towards A Science of Translation, with special reference to principles and procedures involved in Bible translating. Leiden: Brill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Hutchins, W. J. and Somers, H. L. 1992.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">An introduction to machine translatio</span><span class="font5">n, London: &nbsp;&nbsp;Academic</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Hutchins J. 1995. Machine Translation: A Brief History, Concise History of the Language Sciences: From the Sumerians to the Cognitivists. Koerner E. F. K. and Asher R. E. (ed.). Oxford: Pergamon Press. p. 431- 445</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Cheragui, M.A. 2012. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Theoretical Overview Of Machine Translation</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">CEUR Workshop Proceedings. 867. 160-169.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Creswell, J. W. 2009. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches.</span><span class="font5"> California: Sage Publication, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Catford, J.G. 1965. A Linguistic Theory of Translation: An Essay in Applied Linguistics. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">University Press. p. 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bell, A. 1991. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Translation and Translating: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Practice</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Longman</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Group UK Limited. p.6</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Champollion, Y. (2001). </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Machine Translation (MT), and the Future of the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Industry</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Translation Journal, 5(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Johnson, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(2004). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Machine</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Translation(s)</span><span class="font5">. Paragraph: Journal of Modern Crtical Theory. 27(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baker, Mona. (1992). In Other Words, A Coursebook &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">London: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Gaynor, Jennifer L. (2007). Marritime Ideologies and Ethnic Anomalies: Sea Space and the Structure of Subalternity in the Souteast Asian Littoral. In J. Bentley, R. Bridenthal &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;K. Wigen (Ed.)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Seascapes: &nbsp;Maritime &nbsp;Hostories,</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Littoral Cultures, and Transoceanic Exchanges</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;(p.53-70). Honolulu:</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">University &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hawaii</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Press.</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1515/97808"><span class="font5">https://doi.org/10.1515/97808</span></a><span class="font5"> 24864248-005</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">33</span></p>