---
layout: full_article
title: "POWER RELATIONS IN CALISTUNG LEARNING IN TK/RA AND SD/MI CURRICULUM IN SOUTH KUTA DISTRICT"
author: "M. Mughni Juliantara"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-94810 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-94810"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-94810"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2022 Vol. 15, Number 4, Page 57-70</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">POWER RELATIONS IN CALISTUNG LEARNING IN TK/RA AND SD/MI CURRICULUM IN SOUTH KUTA DISTRICT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">M. Mughni Juliantara</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Masters Program in Cultural Studies, Faculty of Cultural Sciences, Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">University, Jln. Nias No. 13 Sanglah Denpasar, 80114</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-mail: </span><a href="mailto:mugen.lombok@gmail.com"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">mugen.lombok@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;15-08-2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;30-10-2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;30-11-2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Reading, writing, arithmetic or what is abbreviated as calistung are basic skills that are often a problem for students. The practice in the field of calistung learning curriculum at the kindergarten and elementary school levels is out of sync. The calistung learning curriculum at the kindergarten level is not allowed to be taught directly, while the elementary school curriculum requires first graders to master calistung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study aims to analyze the form of power relations in the calistung learning curriculum, reveal the factors behind power relations, as well as uncover and examine the impact of power relations in the calistung learning curriculum on kindergarten and elementary school students. This study uses a qualitative approach with interpretive descriptive-qualitative data analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The results showed: first, the form of power relations in calistung learning in the TK/RA and SD/MI curriculum was extracurricular and private calistung activities. Second, this power relation occurs against the background of several factors, namely the TK/RA 2013 curriculum and SD/MI 2013 curriculum, institutional policies, demands of guardians of students, community assessments, and acceptance of new elementary/MI students. Third, power relations in calistung learning have positive and negative impacts. The positive impact is that students become more confident in learning activities because they have mastered calistung. The negative impact is that students become depressed with lessons, lose playing time, untraceable mindsets, decrease interest in learning because they feel they have mastered, get angry easily when stressed with lessons, and decrease achievement. This condition is known as &quot;mental hectic&quot;. The government must take firm action against institutions that violate the established curriculum. Institutions, educators and guardians of students must be wise in providing calistung material to children or students, calistung must be given according to the stages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: power relations, learning, calistung, curriculum</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Education is a basic need for humans. Education is a way to be free from the shackles of ignorance and poverty. Education also changes a person into a noble and</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">responsible person. Therefore, the state guarantees the education of every citizen to obtain education. Every citizen has the same right to obtain quality education (UUD No. 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Early Childhood Education (PAUD), namely Kindergarten (TK) and Raudatul Athfal (RA) is a formal education before taking basic education for students. In teaching and learning activities a curriculum is needed to achieve educational goals. The current curriculum for the TK/RA level is the 2013 curriculum or the so-called 2013 Curriculum for Early Childhood Education. The 2013 Curriculum for Early Childhood Education refers to the National Standard for Early Childhood Education, namely Permendikbud No.146 of 2014.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In principle, the process of implementing the learning curriculum in kindergarten is &quot;play while learning, learning while playing&quot;. Play is the best way to develop children's potential. Before going to school, playing is a scientific way to discover the environment, other people and oneself (SE.Dikdasmen.1839.2009). The principle of playing while learning, learning while playing which was developed by the government in the kindergarten curriculum is accompanied by psychological development, age, and the ability of students. The learning process must create a fun, exciting atmosphere and without any coercion from outside students. In the learning process, exploration is more important than the final result.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The introduction of reading, writing and arithmetic (calistung) is carried out through an approach that is appropriate to the child's developmental stage. Therefore, education in kindergarten is not allowed to teach calistung material directly as fragmented learning to children. The context of calistung learning in kindergarten should be carried out within the framework of developing all aspects of child development, carried out through a play approach, and adapted to the task of child development. Creating an environment rich in “literacy” will stimulate children's readiness to start calistung activities (SE.Dikdasmen.1839.2009).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">At the elementary level, the official curriculum imposed by the government is the 2013 curriculum, which is guided by Permendikbud No. 67 of 2013. The 2013 curriculum aims to prepare Indonesian people to have the ability to live as individuals and citizens who are faithful, productive, creative, innovative, and affective and able to contribute to the life of society, nation, state, and world civilization (Permendikbud No. Year 2013). The 2013 curriculum is a curriculum that is more innovative, modern and follows or adapts to the times that are relevant to current conditions. Students are directed to understand the current reality through a more active, critical, comprehensive and collaborative learning</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">system with teachers or educators.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The implementation of the 2013 SD/MI Curriculum learning content is carried out through learning with an integrated thematic approach from Grade one to Grade six. Religious Education and Character Education subjects are excluded from using integrated-thematic learning. Integrated thematic learning is a learning approach that integrates various competencies from various subjects into various themes. Therefore, every student who graduates from kindergarten and will continue to elementary school must be able to prepare themselves as well as possible to study in elementary school, both psychological readiness and the ability to read, write and count independently.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The application of calistung learning in the kindergarten and elementary school curriculum has become a problem and a gap in the field. At the kindergarten level, educators are not allowed to give calistung teaching directly to students, calistung material at the kindergarten level must be given in a fun method, namely by playing while learning, learning while playing. Calistung ability at the kindergarten level is not the main goal of education, the main goal of kindergarten education is to shape the character (soft skills) of students to become mature individuals psychologically, cognitively, motorly, socially, and religiously.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kindergarten level education curriculum that does not make calistung ability the main goal of education seems to be contrary to the curriculum that applies at the elementary level. The elementary school curriculum demands the ability of students to master calistung well in order to be able to participate in learning activities. If students have not mastered calistung, they will be very difficult in the learning process applied at the elementary level.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The curriculum gap between kindergarten and elementary school in calistung learning creates power relations between institutions, educators and students, and parents of students. Kindergarten institutions carry out calistung learning policies directly in the form of calistung lessons so that students master calistung before entering elementary school. Additional lessons in the form of tutoring often burden students who are not yet psychologically mature to receive direct calistung learning. This policy also burdens parents with a large additional fee.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The demands of new students' calistung mastery skills at the elementary level, as well as the understanding of students' parents who are still logocentric, who consider that calistung ability is the main and only provision to achieve the success of their children's education by putting aside non-academic abilities or soft skills to create power relations between institutions, educators with students and guardians of students is getting stronger</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">and continues to be practiced. The policy of direct calistung learning given to kindergarten students can have a negative impact in the future that is not realized by institutions, educators, and parents of students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Power relations in the application of calistung learning policies in the kindergarten curriculum, by providing calistung materials to students, if carried out continuously can have an impact on students, institutions, educators and guardians of students. The impact can be positive and negative. Students will feel the most significant impact on this power relationship in the future.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The positive impact felt by students with the application of calistung when sitting at the RA level is that students will feel academic readiness when sitting at the elementary level because they have mastered calistung. Academic readiness will make students more confident and enthusiastic when learning. Confidence and enthusiasm for learning make the opportunities for students to become outstanding students wide open. However, behind the positive impact, students who receive calistung learning directly when sitting at the RA level can feel the negative impact of the policy in the future.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The negative impact that is most often caused is the emergence of a sense of laziness in learning that is felt by students when sitting at the elementary level in higher classes such as in third grade, fourth grade and fifth grade. The feeling of laziness experienced by students is caused by boredom in learning and a sense of having mastered the material being taught. This makes students stagnate in learning and less developed in education in the future. Another negative impact that can be experienced by students is low interest in reading (literacy) which causes students to later become individuals who are lazy to read and often draw conclusions without reading in more detail, so they often spread invalid information (hoaxes). Another negative impact that is feared if students are given calistung material at the kindergarten level is that students become rebellious individuals or known as &quot;Mental Hectic&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">METHOD</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Research Approach</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This study uses a qualitative approach that relies on critical social theory commonly used in Cultural Studies. Qualitative writing is a research approach that reveals certain social situations by properly describing reality, formed by words based on relevant data collection and analysis techniques, obtained from natural situations (Satori and Komariah, 2010:25).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Qualitative research is descriptive, namely by presenting the facts as they are,</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">then doing an adequate interpretation and describing the object in a narrative manner. Qualitative research is concerned with data, and images rather than numbers. Describing something means describing what, why and how an event occurred (Satori and Komariah, 2010: 28).</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The data obtained during conducting the research has no meaning if it is not processed, analyzed, and presented systematically. Data analysis in qualitative research is inductive and continuous. The ultimate goal of qualitative data analysis is to obtain meaning, generate understandings, concepts and develop new hypotheses or theories. Qualitative data analysis is the process of systematically searching and compiling data obtained from interviews, field notes, and other materials so that they are easy to understand so that they can be informed to others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Research sites</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The number of institutions that became the object of research was initially 19 institutions consisting of two kindergarten institutions, four PAUD institutions, four RA institutions, five elementary schools, and four MI institutions. The research locations were then focused on four TK/RA institutions and four SD/MI institutions. The eight institutions that are the location of this research are as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PAUD Tadika Puri</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PAUD Mutiara Bunda</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RA Al-Ma'arif</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RA Insan Mulia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SDN 4 Ungasan</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;SDN 6 Jimbaran</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MI Insan Mulia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MI Al-Maarif Nusantara</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The selection of the eight institutions as the object of research refers to the focus of the problems studied in this study. The institution chosen as the research location was determined purposively with the consideration of representing the diversity of conditions in the application of calistung learning which became the main problem in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The selection of the eight institutions as research locations also refers to the design of this research, namely a qualitative approach in the form of case studies. The selected case studies are compound case studies or collective case studies. Referring to Yin (1994), Daymon and Holloway (2008) the use of multiple case studies makes it possible to find similarities and differences between cases, and can even draw</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">generalizations. The following is a table of the eight institutions. The selection of the eight institutions was also based on the ease of access for researchers to obtain data, because not all institutions were open and willing to accept guests from outside the school environment due to the coronavirus (covid 19) pandemic situation which was still endemic when the research was carried out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The above institutions were chosen as research locations because they are located in one sub-district, namely South Kuta District. The existence of an institution located in one sub-district makes it easier for researchers to conduct research. The above institutions both researchers consider representative enough to conduct research related to power relations in calistung learning. The number of institutions is considered sufficiently representative and varied, enabling researchers to obtain varied information and making research more interesting. The varied research locations allow researchers to obtain complex information about how one institution and another implement calistung learning in their respective institutions. What factors are the reasons for implementing the policy, as well as what impacts are felt by students when implementing the policy. It is hoped that all of this information can be obtained from the above institutions that are the location of this research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Research time</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The research was conducted from October to November 2020 when the Covid 19 pandemic was still very high, so it was a little difficult to research. Many schools and teachers refused to be used as research locations because the pandemic situation was still very high at that time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data Types and Sources</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The type of data obtained and analyzed in this study is qualitative data which is divided into primary data and secondary data. Primary data were obtained from informants with direct interview techniques and direct observation in the research field. The secondary data is obtained from supporting documents obtained at the research location in the form of photographs, books, magazines, education laws or other information that supports research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Determination of Research Informants</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To obtain valid and credible research results, researchers must start their research by determining the source of information or informants. Determining the right informants</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">will produce valid and credible data sources as well. According to Spradley in Faisal (1990:45) informants must have several criteria to consider, namely:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Subjects that have been intensively associated with an activity or activity for a long time the field of activity that is the target or attention of the research and this usually characterized by the ability to provide information by heart about something asked.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Subjects are still fully and actively engaged in the environment and activities being targeted or researched.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The subject has enough time and opportunity to be asked information.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Subjects who provide information do not tend to be processed or packaged in advance and they are still relatively innocent in providing information.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, the determination of informants was carried out using a purposive technique, namely the selection of informants was carried out intentionally based on predetermined criteria and was determined based on the research objectives. The selection of informants in the study was selected based on the activities or activities of informants who are directly related or directly involved in the world of TK/RA and SD/MI education, both as teachers, institution managers and as guardians of students. The following are the criteria for informants in this study:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Teachers who teach at TK/RA and SD/MI (especially first grade teachers)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Managers of TK/RA and SD/MI institutions (Principals/Madrasah)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Parents (guardians) of TK/RA and SD/MI</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Communities around TK/RA and SD/MI</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Research Instruments</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To obtain data relevant to research, research instruments are needed. The research instrument is useful for collecting data and checking the validity of the data obtained. The main instrument in the research is the researcher himself. To support success in research, researchers need tools and support during research. To obtain the results of a focused and in-depth interview, an interview guide is needed as a guide for researchers during the interview process with informants. The interview process and interview results were then immortalized with voice and video recording aids using a smartphone owned by the researcher. Video recordings, photos and sound can strengthen the narrative in the presentation of research results.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data Collection Methods and Techniques</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The process of collecting data and information in this study uses several methods</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">and techniques that support research. Data collection methods used include:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ordinary Observation Method and Participatory Observation</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The observation method in data collection allows researchers to obtain data accurately and update directly from the research location. In this study, observations are usually carried out by researchers by observing the process of teaching and learning activities directly in the classroom, how the calistung learning policy runs in detail. Ordinary observations are also carried out by direct interaction with students with teachers, teachers with guardians of students. Participatory observation allows researchers to obtain real and in-depth data directly from informants and from researchers' personal findings. Observation of the participation of the researcher was done by directly becoming a teacher in the school and observing how the teaching process, conducting teaching, and evaluating learning in order to obtain more accurate and in-depth research results.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In-depth Interview Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In-depth interview is the process of collecting data by researchers by means of oral question and answer. Interviews were conducted face-to-face with informants. The in-depth interview process allows researchers to obtain in-depth primary information from informants that can support and facilitate the data analysis process. In-depth interviews allow researchers to obtain detailed, in-depth and thorough information. The data that can be extracted in this study is about the main reasons or factors behind the policies of TK/RA and SD/MI to hold calistung learning and how power relations are formed between institutions, teachers, parents, and students. In the interview process, the researcher holds an interview guide in the form of an interview control card that contains a collection of research-related questions. The function of the interview guide is so that the interview is directed, does not widen out of topic, directly to the main problem being studied.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Documentation Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Documentation is carried out to strengthen the data obtained at the research site. Documentation in the form of photos of activities in the field as well as photos of data obtained.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Data Analysis Methods and Techniques</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this study, the data analysis technique was carried out descriptively-interpretatively through three cycles of analysis, namely the process of data reduction, display and conclusion drawing/verification.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Data Reduction</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In simple terms, the data reduction process is the process of selecting data that has been collected from interviews and research results directly at the research location into simpler data that supports research. Data reduction is a form of analysis that sharpens, categorizes, directs, discards unnecessary and organizes data in such a way that conclusions can be drawn and verified (Miles and Huberman, 1992:15). The data that has been simplified into the form of research themes are then verified and compiled into a description.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exposure (Display)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Data exposure is a process where data has been collected and analyzed, then conclusions are drawn. According to Miles and Huberman (1992:14) data is a set of structured information that provides the possibility of drawing conclusions and taking action. The data obtained from the results of in-depth interviews with the community were collected to draw conclusions so that they could be used in the form of descriptive narratives. According to Iskandar (2008:223), in presenting data, researchers must be able to arrange systematically or simultaneously so that the data obtained can explain or answer the problem being studied, for that researchers must not be hasty in drawing conclusions.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Withdrawal of Conclusions (Verification)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The third step of the data analysis process is drawing conclusions or verification. Conclusions can be drawn when data collection has been completed. Basically, from the beginning of data collection activities, researchers can start to make some conclusions. The data that has been collected is linked with one another according to the theme, analyzed and then drawn conclusions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Methods and Techniques for Presentation of Data Analysis Results</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Sudaryanto (1993: 57) there are two methods and techniques for presenting data analysis, namely formal and informal methods. The formal method is a presentation method using statistics in the form of numbers and tables, while the informal method is a presentation method using ordinary words to make it seem detailed and unraveling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">To obtain a complete and comprehensive analysis result, in this study the author uses the two methods above, namely the formal and informal methods. Formal methods are presented in the form of statistics in the form of tables and figures. The tables</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">presented are then analyzed to show the data found. While the informal method is presented in the form of qualitative descriptions. In this study, the researchers combined the two methods in order to obtain structured and directed writing results .</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Education is a basic human need. The main basis of education is the ability to read, write and count or abbreviated as calistung. Calistung is often a frightening specter for most parents, especially mothers. Calistung became a frightening specter because it became a barometer of a child's success in school. Therefore, the guardians of students try as early as possible to teach their children calistung even though they are still very early in preparation for entering kindergarten.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The curriculum as a teaching reference set by the government in this case the Ministry of Education and Culture (Kemendikbud) has regulated how to apply teaching related to calistung in the TK/RA and SD/MI curriculum. The calistung material in the 2013 TK/RA curriculum or what is known as the current early childhood education curriculum regulates how calistung learning is given to students. The teaching method of calistung at the TK/RA level must be taught in accordance with the principle of &quot;Learning while playing, playing while learning&quot;, it is forbidden to teach calistung in a direct or fragmented way. The learning process must be carried out in a happy, fun atmosphere, while playing and singing, so that students do not feel pressured and forced to learn. Therefore, the output of TK/RA does not refer to the student's calistung ability. The emphasis on the goals of TK/RA education is the emotional, psychological and spiritual maturity of students so that they are ready to study at the SD/MI level.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">This condition then gave rise to policies issued by TK/RA institutions that continued to teach calistung directly to their students even though they had to violate the applicable rules and principles held by educators. The form of policy issued by the institution is the holding of calistung extracurricular activities or special additional hours for learning calistung. This policy is not free, parents are charged a large fee to follow this policy. This calistung learning policy is a form of power relation in calistung learning in TK/RA and SD/MI.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The power relation in calistung learning is motivated by various factors. The first factor is the synchrony between the TK/RA and SD/MI curricula on calistung material. The second factor is the demand from the guardians of students to teach calistung directly to students so that they have the provisions to enter SD/MI. The third factor is the community's assessment of the institution. For the community, good TK/RA institutions</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">are institutions that graduate students with calistung abilities, are accepted into desired schools, and excel. Good judgment from the community benefits the institution both morally and materially. The fourth factor is the New Student Admission (PPDB) which often requires calistung ability as the main requirement for new student acceptance, the fifth factor that greatly influences is the understanding of most guardians of students, even some educators who are still very logocentric who think that exact abilities are the only way to be successful and achieve the achievements of their children and put aside other abilities or soft skills.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Power relations in calistung learning directly on students can have positive and negative impacts. The positive impact is that students become students who are ready to study at the SD/MI level, students become confident because they have mastered calistung since sitting in TK/RA. Students are easy to follow teaching and learning activities in SD/MI and are likely to become students who excel. But behind the positive impact there is a negative impact that is bad for the development of students. Students who are given calistung material directly from an early age have the potential to experience learning disorders when they are in SD/MI. they develop into lazy students to learn, quickly satisfied with their achievements, underestimate the lessons because they feel they have mastered the material provided by the teacher. In their severe condition, they experience &quot;Mental Hectic&quot; which is a condition where students become individuals who are easily angry if they cannot solve problems or tasks given by the educator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The negative impact of this calistung learning policy power relation should be the concern of all relevant parties, government, institutions, educators and parents of students. These negative impacts not only affect the educational process, but can affect real life in their real environment after completing their education period. That is, if this condition is not taken seriously, it can have a negative impact on the quality of our nation's generation in the mindset and problem solving and so on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">First, the form of power relations in calistung learning in the TK/RA and SD/MI curriculum in South Kuta District is the institution's policy in the form of calistung special extracurricular activities. This activity teaches TK/RA Calistung students directly as preparation for entering elementary school. This policy violates the principles and rules that apply to the TK/RA teaching system which puts forward the rules of learning while playing, playing while learning. In addition, this activity also requires the student's guardian to incur additional costs that have been agreed between the institution and the student's</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">guardian. This policy raises pros and cons among parents, guardians of students with sufficient economic conditions will not object to the additional costs that must be incurred, while guardians of students who are still completely limited will object to spending extra fees. Meanwhile, at the SD/MI level, the policy form on the Calistung curriculum is more or less the same as that of TK/RA, namely for students who have not been able to Calistung, special programs are made in the form of extracurricular activities at school or private lessons with their teachers at a cost and place that has been mutually agreed upon in advance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Second, power relations in calistung learning are motivated by the early childhood education curriculum (PAUD) and elementary school curriculum (SD) which are felt to be out of sync. In the PAUD curriculum, students are prohibited from being taught calistung directly, structured and divided, because the principle is learning while playing, playing while learning. While in the elementary school curriculum, students are required to be fluent in calistung since sitting in the first grade of elementary school. Another factor behind the occurrence of power relations is the demand from parents of students for institutions and educators to teach their children calistung as a provision to enter elementary school. The last factor behind the occurrence of power relations is the assessment of the community. The community judges whether an institution is good or not based on the calistung ability of the graduates of that institution. A good assessment from the community has a good impact on the institution with more and more students enrolling in the institution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Third, power relations in calistung learning policies have an impact on institutions, educators, students, and guardians of students. The impact felt in the form of positive impacts and negative impacts. The impact felt by institutions and educators in TK/RA is a feeling that is less pleasing to the heart when carrying out policies, teaching calistung directly to TK/RA students directly has sacrificed the ideals they learn and guide, but on the one hand they get advantages material from additional costs incurred by the student's guardian. Meanwhile, SD/MI institutions feel the good impact of this policy because they get students who are ready to learn and facilitate teaching and learning activities. Besides that, institutions and educators also get additional material from the parents of students who study extra calistung. Students are the ones who most feel the impact of this calistung learning policy. When they are in kindergarten they are often depressed because they are not mentally and of age enough to receive calistung lessons. When they enter elementary school, it will be easy for them to receive lessons from educators, they tend to be high achieving students, but later in life most of them experience a decrease in interest in</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">learning, underestimate lessons because they feel they can, as a result their achievement drops. The most severe impact can cause students to experience hectic mental conditions, namely where students become irritable individuals if they cannot solve problems or assignments, their mindset is not intact in understanding the problem because they are not traced in seeing the problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Allen, Marrow Raymond, Carlos Alberto Torres. 2002. Reading Freire and Habermas Critical and pedagogy and Transformative Social Change. New York: Teachers College Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Asiah, Nur. 2018. Pembelajaran Calistung Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini dan Ujian Calistung Masuk Sekolah Dasar di Bandar Lampung. Terampil Jurnal Pendidikan dan Pembelajaran Dasar. Vol 5: No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Barker, Chirs. 2005. Cultural Studies, Teori dan Praktik (terjemahan). Yogyakarta: PT. Bentang Pustaka.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">----------, 2014. Kamus Kajian Budaya. Yogyakarta: PT Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bredekamp, S., &amp;&nbsp;Copple, C. (1997). Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early Childhood Programs (Revised Edition). Washington, DC: NAEYC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bredekamp, S. 1987. National Association for the Education of Young Children's. Washington, DC: NAEYC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Duffy, Roehler. 1989. Improving Classroom Reading Instruction. New York: Radom House</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Fairclough, Norman dan Ruth Wodak. 1995. “Discourse as Social Interaction”, vol 2. London: Sage Publication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">George. 2016. Dasar- Dasar Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini (PAUD). Jakarta: PT. Indek.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hasballah. 2014. Pertumbuhan dan perkembangan anak. Banda Aceh: Yayasan Pena</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hanifah, Nanang, dan Cucu Suhana. Konsep Strategi Pembelajaran. Bandung: PT. Refika Aditama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Heruman. 2013. Model Pembelajaran Matematika di sekolah Dasar. Bandung: PT. Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hibana S. Rahman. 2002. Konsep Dasar Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini. Yogyakarta: PGTKI Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Indrijati, Herdina, dkk. 2016. Psikologi perkembangan &amp;&nbsp;pendidikan Anak Usia Dini. Jakarta: Kencana PrenadaMedia Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Maryatun, Ika Budi. Tanpa tahun. “Calistung untuk Paud” dalam makalah Program</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pelatihan Tenaga Pendidik PAUD Kecamatan Tempel, Yogyakarta. Dinas Pendidikan dan Kebudyaaan Sleman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mansur. 2005. Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini Dalam Islam. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Belajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Maspupah, ulpah. 2016. Manajemen Pengembangan Kurikulum Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini. Tesis. IAIN Purwokerto.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mc.Laren, Peter. 2003. Life In Schools: An Introduction to Critical Pedagogy In The Foundations Of Education. USA: Pearson Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Michael Huberman, dan Matthew B. Miles. 1992. Analisis data kualitatif .Terj. Tjejep Rohidi.Jakarta : UI Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Muji, Sutrisno, Hendar Putranto. 2005. Teori-Teori Kebudayaan.Yogyakarta: Kanisius</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Patmonodewo, Soemiarti. 2000. Pendidikan Anak Prasekolah. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Spradley, James. P. 1980. Participant Observation. New York: Holt</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Syaodih, Ernawulan dan Mubiar Agustin. 2014. Bimbingan Konseling Untuk Anak Usia Dini. Penerbit Universitas Terbuka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tohirin. 2011. Psikologi Pembelajaran Pendidikan Agama Islam Berbasis Integrasi dan Kompetensi. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wink, Joan. 2000. Critical Pedagogy: Notes From The Real World. United States: Addison-Wesley Longman Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">70</span></p>