---
layout: full_article
title: "THE PRACTICE OF INDEPENDENT LEARNING AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR STUDENTS’ LEARNING IN CLASSROOMS AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS"
author: "I Made Kartika, A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara, I Ketut Suda, I Gede Mudana"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-84083 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-84083"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-84083"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">February 2022 Vol. 15, Number 1, Page 33-51</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">THE PRACTICE OF INDEPENDENT LEARNING AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR STUDENTS’ LEARNING IN CLASSROOMS AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">I Made Kartika<sup>1</sup>, A.A. Ngurah Anom Kumbara<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Suda<sup>3</sup>,I Gede Mudana<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>1</sup>Dwijendra University Denpasar, <sup>2</sup>Cultural Studies Study Program, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University, <sup>3</sup>Indonesian Hindu University Denpasar, <sup>4</sup>Bali State Polytechnic</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Email: <sup>1</sup> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">k</span><a href="mailto:wik.kartika@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">wik.kartika@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:2anom.kumbara@unud.c.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>anom.kumbara@unud.c.id</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><a href="mailto:3suda.unhidps@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>3</sup>suda.unhidps@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><a href="mailto:4igedemudana@gmail.com"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>4</sup>igedemudana@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;28-05-2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;07-02-2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;28-02-2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This article examines the practice of independent learning and its implications for students, the learning process in classrooms, and educational institutions.The policy of independent learning is the policy of the Minister of Education and Culture, which includes four main programs, namely the replacement of USBN into school exams, the replacement of the national exam with a minimum competency assessment and character survey, the implementation of a 1-sheet lesson plan, and the application of zoning-based new student admissions. The application of independent learning at the Denpasar City Public High School, especially at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 was held starting from the 2019/2020 academic year. However, in practice there are still some obstacles faced by the school management. The writing of this article uses a qualitative descriptive method, with a cultural studies approach. This research found several things, among others: First,on the psychological aspect of implementing the independent learning policy, especially with regard to the replacement of USBN into a school exam and the National Examination as a minimum competency assessment, at least it can reduce the psychological burden of students in facing these exams. Second, in the didactic aspect, the application of this free learning policy can provide flexibility for teachers in terms of finding and finding various learning strategies and methods to develop PAIKEM learning. Third, in the sociological and juridical aspects, the implementation of this free learning policy can encourage the realization of a sense of justice for the Indonesian people, in terms of obtaining equal opportunities to enjoy quality education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: Freedom of Learning, National Examination, USBN, PPDB based on zoning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The independent learning policy launched by the Minister of Education and Culture of the Republic of Indonesia, starting from the primary and secondary education levels to higher education levelsinteresting to studyacademically. The reason is that various responses emerged in society, both from education practitioners, academics, and society in general.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ideally, education should be able to free people from all the problems that bind their lives. However, in fact education in this case school institutions have not been able to realize the educational goals as mandated in the legislation. In the midst of public anxiety about the low function of schools in developing their potential and freeing students from various problems that bind themselves, the Minister of Education and Culture Nadiem Makarim issued an independent learning policy that ideally promises sweet hopes for future educational prospects. In connection with how the practice of independent learning is carried out by educational units, especially at the state senior high school level (SMA Negeri) in Denpasar City, this research is not only interesting, but also urgent to be carried out immediately.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the background of the problem above, there are three main problems that will be studied in this research, including: (1) What is the form of independent learning practice at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar? (2) What are the potentials and obstacles to the practice of independent learning at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar? (3) What are the implications of the practice of independent learning at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, for students, the learning process in classrooms, and educational institutions? so this research is not only interesting, but also urgent to be done. Based on the background of the problem above, there are three main problems that will be studied in this research, including: (1) What is the form of independent learning practice at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar? (2) What are the potentials and obstacles to the practice of independent learning at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar? (3) What are the implications of the practice of independent learning at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, for students, the learning process in classrooms, and educational institutions? so this research is not only interesting, but also urgent to be done.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The objectives of this research are (1)To analyze the form of the practice of independent learning in State Senior High Schools in Denpasar City; (2) To analyze the potentials and obstacles to the practice of independent learning in State Senior High Schools in Denpasar City; and (3) To analyze the implications of the practice of independent learning in State Senior High Schools in Denpasar City.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">LITERATURE REVIEW</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In order to examine these three problems,digunakan teori Dekonstruksi Jacques Derrida (1976), yang mengatakan bahwa ciri khas dari dekonstruksi adalah penolakannya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">terhadap logosentrisme dan fonosentrisme yang secara keseluruhan melahirkan oposisi biner dan cara-cara berpikir lainnya yang bersifat hierarkhis dikotomis. Kecenderungan utama oposisi biner adalah anggapan bahwa unsur yang pertama merupakan pusat, asal usul, dan prinsip, dengan konskuensi logis unsur yang lain menjadi sekunder, marginal, manifes, dan padanan pelengkap lainnya (Ratna, 2004:222). Dekonstruksi bertujuan untuk membongkar tradisi metafisika Barat seperti fenomenologi Husserlian, strukturalisme Saussurean, psikoanalisis Freudian, dan psikoanalisis Lacanian. Tugas pokok dekonstruksi adalah di satu pihak mengungkap hakekat problematika wacana-wacana yang dipusatkan,and on the other hand dismantle metaphysics by changing its boundaries conceptually (Sarup, 2003:51).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The deconstruction developed by Derrida is a denial of the opposition of speech/written, being/not existing, pure/polluted, and finally the rejection of a single truth or logos itself. Furthermore, deconstruction will separate, disassemble to find and expose various assumptions, rhetorical strategies and text blanks. Disclosure of hierarchical binary oppositions such as reality/appearance, nature/culture, reason/madness, to show: a) that one part of the binary pair is seen as unimportant; b) that the binary guarantees correctness; c) that each part of the binary pair affects each other (Barker, 2004:406).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In addition to the deconstruction theory, this study also uses educational management theory, which is a series of activities in the form of a collaborative business management process of a group of people who are members of educational organizations, to achieve educational goals that have been previously set, to be effective and efficient, with the scope of activities including: planning , organizing, staffing, directing, leading, coordinating, motivating, controlling, reporting, and forecasting. It was further stated that the urgency and implementation of education management on education management covers the following areas: curriculum management, student management, infrastructure management, management of educators and education staff, public relations management, and financial management.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Departing from this fact, it can be said that education management is the development of general management to areas of education. Management according to Terry and Rue (1991:1) is a process or framework that involves the guidance or direction of a group of people towards organizational goals or real purposes. If Terry and Rue put forward management theory in general, then Nohfield (in Suda, 2009:39) explains that education</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">management is a process or framework that provides opportunities for participants or members of school organizations to participate in developing personal understanding and encourage the creation of conditions conducive to practical reflection, especially in the field of education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Understanding the practice of education in schools as a cultural process (enculturation and acculturation) cannot be separated from the relationship between power and knowledge as described by Michel Foucault. Foucault's work on the ''relation of power and knowledge'' (power is knowledge, knowledge is power) is a philosophical contribution to the theory of truth. According to Foucault (2002:167), there is a relationship between power and knowledge. Power is the power and thought of each subject, and not as a right of domination by elite groups that determine the life of the whole society. In this theory, Foucault explores the discursive practices and forms of power that make up the subject. It means, In relation to the relation of power and knowledge, Foucault does not build a rational theory about history, but instead presents history which is marked by discursive discontinuities or forms of power relations with knowledge (Beilharz, 2005:127).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In relation to educational practice, Foucault says that there is no knowledge without the effect of power and vice versa there is no power without knowledge. The theory of relational knowledge as described by Focoult is then eclectic with the concept of capital according to Bourdieu, where Bourdieu (in Hasbullah, 2006:7) says that the terminology of capital has three forms. First, economic capital which can be associated with money or ownership of objects, goods, and the like that can be viewed and used for investment purposes; Second, institutionalized cultural capital in the form of educational qualifications; and third, is social capital which consists of social obligations and among them is institutionalized in the form of honor and nobility. In the process of providing education in this capital exchange school, it can run very well, because according to Bourdieu (1990: 110) dominant economic institutions have been structured to benefit those who already have economic capital.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Likewise, educational institutions are structured to benefit those who already have cultural capital in the form of the habitus of the dominant cultural faction. 110) dominant economic institutions have been structured to benefit those who already have economic capital. Likewise, educational institutions are structured to benefit those who already have cultural capital in the form of the habitus of the dominant cultural faction.That is, in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">educational practice of school management, principals, teachers, school committees, and the education office as the dominant group with the knowledge possessed can become schools as a playground, in which there is always an opportunity to risk each other and exchange capital, namely social capital, cultural capital, and economic capital. For example, through school regulations, the principal makes rules to dominate and hegemony on the parents' side, which is then legalized by the school committee and also by the education office, especially the office in charge of senior high schools.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">RESEARCH METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The writing of this article uses a qualitative method with a cultural studies approach or often referred to as a cultural studies approach (Barker, 2004: 28). Qualitative methods are methods with quality intensity, values, which in their application are distinguished from quantitative methods, namely methods with measurements in the form of numbers and amounts (Ratna, 2010: 306). Qualitative analysis is defined as research that produces descriptive data in the form of words and or expressions, including actions that can be observed with an emphasis on developing concepts and understanding patterns that exist in the data. This research was conducted at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Data collection techniques used include observation techniques, namely by observing various activities carried out by research subjects related to the practice of independent learning in this research location. Then the interview technique is one of the most common and most powerful ways to understand other human beings. Denzin, (2009: 501) states that, interviewing is the art of socializing, the meeting of two humans who interact with each other within a certain period of time. The third technique is the document study technique, which is to find and obtain data about things or variables in the form of notes, transcripts, books, newspapers, magazines, inscriptions, and so on (Arikunto, 2002:206).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Replacement of USBN Into School Examination</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Makarim, the idea to replace the National Standard School Examination (USBN) with an assessment (assessment) is based on the current conditions and situation where USBN is considered to limit the application of the spirit of the National Education System Law which should provide flexibility for schools to determine the graduation of their</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">students. Therefore, in 2020 USBN will be replaced with an exam (assessment) that is held only by the school. This is intended to assess student competence, which is carried out in the form of a written test and or other forms of assessment that are more comprehensive. For example, it is possible to assess student competence, the test is carried out in the form of portfolios and assignments such as group assignments, written works, and so on. All of this is intended to make teachers and schools more independent in assessing the learning outcomes of their students.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Talking about the issue of independent learning, it can refer to a learning model based on giving students a sense of independence in terms of learning which was initiated by the Minister of Education and Culture Nadiem Makarim whose implementation in schools, especially SMA/SMK started in 2019. According to Kurniasih (in Kompas.com/02/02/2020) (accessed January 26, 2021), that one form of free learning policy issued by the Minister of Education and Culture is the implementation of exams held in schools. The concept of independent learning is actually in line with the idea of Freire (in Yunus, 2007: 1) which says that education is basically held in order to free humans from the various life problems they face. So, education for Freire is one of the efforts to restore the function of humans to become human in order to avoid various forms of oppression, ignorance, to being left behind. Regarding what Freire said above and referring to the policy of the Minister of Education and Culture of the Republic of Indonesia, at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar since 2019 the practice of independent learning has been implemented gradually. As stated by the Principal of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, Drs. Ida Bagus Sudirga, M.Pd.H as follows. So at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar since 2019 the practice of independent learning has begun to be implemented which is carried out in stages. As stated by the Principal of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, Drs. Ida Bagus Sudirga, M.Pd.H as follows. So at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar since 2019 the practice of independent learning has begun to be implemented which is carried out in stages. As stated by the Principal of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, Drs. Ida Bagus Sudirga, M.Pd.H as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">We at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, in principle, try to follow whatever policies the central government takes in terms of learning practices. It's like the practice of free learning, because it's a government decision, so we have to follow it. However, for the National Examination which is based on the discourse of independent learning to be changed to US, its implementation will begin in the 2020/2021 academic year. This is because to return the national exam to the form of a school exam, it does require preparation, both regarding the preparation of questions, regarding the facilities and infrastructure to support the implementation of the exam, and especially regarding the preparation of human resources, especially teachers (interview, January 22, 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The same thing was conveyed by the Head of SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, namely Drs. I Ketut Suyastra, M.Pd by saying the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In my opinion, the replacement of USBN into an assessment that is only carried out by the school is an attempt to restore the essence of the exam or the assessment itself. That is, the graduation of students at the end of the level is indeed the authority of the teacher and the school, because those who best understand the abilities of students at the school concerned are the teachers there. Therefore, in principle, I agree to replace the USBN with a school assessment (interview, 8 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Observing the statements of the two informants, a framework of thought can be built that the replacement of USBN into a school assessment is actually a return to the essence of the assessment itself. This means that to determine student graduation at the end of the level is determined by the teacher and the school. This is based on the idea that the teachers who best understand the abilities of the students at the school concerned are the teachers who teach there. In addition, the final level assessment carried out by the school also allows for a more comprehensive assessment of students' abilities, which does not only rely on tests at the end of the level, but can also be given in other forms of assessment, such as assignment assignments, porto polio, and other forms of assessment. collaborative projects.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Change from National Examination to Minimum Competency Assessment</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">As reported by Solopos.com (</span><a href="https://www.solopos.com/Friday"><span class="font1">https://www.solopos.com/Friday</span></a><span class="font1">, 12 February 2021) accessed 15 February 2021, that starting the 2020/2021 school year the Ministry of Education and Culture will no longer hold a national exam as a way to determine a student's graduation. students in ending a certain level of education, but will be replaced with a minimum competency assessment and character survey. The minimum competency assessment and character survey include an assessment of the ability to reason using language (literacy), the ability to reason using mathematics (numbering), and strengthening the character education of students (Kompas.com/11-12-2019) accessed 15 February 2021. Thus, it can be emphasized that starting the 2020/2021 academic year, the national exam which is abbreviated as UN is no longer a graduation requirement for students in ending a certain level of education, and is no longer used as a requirement to enter a higher level of education. Related to the existence of the national exam which in the previous era was often abbreviated as Ebtanas (National Stage of Learning Evaluation), according to Sam M. Chan and Tuti T.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sam (2005:40-41) academically, the goal of Ebtanas to uniform the quality of education was not achieved.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Referring to the views of Chan and Tuti T. Sam that the education or learning process held in schools so far is no longer aimed at mastering and deepening knowledge, but rather leading to efforts to seek financial gain, it seems that this is a fact. Regarding the replacement of the National Examination as a minimum competency assessment and character survey at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA 8 Denpasar, the head of SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, Mr. Drs. I Ketut Suyastra, M.Pd said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For the 2020/2021 academic year, we at SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar have started implementing a minimum competency assessment and character survey as a substitute for the national exam, in determining the graduation of students. Because this assessment model is a government program, which in this case is the Minister of Education and Culture as a form of free learning policy. Yes, as the lowest implementing unit whose name is government policy, it must be supported and implemented. Likewise, the policy of replacing the National Examination with a minimum competency assessment and character surveys that will be carried out starting the 2020/2021 school year must be carried out, said Suyastra when interviewed in a meeting room at SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar (interview, February 8, 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The same thing was conveyed by one of the teachers of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar who was appointed as an informant, namely:Mr. Dewa Gede Alit Dwija, S.Pd (59 years old). Among his various statements he said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Actually, the free learning policy issued by the Minister of Education and Culture has actually started to be implemented since the decision was issued, namely since the 2019/2020 school year. However, its implementation is certainly not as easy as it sounds, because everything requires planning, preparation, and coordination. Regarding the replacement of the National Examination to be a minimum competency assessment and character survey, the Minister had planned from the start that its implementation would begin in the 2020/2021 school year. What is clear is that all components of the free learning policy will be implemented in all educational institutions, especially for the SMA/SMK level (interview, January 22, 2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Observing the statements of the two informants above, it can be understood that the free learning policy in the form of replacing the National Examination with a minimum competency assessment and character survey has indeed begun to be carried out in 2020/2021 schools, especially in SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar. This independent learning policy actually has a close relationship with school-based management as was the education management program that was once programmed in the era of regional</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">autonomy. In relation to the implementation of such education management, Beny Susetyo (2005:31-32) said that education in Indonesia faces three major challenges, namely (1) the world of education is required to be able to maintain the results of educational development that have been achieved previously; (2) to anticipate the global era, the world of education is required to prepare competent human resources to be able to compete in the era of the global job market; (3) considering the number one and number two challenges, namely in the context of anticipating the readiness of human resources to face competition in the global era that has hit the world, it is necessary to make changes and adjustments to the national education system, in order to realize a more democratic education process, paying attention to diversity of needs/conditions of the region and students, as well as encouraging community participation in national development, especially in the field of education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Practices of Independent Learning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Sri Minda Murni as reported by Kompas.com (08-03-2020) (accessed February 8, 2021) that the thing that most attracted the attention of teachers from Nadiem Makarim's statement about the concept of independent learning was the Learning Implementation Plan (RPP) which must be written by the teacher. teacher only in one page (1 sheet). From a number of conversations between supervisors, principals, and teachers, the central theme of the discussion was how to design the lesson plan which only had one sheet. There is even a desire for a number of school principals and teachers to conduct training on making one-page lesson plans as referred to above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The policy for implementing the 1-sheet RPP is an effort to simplify the learning scenario, which before the policy for independence in learning was issued, this RPP contained many sheets, up to 10 sheets or more. Administratively, this is considered too burdensome for teachers in preparing learning administration, namely the making of lesson plans (RPP). The making of the RPP, which has more than 10 sheets, has taken a lot of time for the teacher to make learning administration, while the aspects of methodology, strategy, and deepening of the material to be taught by the teacher to students have received less attention. Whereas according to Sanjaya (2008) the role of the teacher is not only as an administrator, but also as a learning resource, as a facilitator, as a class manager, as a demonstrator, and as an evaluator. Regarding the implementation of the 1 sheet lesson plan,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA 8 Denpasar, one of the teachers, who was appointed as an informant, namely Ida Ayu Sriathi (58 years old) said as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">We at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar have been instructed to use the lesson plans that follow the one-sheet format as conveyed by the Minister of Education and Culture Nadiem Makarim. To follow up on the principal's appeal, we teachers have been given training in making 1-page lesson plans through subject teacher deliberations (MGMP). In addition, for comparison, I also downloaded a format on google that can be used as a model for making the 1 sheet lesson plan (interview, 22 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The same thing was conveyed by one of the teachers of SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, namely:Mrs. Nyoman Puspadi, S.Pd (aged 58 years) one of the teachers of SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar who was appointed as an informant said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">... yes the policy of implementing 1 sheet of RPP for SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar has been implemented according to the Circular of the Minister of Education and Culture No. 14 of 2019 concerning Simplification of Learning Implementation Plans (RPP). Regarding the issuance of this circular, we at SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar have been asked by the principal to implement this policy. So, we have carried out the process of simplifying the lesson plans and have started to implement it in our teaching places since the 2019/2020 school year (interview, 15 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the above statement, It can be understood that the simplification of the lesson plans into 1 sheet has many positive aspects, namely learning can take place more flexibly, because it is not too tied to the formulation of the lesson plans that have been made, teachers can be more flexible in developing teaching materials and learning strategies, while students can think more creatively and innovatively. , because it is not too tied to the teaching materials formulated by the teacher in the lesson plans as in the old lesson plans format. This is in line with what was said by Lia Fakhriah (in</span><a href="https://www.instastori.com/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.instastori.com/</span></a><span class="font1">) accessed 18 February 2021, citing the statement of the Minister of Education and Culture Nadiem Makarim who said that ''the essence of RPP is the teacher's reflection on achieving targets in the learning implementation plan. So, the most important thing in this case is that the educational objectives contained in the RPP can be achieved, not the lesson plan (RPP) which is lengthy in pages”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Implementation of Zoning-Based New Student Admission (PPDB)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Mahatma Chrysnha as reported by Kompas.com (9 July 2020, </span><a href="https://kompaspedia.kompas.id/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://kompaspedia.kompas.id/</span></a><span class="font1">), accessed on 19 February 2021, that The implementation of New Student Admission (PPDB) is generally based on Government Regulation No. 17 of</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 </span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">2010 concerning Management and Implementation of Education. The legal product regulates the acceptance of students starting from early childhood education, elementary, junior high, high school / vocational / MA, up to university level. As has happened so far, the acceptance of new students (PPDB) for public schools at the elementary and secondary levels is based on ministerial regulations, but changes every year according to the change in the minister of education itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">For the PPDB for the 2020/2021 academic year, the implementation is based on the Regulation of the Minister of Education and Culture of the Republic of Indonesia No. 44 years 2019. Principleswhat is regulated in regulation No.44 of 2019 is in article 2 of the regulation which states that the principles of implementing PPDB for the 2020/2021 school year are (1) non-discriminatory; (2) objective; (3) transparent; (4) accountable; and (5) fair.Regarding the implementation of PPDB at SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, Mr. Drs. I Ketut Suyastra, M.Pd as the Principal said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The PPDB program at SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar has also been implemented, because it is a package of ministerial policies contained in the policy of independent learning. Regarding the implementation of the zoning-based PPDB, there are indeed some parents of prospective students who feel disappointed with the implementation of this policy, especially for parents whose children happen to be not accepted in this school, because the distance from their domicile to the school is not possible according to the laws and regulations. invitation. This is something that is natural, because whatever policy is taken by the government there will be parties who agree and on the other hand there are also those who disagree (pros and cons) (interview, 15 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Departing from the statements of the informants above, it can be understood that as part of community life, the process of implementing education is always related to other aspects of community life. For example, the educational process will be related to economic issues, as well as social, political, religious, and cultural issues. Therefore, whatever policies are taken by the government and then implemented by the school, it will certainly have an impact on people's lives, including policies regarding the implementation of PPDB based on zoning. This means that the implementation of the zoning-based PPDB carried out by every school, especially for the SMA/SMK education level, can certainly invite a public response. The response given by the community can be in the form of a positive response and can also be in the form of a negative response.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Potentials and Barriers to the Independent Practice of Learning</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Talking about potential cannot be separated from the problem of strength or energy that has not been used optimally, so that the benefits have not been felt, either by those who have the potential itself or by other parties. Departing from these limitations, and if it is related to the process of changing USBN into school exams, there can be explored what potential can be developed by replacing USBN with school exams, especially with regard to the quality of education. Based on the Regulation of the Minister of Education and Culture No. 43 of 2019 concerning Examinations Organized by Education Units and National Examinations, it is understood that starting from the 2020/2021 school year USBN is officially abolished and replaced with exams organized by educational units. This policy was taken on the basis of, first, the education system must encourage the growth of teaching and learning practices that grow the reasoning power and character of students as a whole; Second, educational units are given the freedom to innovate in creating a learning environment that favors students; and Third, the regulation regarding the assessment of learning outcomes by the education unit and the assessment of learning outcomes by the central government has not been able to accommodate the legal needs of the community.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Withthe issuance of the Minister of Education and Culture No. 43 of 2019, the BSNP (National Education Standards Agency) no longer makes reference questions for USBN because the making of questions and the administration of USBN are left entirely to the school. Meanwhile, in the national standard school examination system as has been carried out previously, 75 percent of the questions are made by the Provincial Education Office, through the MGMP, while the remaining 25 percent are made by the BSNP. Regarding the plan for implementing this school exam, as a substitute for USBN, the Head of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, Drs. Ida Bagus Sudirga, M.Pd.H said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DInstead of USBN being a school exam, there is a lot of potential that can be developed in the child himself. Because with school exams, especially the types of evaluation tools used, not only in the form of tests, but also in the form of assignments, portfolios, and collaborative projects. With an evaluation tool model like this, several potentials of children can be developed, such as children's abilities in solving problems by using literacy skills, numerical abilities, and from the results of the tasks done by the children, the teacher can see the character of each child. For example, how are children responsible for the tasks given by the teacher, and how the honesty aspect of children in doing these tasks will be seen from the assignments they submit, and many other aspects of children's attitudes and behavior that can be assessed through types of evaluation tools such as it (interview, 15 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The same thing was conveyed by the Head of SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, Mr. Drs. I Ketut Suyastra, M.Pd. Among his various statements he said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yes, that's right, starting the 2020/2021 school year, all schools in Indonesia, including SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, must carry out the mandate of the regulation. Therefore, as an implementing unit at the education unit level, we must carry out all these policies according to what is stipulated in them Permendikbud No.43 of 2019. Indeed, to do something new is not an easy job, but like it or not, it must be carried out, because it has been mandated by the government (interview, 7 March 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The statement from the Head of SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, proves that starting the 2020/2021 school year the implementation of the final exam for schools, especially schools at the high school level (read: SMA/SMK/MA) is no longer held by the Education Office. Province, but by the school in full, both in terms of making exam questions, as well as in the implementation process. As a technical guide for the education unit or school in carrying out the school exam, the school can refer to Permendikbud No. 53 of 2015 concerning Result AssessmentLearning by Educators and Education Units in Primary and Secondary Education. Article 1 Permendikbud No. 53 of 2015 confirms thatassessment of learning outcomes by educators is the process of collecting information/data about student learning outcomes in terms of attitudes, aspects of knowledge, and aspects of skills that are carried out in a planned and systematic manner which is carried out to monitor processes, learning progress, and improve learning outcomes through assignments and evaluation of results. study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The discourse on replacing the national exam (UN) into a minimum competency assessment and character survey was followed up by the Minister of Education and Culture by issuing a Circular Letter of the Minister of Education and Culture No. 1 of 2021, concerningElimination of National Examinations and Equality Examinations and Implementation of School Examinations in the Emergency Period of the Spread of Covid-19. The important thing contained in the Circular Letter is regarding the indicators for determining student graduation in the minimum competency assessment and character education survey. The three points referred to are (1) New students can be declared graduated if they have completed the learning program during the Covid-19 pandemic as evidenced by report cards every semester; (2) Obtaining a minimum good attitude or behavior value; and (3) take an exam conducted by the education unit (school).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">The form of the exam organized by the school as referred to inpoint 3 of the Circular of the Minister of Education and Culture No.1 of 2021 is as follows. First, in the form of a portfolio, namely in the form of evaluation of report cards, attitude, or behavior values, and achievements obtained by previous students (awards, competition results, and so on); Second, an evaluation tool in the form of an assignment; Third, in the form of evaluation tools in the form of tests, both online and offline by the education unit itself; and Fourth, is evaluation in the form of other assessment activities determined by each educational unit.However, in practice its application in schools is certainly inseparable from various obstacles faced, both by teachers, students, and by the school management.With regard to the implementation of the minimum competency assessment and character survey starting from the 2020/2021 school year, one of the teachers at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, namely Mr. Dewa Gede Alit Dwija, S.Pd (aged 59 years) said the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In my opinion, the replacement of the National Examination with a minimum competency assessment and character survey is very good for assessing the personality of students. Because education includes three domains, such as cognitive, affective, and cognitive domainspsychomotor. To assess the three domains, of course, it is not enough to just use an evaluation tool in the form of a test. However, it must involve several instruments, such as assignments, written works, and so on. Because the measurable test technique only concerns the cognitive aspect,while the aspects of students' attitudes and skills are not touched (interview 22 February 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the informant's statement, it can be understood that many teachers actually want the National Examination to be abolished, considering that in practice there are many weaknesses.his. For example, there is a provision that students must pass 100%, this can certainly damage the academic atmosphere, because such a requirement can reduce the attitude of honesty among school members. Whereas one of the values of character education as determined by the Ministry of Education and Culture is the aspect of honesty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Before carrying out learning in the classroom, the teacher must first make a learning plan called a lesson plan (RPP). According to Mulyasa (2006: 184)RPP is a plan that describes learning procedures and management to achieve one or more basic competencies specified in the content standards and described in the syllabus. Or in other languages, it can be said that the lesson plans are an operational description of the syllabus of subjects that have been developed as a guide for teachers in carrying out the learning process in the classroom. Therefore, it is obligatory for every teacher to make RPP before starting to teach. Making RPP based on the 2013 curriculum which is often called K-13 is made up to ten</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">pages, it can even be more, but with independent learning wisdom, teachers only need to make one sheet of RPP. This policy can ease the burden on teachers in the field of learning administration. The policy of implementing this one-sheet RPP, received a positive response from teachers, including teachers at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar. As said by Mr. Made Mertana (aged 57 years), one of the teachers appointed as informants said as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In my opinion, the policy of making 1 sheet of RPP lightens the burden on teachers in the administrative field. Because teachers in addition to making teaching preparations (RPP) there are still many administrative tasks that need to be donemust be completed by the teacher related to the duties of a teacher. For example, curriculum administration, personal administration, student administration, school administration, and others. So by making only 1 sheet of RPP, the teacher has the potential to focus more on developing teaching materials, and guiding students in the learning process. In addition, with only 1 lesson plan, the teacher can be more flexible in explaining teaching materials, because they are not too attached to the material written by the teacher in the lesson plan (interview, March 1, 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the statements of the informants above, it can be understood that in summary the RPP that must be made by the teacher can reduce the burden on the teacher in the field of making learning administration and has the potential for teachers to develop teaching materials flexibly. This also has the potential for teachers to focus on deepening the material that will be taught to their students. For example, teachers are more flexible to provide real examples and teachers can appear to be models for students in front of the class. This is in line with the socialization theory developed by Mark Baldwin, (in Ahmadi 1991: 18) that the process of child personality development is the process of socializing the characteristics of the child itself individually.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">PPDB is an abbreviation of the acceptance of new students which is carried out at the beginning of each new academic year by each educational institution at every level. For example, at the level of early childhood education, elementary, junior high, high school/vocational school, and other equal education levels. To enter a certain level of education, certain conditions are required, such as for PAUD education, an age requirement is required, namely a minimum of 5 years or a minimum of 4 years for group A, and 6 years of age or a minimum of 5 years for group B as evidenced by a letter. birth sign(birth certificate). Then to enter the elementary school level, there are several requirements, such as, ages 712 years, and a minimum of 6 years on July 1 of the current year, age 7 years must be accepted while age 6 years there are exceptions. To enter the junior high school level, several requirements are needed, namely a maximum age of 15 years on July 1 of the current year,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">having an elementary school diploma/equivalent education or other document that explains that the child in question has completed elementary school education. Then for the SMA/SMK/other educational levels of equivalent, the requirements include, the maximum age of 21 years on July 1 of the current year, possessing a junior high school diploma or other document stating that the child in question has completed junior high school education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Regarding the implementation of the recruitment of new students for the 2019/2020 school year for SMA Negeri in Denpasar City, a zoning-based PPDB has been implemented. The zoning-based PPDB system is a new student admission system based on the zone where each prospective student lives.Based on Permendikbud Number 51/2018, PPDB is regulated through a zoning system. The selection of Prospective students is carried out by prioritizing the distance of the nearest prospective participant's residence from the school within the stipulated zoning. In this case, what will be the focus of this research is the potential and obstacles faced by the school related to the implementation of new student admissions with the zoning system. The potential that can be explored from the implementation of zoningbased new student admissions according to the head of SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar, namely Drs. Ida Bagus Sudirga, M.Pd.H are as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Actually, the implementation of zoning-based PPDB at SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar can provide equal opportunities to enjoy quality education for children who happen to live close to the school location. This is in accordance with the basic principles of implementing the PPDB, which are non-discriminatory, objective, transparent, accountable, and fair (interview, 5 March 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the informant's statement, it can be understood that the implementation of zoning-based PPDB can provide equal distribution to every citizen to enjoy quality education. This means that the application of this zoning system is not only applied in the context of recruiting new students, but this system has the potential to also rotate teachers within the zone according to the mandate of the law. This implies that the distribution of teachers is prioritized for each zone and if there are still schools that lack teachers, they will be rotated between the zones concerned. This is in line with the statement of Muhadjir Effendy (in</span><a href="https://hot.liputan6.com/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://hot.liputan6.com/</span></a><span class="font1">) accessed, March 2, 2021, that&quot;Equitable distribution of teachers is prioritized in each of these zones. If it turns out that there are still schools that lack teachers, inter-zone rotations will be carried out. Meanwhile, teacher rotation between districts/cities will only be carried out if the distribution of teachers is truly unbalanced and there are no teachers from within the district who available for rotation&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">E-Journal of Cultural Studies </span><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the descriptions in the previous chapters, some conclusions can be drawn as follows. First, the form of independent learning practices carried out, both at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, includes four forms of practice, namely (1) the practice of replacing USBN into school exams, because the USBN implemented so far is judged by many to be only able to measure cognitive aspects. students in the lowest realm; (2) the practice of replacing the National Examination with a minimum competency assessment and character survey, because with this assessment model students are able to master the minimum skills in the form of 'literacy' and 'numbering'; (3) the practice of implementing a 1-sheet lesson plan, to this policy there were various responses, especially from teachers and school principals; (4) zoning-based PPDB implementation practices,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Second,The practice of implementing this free learning policy, especially at SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, has several potentials. This potential can also be categorized into 4 types, namely (1) the potential for replacing USBN into a school exam, namely the school can optimize the potentials of students, because the most knowledgeable about the condition of students is their own teacher; (2) the potential for replacing the National Examination with a minimum competency assessment and character survey can reduce the psychological burden of the examinees, and can measure the overall knowledge, attitudes, and behavior of students; (3) the potential for implementing 1 sheet of lesson plans, namely teachers can be creative in developing learning models by providing examples, even teachers can appear to be models in the learning; (4) The potential for implementing a zoning-based PPDB can provide equal opportunities for every citizen to enjoy quality education. However, with the implementation of independent learning practices, both in SMA Negeri 3 and SMA Negeri 8 Denpasar, it can provide space for the school management to take manipulative policies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Third,The implementation of the independent learning policy has implications, both for students, the learning process in the classroom, as well as for school institutions. The replacement of USBN into a school exam has implications for reducing the psychological burden of students in facing exams, and with a minimum competency assessment model and a character survey, a comprehensive assessment can be carried out. Then the implications for the learning process in the classroom teachers can be more flexible in creating and innovating to develop various strategies and learning methods. the implementation of a 1-</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">sheet lesson plan can reduce the administrative burden of teachers, but it can also cause some teachers to be reluctant to make new lesson plans.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Arikunto, Suharsimi. 2002. Prosedur Peneltian Suatu Pendekatan Praktik. Jakarta: PT. Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Barker, Chris. 2004. Cultural Studies: Teori dan Praktik. Yogyakarta: Kreasi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Beilharz Peter, 2005. Teori-Teori Sosial Observasi Kritis terhadap Para Filosof Terkemuka. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Bourdieu, P. (1990). Cultural Reproduction and Social Reproduction. Dalam J. Jarabel dan A.H. Halsey (ed). Power and Ideology in Education. New York: Oxford University Press. Hal.: 487- 510.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Chan M.Sam dan Tuti T.Sam. 2005. Analisis SWOT Kebijakan Pendidikan Era Otonomi Daerah. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denzin, Norman K. dan Yvonna S. Lincoln. 2009. Qualitative Research. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Fakhriah Lia,2020. &quot;&nbsp;Kebijakan RRP Ringkas 1 Lembar beserta Contohnya&quot;. Dalam </span><a href="https://www.instastori.com/"><span class="font1">https://www.instastori.com/</span></a><span class="font1"> diakses 18 Pebruari 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Foucault, Michel, 2002. Wacana Kuasa/Pengetahuan (diterjemahkan Yudi Santoso). Yogyakarta: Bentang Budaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Hasbullah Jousairi, 2006. Social Capital Menuju Keunggulan Budaya Manusia Indonesia. Jakarta: MR-United Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kurniasih ( dalam Kompas.com/02/02/2020). diakses 26 Januari 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kompas.com/11-12-2019 diakses tanggal 15 Pebruari 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mahatma Chrysnha, Kompas.com (9 Juli 2020) https:// kompaspedia.kompas.id/) diakses tanggal 19 Pebruari 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Muhadjir Effendi ( dalam </span><a href="https://hot.liputan6.com/"><span class="font1">https://hot.liputan6.com/</span></a><span class="font1"> diakses tanggal 2 Maret 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mulyasa. 2006. Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah Konsep, Strategi dan Implementasi. Bandung: PT Remaja Rosdakarya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nadiem Makarim, KOmpas.com, 14-1-2020 ( </span><a href="https://edukasi.kompas.com/"><span class="font1">https://edukasi.kompas.com/</span></a><span class="font1">) diakses tanggal 13 Maret 2021.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha. 2004. Teori, Metode, dan teknik Penelitian sastra dari Strukturalisme hingga Postrukturalisme: Perspektif Wacana Naratif. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Ratna, I Nyoman Kutha. 2010. Metodologi Penelitian Kajian Budaya dan Ilmu Sosial Humaniora Pada Umumnya. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sanjaya, Wina. 2008. Strategi Pembelajaran, Berorientasi Standar dan Proses Pendidikan. Jakarta: Prenada Media Group.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sarup, Madan,2003. Postrukturalisme dan Posmodernime: Sebuah Pengantar Kritis. Yogyakarta: Jendela.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Solopos.com ( dalam </span><a href="https://www.solopos.com/jumat"><span class="font1">https://www.solopos.com/jumat</span></a><span class="font1">, 12 Pebruari 2021) diakses tanggal 15 Pebruari 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sri Minda Murni. 2020. &quot;&nbsp;RPP 1 Halaman Bisakah Hadirkan Merdeka Belajar? Bisa, Ini Caranya...&quot; ( dalam Kompas.com (08-03-2020) diakses 8 Maret 2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Subkhan, Edi.2016. Pendidikan Kritis, Kritik atas Praksis Neo- Liberalisasi dan Standarisasi Pendidikan. Yogyakarta: AR-RUZZ Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Susetyo, Benny. 2005. Politik Pendidikan Penguasa. Yogyakarta: LKiS.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yunus. M., Firdaus.2007. Pendidikan Berbasis Realitas Sosial. Paulo Freire Y.B. Mangun Wijaya.Yogyakarta: Logung Pustaka</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">51</span></p>