---
layout: full_article
title: "HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD FAT PROFILE OF MUSCOVY DUCK FED WITH DIFFERENT PROTEIN LEVELS SOURCED FROM GOLDEN SNAILS"
author: "Made Rahayu Kusumadewi, I Putu Agus Kertawirawan, Ni Luh Gede Budiari"
categories: buletinvet
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-90979 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/id-90979"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-90979"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">Buletin Veteriner Udayana &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Volume 15 No. 5: 765-771</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">pISSN: 2085-2495; eISSN: 2477-2712 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oktober 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Online pada: </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet"><span class="font0">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet</span></a><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/bulvet.2023.v15.i05.p09"><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/bulvet.2023.v15.i05.p09</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Terakreditasi Nasional Sinta 4, berdasarkan Keputusan Direktur Jenderal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Pendidikan Tinggi, Riset, dan Teknologi No. 158/E/KPT/2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD FAT PROFILE OF MUSCOVY DUCK FED WITH DIFFERENT PROTEIN LEVELS SOURCED FROM GOLDEN SNAILS</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark1"></a>(Profil Hematologi dan Lemak Darah Entog yang Diberi Pakan dengan Kadar Protein Berbeda Bersumber dari Keong Mas)</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Made Rahayu Kusumadewi<sup>1</sup>*, I Putu Agus Kertawirawan<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Gede Budiari<sup>2</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>Balai Pembibitan Ternak Unggul Hijauan Pakan Ternak Denpasar, Jl. Gurita III Pegok Sesetan Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup>Assessment Institute for Agricultural Technology (AIAT) Bali, Jl. ByPass Ngurah Rai Pesanggaran Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">*Corresponding author email:</span><a href="mailto:kusumadewirahayu@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kusumadewirahayu@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">This research was conducted to see that effect of using golden snail as alternatif fed for Muscovy ducks on different ration level to hematologi profil and blood fat. 64 Muscovy ducks of 8 weeks of age were use in this study use a randomized block design with four treatments and four replications, whereas each replicate consisted of four male Muscovy ducks. The composition of the ration used consisted of corn, rice bran, pollard, coconut meal and golden snail meal. There were four treatments included P0 (control feed), P1 (control feed + 10% golden snail meal), P2 (control feed+20% golden snail meal), P3 (control feed + 30% golden snail meal). The parameters observed were hematological profile including hemoglobin content, erythrocyte count, leukocyte count, and blood hematocrit content and than blood metabolites including cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL and LDL. The study used a completely randomized design with four treatments and three replicates. The data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA). Based on the results obtained there was no significant difference in erythrocyte levels each treatment, but the hemoglobin level in muscovy duck given 30% golden snail showed significant differences in all treatments. Results of blood metabolites, showed no significant difference in triglyceride levels in all treatments, but the cholesterol content in the ration given 30% golden snail meal (P3) was lower and significantly different from other treatments. In general, giving 30% golden snail meal in the ration shows better results based on the hematological profile</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: Muscovy duck; golden snails meal; feed; hematology profile</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk melihat pengaruh penggunaan keong mas sebagai pakan alternatif bebek Entog terhadap perbedaan kadar ransum terhadap profil hematologi dan lemak darah. 64 ekor itik entok umur 8 minggu yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini menggunakan rancangan acak kelompok dengan empat perlakuan dan empat ulangan, dimana masing-masing ulangan terdiri dari empat ekor itik jantan. Komposisi ransum yang digunakan terdiri dari jagung, dedak, pollard, bungkil kelapa dan bungkil keong mas. Terdapat empat perlakuan yaitu P0 (pakan kontrol), P1 (pakan kontrol + 10% tepung keong mas), P2 (pakan kontrol + 20% tepung keong mas), P3 (pakan kontrol + 30% tepung keong mas). Parameter yang diamati adalah profil hematologi meliputi kadar hemoglobin, jumlah eritrosit, jumlah leukosit, dan kadar hematokrit darah serta metabolit darah yang meliputi kolesterol, trigliserida, HDL dan LDL. Penelitian menggunakan rancangan acak lengkap dengan empat perlakuan dan tiga ulangan. Data yang diperoleh dianalisis menggunakan sidik ragam (ANOVA). Berdasarkan hasil yang diperoleh tidak terdapat perbedaan kadar eritrosit yang bermakna pada setiap perlakuan, namun kadar hemoglobin pada itik entok yang diberikan keong mas 30% menunjukkan perbedaan yang bermakna pada semua perlakuan. Hasil metabolit darah, tidak menunjukkan perbedaan kadar trigliserida yang bermakna pada semua perlakuan, namun kadar kolesterol pada perbandingan yang diberikan tepung keong mas (P3) 30% lebih rendah dan berbeda</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">nyata dengan perlakuan lainnya. Secara umum pemberian tepung keong mas 30% dalam ransum menunjukkan hasil yang lebih baik berdasarkan profil hematologi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: Bebek entog; tepung keong mas; pakan; profil hematologi</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Meat product from poultry is a general food commodity that consumed by the community in effort to fulfill daily nutrition. Beside chicken and duck, Muscovy duck is one of the poultry that is in great demand because it has a distinctive and delicious meat taste. Among the three poultrys comodities, ducks and Muscovy ducks are considered to have higher fat and cholesterol content, but biologically, Muscovy duck contains lower fat and protein than the other local ducks but the cholesterol is the highest (Ismoyowati </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Each poultrys has a different ability to synthesize cholesterol depending on the quality and quantity of feed given.As we known, consumption of meat with high fat and cholesterol content can cause health problems especially in old age such as obesity and atherosclerosis. The nutritional feed ingredient was manly factor influenced nutritional meat content as fat, cholesterol, and fatty acid of meat beside age, genetic, and habit of Muscovy duck. Older ducks generally have higher fat content (Triyantini </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 1997; Damayanti, 2006; Woloszyn </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2006; Baeza, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Therefore, the information of fatty acids, cholesterol and fatty acid profile content is required. The content of fat, cholesterol and fatty acid profile can be controlled via the feed source of oil content in the animal feed (Wood et al; 2003; Schiavone </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al., </span><span class="font2">2007), differences in eating habits, feed ingredients with high source of omega 3 microalga (Wood et al; 2003), and the influence of protein (El-Deek </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 1997). Furthermore, genetics also affects the nutrient content of the Muscovy duck meat Woloszyn </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2006; Baeza, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Setioko (1997), reared duck at backyard had various nutritional content of the crop, the feed material</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">mainly rice, snails, insects, leaves, and also other unknown materials. The study of use golden snails as a feed protein source for poultry have been carried out. The use of 15% golden snail meal in broiler chicken shows a better feed conversion ratio than control Jawa </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2020). The use of 5% golden snail meal with 10% cassava leaf meal in duck diet had the greatest effects on the performance and egg physical quality without affecting their chemical quality (Sumiati et al., 2020). The high protein content of the golden snail is indicated to impact the physical and chemical composition of the carcass and meat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study was conducted to determine the effect of giving golden snail meal rations at a certain level on the hematology, fat and cholesterol profile. These results are expected to be a reference in the use of golden snails as feed for Muscovy duck to produce better meat quality.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESEARCH METHODS</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Animal and Dietary Treatments</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The experiment used 64 male Muscovy ducks of 8 weeks of age. The experiment was conducted in a randomized block design with four treatments and four replications, whereas each replicate consisted of four male Muscovy ducks. The Muscovy ducks were allocated randomly in a floor pen of cages. The diet and dringking water were provided ad libitum. The feeding is done twice in the morning (06.30 a.m) and evening (5 p.m) with same amount.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The diet ingredients used were corn, rice bran, pollard, coconut meal, golden snail meal (Table 1) and nutrient content in diet presented in Table 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Variables and Sampling</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The variables measured were hematological profile. Hematological</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">parameters measured included hemoglobin content, erythrocyte count, leukocyte count, and blood hematocrit content. Blood sampling was carried out at the end of the study (week 7). Blood samples were taken in the morning before gave the diet. The blood sample was taken through the pectoralis vein as much as 6 ccs and put in an anticoagulant tube. Hemoglobin did calculation was done by using the Sahli method. Meanwhile, the hematocrit was determined by measuring the volume of erythrocytes using a microcapillary hematocrit reader. The number of erythrocytes is calculated using a hemocytometer. The blood is first diluted with Hayem's solution 200 times and then read using a counting chamber with the aid of a 10x40 magnification microscope. The blood was diluted using a briliant cresyl blue (BCB) 0.03% and then counted with a counting chamber under a microscope with a magnification of 10x40 times to count blood leukocytes. The formula used to count erythrocytes and leucocytes is presented below :</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The number of erytrocytes = a x 10<sup>4</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">a = the number of cells counted in the hemocytometer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The number of leukocytes = b x 50 b = the number of cell counted in the hemocytometer</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Blood metabolites measured include cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL dan LDL. Blood cholesterol was measured using the CHOD-PAP (cholesterol-oxidase p-aminophenazone) enzymatic colorimetric method. In contrast, blood triglyceride levels were measured by the GPO-PAP (glycerol &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;phosphate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;oxidase-p-</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">aminophenozone) method. HDL profiles were measured using enzymatic colorimetric methods, and LDL levels were measured using the formula LDL = total cholesterol-HDL-1/5 triglycerides. (Friedewald </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 1972).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Statistical Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The study used a completely randomized design with four treatments</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">and three replicates. There were four treatments included P0 (control feed), P1 (control feed + 10% </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pomacea canaliculata </span><span class="font2">meal), P2 (control feed+20% </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pomacea canaliculata</span><span class="font2"> meal), P3 (control feed + 30% </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pomacea canaliculata</span><span class="font2"> meal). The data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Results</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Effect of Level Golden Snail Meal on Haematology Profile</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The data of hematology profile presented in Table 3.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Effect of Level Golden Snail Meal on Fat and Cholesterol Profile</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The fat and cholesterol profile on this study showed on table 4.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Effect of Level Golden Snail Meal on Haematology Profile</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the results of the blood analysis, it was seen that there was no significant difference in the erythrocyte levels in each treatment, but the leukocyte hemoglobin and total hematocrit levels had significant differences between treatments. This shows that nutritionally the four treatment rations are not so different even though the protein content of each treatment is different. Erythrocytes are one of the blood elements that transport hemoglobin in the blood circulation, hemoglobin contains proteins that act as binders and transporters of oxygen to be carried throughout the body, then used in metabolic processes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Regarding hemoglobin levels, treatment P3 where the ration contained 30% gold snail flour showed significantly different (p&lt;0.05) results compared to treatments P0, P1 and P2, which means that the administration of 30% gold snail flour in the ration increased the hemoglobin level of the snail blood. Haemoglobin contains protein that acts as a binder and transporter of oxygen to be carried throughout the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">body, then used in metabolic processes. As is known, the P3 ration contains 30% golden snail flour and has the highest crude protein content of 22.81% (see table 3) compared to other treatments.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results of analysis, leukocyte levels showed a significant difference (p&lt;0.05) between Muscovy duck that was given additional golden snail meal rations and the control (P0). Giving golden snail meal increased the protein ration (as shown in table 2) and was able to increase leukocyte levels. Leukocytes are cells that play a role in the body's defense system that is very responsive to infectious agents. Leukocytes function to protect the body against various diseases by way of phagocytes and produce antibodies (Junguera, 1997). High levels of leukocytes indicate the ability of livestock to respond to infection better.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The rate of increase and decrease in the number of leukocytes in the circulation reflects the responsiveness of white blood cells in preventing the presence of disease and inflammatory agents (Nordenson, 2002). Factors that affect the number of leukocytes and their differential include environmental conditions, age and nutritional content of feed. Among these factors, nutritional factors have a very important role, for example, protein (Addass et al., 2012). Protein plays an important role in the process of leukocyte formation because protein is one of the components of blood (Etim et al., 2014).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The hematocrit value in this study there was a significant difference (p&lt;0.05) in treatment P1 (table 2) against other treatments. If it is seen from the erythrocyte levels that are not significantly different, the hematocrit levels should also not be significantly different because normally, the number of erythrocytes is positively correlated with the hematocrit value. The amount of hematocrit value is influenced by the breed and type of livestock, age and production phase, sex of livestock, disease, and local climate. The rise and fall of the hematocrit value</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">depend on the volume of blood cells compared to the total blood volume (Swenson,1977). The hematocrit value is usually considered to be as useful as the total erythrocyte count (Frandson, 1992). Hematocrit value is closely related to blood viscosity where an increase in hematocrit value will increase blood viscosity (Wilson, 1981). Disproportionate changes in the volume of erythrocytes and blood plasma in circulating blood will change the PCV value (Swenson, 1984).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">An increase in the number of erythrocytes at a low ambient temperature will increase the hematocrit value if the blood volume remains constant, on the contrary if at a high ambient temperature it will decrease the hematocrit value as a result of the reduced number of erythrocytes (Swenson,1977). This means that the hematocrit value changes in line with changes in erythrocytes. Based on these results, it appears that the hematocrit value with the number of erythrocytes has a relationship. The greater the number of erythrocytes, the greater the hematocrit value in the blood. Decrease in hematocrit value can be caused by damage to erythrocytes, decreased production of erythrocytes or can also be influenced by the number and size of erythrocytes (Dawson and Whittow, 2000). The hematocrit value is highly dependent on the number of erythrocytes, because erythrocytes are the largest cell mass in the blood (Virden et al., 2007).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Effect of Level Golden Snail Meal on Fat and Cholesterol Profile</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Base on the data we can see that the P3 (30% snail meal) have quality of fat cholesterol better than other. The cholesterol contain were significant different than other treatment. The value of the cholesterol is 62 mg/dl and other treatment between 97 mg/dl until 104,5 mg/dl. The nutritional feed ingredient was manly factor influenced nutritional meat content as fat, cholesterol, and fatty acid of meat beside age, genetic, and habit of Muscovy duck. Older ducks generally</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">have higher fat content (Triyantini </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al., </span><span class="font2">1997; Damayanti, 2006; Woloszyn </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al., </span><span class="font2">2006; Baeza, 2006).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results of the analysis of LDL cholesterol levels showed that the P3 and P1 treatments were better than control (P0/without treatment) and treatment P2(using 10% snail meal), otherwise, HDL cholesterol levels were lower at P3 compared to other treatments, which ranged from 44.4 mg/dl – 51.8 mg/dl. The low HDL in treatment P3 was probably due to the higher body weight of the muscovy duck compared to other treatments (Kingham, 2009), because the protein content of the feed in the ration was the highest.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Giving 30% snails meal on the ration of muscovy duck increases the protein value of the ration, blood hemoglobin and lowers blood cholesterol levels.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Suggestion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The use of fresh golden snails is not recommended because it can cause poisoning.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The author would like to thank to researches from Assesment Institite of Agriculture Technology (AIAT) Bali who were involved in this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Addass PA, David DL, Edward A, Zira KE, Midak A. 2012. Effect of age, sex and management system on some haematological &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;parameters &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">intensively and semi-intensively kept chicken in Mubi. Adamawa State, Nigeria. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Iranian J. App. Anim. Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 2(3): 277-282.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Baeza E. 2006. Effect of genotype, age and nutrition on intramuscular lipids and meat quality. Symposium COA/INRA Scientific Cooperation in Agricultural. Tainan (Taiwan, R.O.C).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Damayanti AP. 2006. Kandungan protein, lemak daging dan kulit itik, Muscovy duck dan mandalung umur 8 minggu. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Agroland: Agric. Sci. J.</span><span class="font2"> 13(3): 313-317.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dawson WR, Whittow GC. &nbsp;2000.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Regulation of body temperature. Sturkie’s Avian Physiology. G. C. Whittow, ed. Academic Press, New York, NY. Pp. 343-379.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">El-Deek, Ahmed A, Barakat MO, Attia YA, EL-Sebeay AS. 1997. Effect of</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">feeding Muscovy duckling’s different protein sources: performance, ∞-3 fatty acids content, and acceptability of their tissues. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc.</span><span class="font2"> 74: 9991009.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Etim N, Enyinihi E, Akpabio U, Edem. 2014. Effects of nutrition on haemotology of rabbits: A review. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. European Sci</span><span class="font2">. 10(3): 413-423.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frandson RD. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anatomi dan fisiologi ternak, edisi 4.</span><span class="font2"> Gajah Mada Press. Yogyakarta,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Friedewald WT, Levy RI, Fredrickson DS. 1972. Estimation of the concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma, without use of the preparative ultracentrifuge. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Clin</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Chem</span><span class="font2">. 18: 499</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">502.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ismoyowati N, Iriyanti SA, Santosa. 2012. The differences of physical, chemical, and fatty acid profile of meat quality of male muscovy (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Cairina moschata</span><span class="font2">) and local duck (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anas planthyrinchos</span><span class="font2">). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Indon. Trop. Anim. Agric.</span><span class="font2"> 37: 4.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jawa G, Suwitari NKE, Sanjaya IGAMP. 2020. The appearance of broiler that given golden apple snail meat (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pomacea canaliculata</span><span class="font2">) flour as replacement of fish flour. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">SEAS</span><span class="font2">. 4: 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Junguera LC. 1997. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basic histology</span><span class="font2">. Edisi Kedelapan. McGraw-Hill, New York,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kingham K. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Makan oke hidup oke dengan kolesterol tinggi</span><span class="font2">. Jakarta: Erlangga.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nordenson NJ. 2002. White blood cell count and differential. </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www. Lifesteps &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.com/gm. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Atoz/ency</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">/white_blood_cell_count_and_di</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">fferential. jsp. 2002</span><span class="font2"> [Access date: 2 April 2019].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Schiavone A, Chiarini R, Marzoni M, Castillo A, Tassone S, Romboli I. 2007. Breast meat traits of Muscovy Ducks fed on a microalga (Crypthecodinium cohnii) meal supplemented diet. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">British Poult. Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 48(5): 573-579.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Setioko AR. 1997. Prospek dan kendala peternakan itik gembala di Indonesia. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Prosiding</span><span class="font2"> Seminar Nasional Peternakan dan Veteriner. Balai Penelitian Ternak, Ciawi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sumiati A, Darmawan, Hermana W. 2020. Performances and egg quality of laying ducks fed diets containing cassava (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Manihot esculenta Crantz</span><span class="font2">) leaf meal and golden snail (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pomancea canaliculata</span><span class="font2">). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Trop. Anim. Sci. J.</span><span class="font2"> 43: 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Swenson MJ. 1977. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dukes physiology of domestic animals</span><span class="font2">, 9 th , Ed. Comstock Publishing Associate a Division of Cornell University Press. Ithaca, New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Swenson MJ. 1984. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Duke’s physiology of domestic animals</span><span class="font2">. 10th edition. Cornell University Press, London.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Triyantini, Abubakar, Bintang &nbsp;IAK,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Antawidjaja T. 1997. Studi komparatif preferensi mutu dan gizi beberapa jenis daging unggas. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Indon. J. Anim. Vet. Sci. </span><span class="font2">2(3):157-161.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Virden WS, Lilburn MS, Thaxton JP, Corzo A, Hoehler D, Kidd MT. 2007. The effect of corticosterone-induced stress on amino acid digestibility in ross broilers. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Poult. Sci</span><span class="font2">. 86: 338-342.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woloszyn J, Ksiazkiewicz J, Skrabka-Blotnicka T, Haraf G, Biernat J, Kisiel T. 2006. Comparison of amino acid and fatty acid composition of duck breast muscles from five floks. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Archives Tierzucht, Dummerstorf.</span><span class="font2"> 49(2): 194-204.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wood JD, Richardson RI, Nute GR, Fisher AV, Campo MM, Kasapidou E, Sheard PR, Enser M. 2003. Effects of fatty acids on meat quality: A review. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Meat Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 66: 21-32.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wilson BJ. 1981. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Growth in birds for meat production</span><span class="font2">. In T. L. J. Laurence (ed). Growth in Animals. Butterworths, London Boston.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Table 1. Composition of Ingredients Diet</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Feed Ingredients</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Treatments</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">P0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Corn</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rice Bran</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pollard</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Coconut Meal</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Golden Snail Meal</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">35 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;35 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;35 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;35</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">30 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">20 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;20 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;20 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;30</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">100 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;100</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">Table 2. Nutrient composition of Treatments Diet</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Nutrient Content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Treatments</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">P0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Energy Metabolism (Kcal/kg)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crude Protein (%)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ether Extract (%)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Crude Fiber (%)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Calcium (%)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Phosporus (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">3121.90 &nbsp;&nbsp;2946.90 &nbsp;&nbsp;2872.40 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2847.40</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">13.78 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17.48 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;19.41 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;22.81</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">5.51 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.09 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.01</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">7.57 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.92 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5.15</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.06 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.65 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.79</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">0.65 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.44 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.46 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.38</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Table 3. Blood analysis of Muscovy duck </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Cairina moschata)</span><span class="font2"> given different levels of golden snail meal</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Haemoglobin (g/dl)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Eritrosit M/UI</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Leukosit k/UI</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Hematokrin %</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">24,10<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2,67<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">13,00<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">33,45<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">22,00<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2,77<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">18,40<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">36,15<sup>b</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">23,85<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2,74<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">19,05<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">33,60<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">29,25<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">2,64<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">18,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">33,55<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Table 4. Fat and Cholesterol Analysis of Muscovy duck Given Different Levels of Golden Snail Meal</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Treatment</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Trigliserida mg/dl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Kolesterol mg/dl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Chol LDL mg/dl</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Chol HDL Direct mg/dl</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">140,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">98,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">23,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">47,30<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">214,00<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">97,00<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">9,50<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">44,40<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">P2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">117,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">104,50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">29,00<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">51,80<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">P3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">129,00<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">62,00<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">9,50<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">26,65<sup>b</sup></span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">771</span></p>