---
layout: full_article
title: "The Correlation between the Level of Hemoglobin and Learning Concentration on the Tenth-Grade Science Class Female Students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar"
author: "Ni Made Sekar Sari, Ni Kadek Ayu Suarningsih, Gusti Ayu Ary Antari"
categories: jsgs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-83553 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/id-83553"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-83553"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Journal of A Sustainable Global South, Vol. 6 No. 1, February 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">19</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Correlation between the Level of Hemoglobin and Learning Concentration on the Tenth-Grade Science Class Female Students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ni Made Sekar Sari<sup>1</sup>, Ni Kadek Ayu Suarningsih<sup>2</sup>, Gusti Ayu Ary Antari<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:ayusuarningsih@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1">ayusuarningsih@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font1">Hemoglobin is an iron rich protein present in red blood cells. Female student is vulnerable of having abnormally low levels of hemoglobin (≤12 g/dL) due to blood losses during monthly menstruation, which can have an impact on decreasing their concentration to learn. The purpose of this research was to determine the correlation of hemoglobin levels and learning concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in senior high school of 3 Denpasar. It used quantitative type of research and cross-sectional study model approach. The sampling methods used simple random sampling, which is totaled 122 respondents. The data collection of hemoglobin levels used digital method Easy Touch GCHb and learning concentration used questionnaire with 27 statements. Based statistic test on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pearson Product Moment</span><span class="font1">, it showed hemoglobin level with learning concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in senior high school of 3 Denpasar, has a strong and positive correlation (r=0,737; p&lt;0,05). The result of this research is expected to be used as a suggestion in helping female student to be active in the blood tablet administration program.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Index Terms</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">— Hemoglobin Level, Learning Concentration, Female Student</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark1"></a>I.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Teenage girls are vulnerable to nutritional problems. The menstruation period highly contributed to the teenage girls' nutritional problems. Teenage girls are at risk of various health problems if the food intake is not matched the need during the menstruation period. One health problem that can occur is anemia [1].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The anemia prevalence on the teenage girl is relatively high. World Health Organization (WHO) stated that 50% of the female world population in 2016 are diagnosed with anemia, one-third of that population are aged between 10-24 years old. Indonesia has contributed 12-37% female population with anemia (aged 15-49 years old), with the mean of the hemoglobin level were &lt;12g/dL [2]. Indonesia Health Survey Department in 2013 also found that 18.4% of anemia was found at the age of 15-24 [3].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The level of hemoglobin is an indicator used to classify an individual health status. Hemoglobin is a red-pigmented protein which used to delivers oxygen [4]. WHO in 2011 stated that the normal level of hemoglobin on females aged more than 15 years old is &gt;12g/dL [5].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The low level of hemoglobin affected the blood's ability to deliver oxygen and iron. A study conducted by Kusmiyati, Meilani, and Ismail in 2013, found that student’s academic performances are parallel with the level of the hemoglobin. The academic performance was increasing 2.3 times if there was an improvement of hemoglobin level of 1 g/dL [6].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A good concentration would be increased the focus, which in other hand also improves the level of understanding of an object or information. Pratama, Sinaga, and Ompusunggu in 2017 also stated that the high level of hemoglobin correlated with better concentration [7]. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">low level of hemoglobin could cause some problems, such as psychomotor development disorder, intellectual and cognitive disorder, low studying concentration and some behavioral changes [8].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Senior High School of 3 Denpasar successfully gained the highest score on the computer-based national examination on the science and social program in 2018 [9]. Senior High School of 3 Denpasar held a program of Ferrous Tablet. Senior High School of 3 Denpasar was given ferrous tablets to their female students which already started in June 2017. Each female student received 6 ferrous tablets which have to be consumed once a week.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The previous study in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar showed that 64.1% of female students were having a low level of hemoglobin [10]. The pilot study also showed that 5 students from 10 students were having a low level of hemoglobin (&lt;12 g/dL). We also found that only 3 students who consumed the ferrous tablets routinely. Based on those explanations, this study aimed to know the correlation between the level of hemoglobin and studying concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in the Senior High School of 3 Denpasar.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>II.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This was a descriptive correlational study with crosssectional design. Bivariate analysis was done using the Pearson Product Moment test because the data was distributed in the normal pattern.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The study population was all the tenth-grade science class female students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar, with a total of 152 students. Based on the Slovin formula, the total of required participants was 122 students. Participants who met the inclusion criteria were chosen randomly using a simple random sampling technique assisted by a computer program.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study involved independent variables (hemoglobin level) and dependent variables (learning concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in senior high school of 3 denpasar). Easy Touch GCHb was used to identify the level of hemoglobin. The studying concentration data was collected using a Studying Concentration Questionnaire which already modified by Setiani in 2014 [11]. This questionnaire consisted of 27 valid question items. Statistically, the reliability of the questionnaire’s question item was 0.903 (r productmoment). This result indicated that the questionnaire could be categorized as a reliable questionnaire.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data collection was done on April 15<sup>th</sup> and April 18<sup>th</sup>, 2019 in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar by the researcher and one enumerator. After Senior High School of 3 Denpasar granted the study, the data collection was done to all the tenth-grade science class female students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar. The data was collected using the Study Concentration Questionnaire while the level of hemoglobin was checked using the Easy Touch GCHb meter. The data then filtered based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The participants who met the inclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">criteria than randomly chosen by a computer program to achieve the number of participants required in the Study (n=122).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The data were analyzed by univariate and bivariate analysis. The univariate analysis was used to describe the study variables. The bivariate analysis was used to know the correlation between the effects happened on the dependent variable. Pearson Product Moment test was used because the data were distributed normally.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark5"></a>III.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the demographic data, there were 72 participants (59%) were aged 16, 97 participants’ parents (79.5%) were having a salary of ≥ Rp. 2.500.000,00, and 99 participants (88.1%) were only joining one extracurricular activity. Based on the nutritional status, 90 participants (73.8%) were having a normal body mass index (BMI), 81 participants (66.4%) have a good quality of sleep, and 117 participants (95.9%) were having menstruation period in 37 days.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result of the level of hemoglobin shows that the mean of the level of hemoglobin was 13.4 (SD=1.4). We</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">estimated that 95% of the level of hemoglobin was between 13.12 until 13.63 with the lowest score of 8.9 and the highest score was 16,3. One-hundred five participants (86.1%) were having a normal level of hemoglobin (≥12 g/dL). There were no participants with a level of hemoglobin under &lt;8 g/dL).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The participant’s studying concentration result showed that the mean of the studying concentration was 69.0 (SD=7.0) with the lowest score 50 and the highest score of 88.9. We estimated that 95% of the studying concentration score was between 67.73 until 70.28. One-hundred and five participants (86.1%) were having moderate studying concentration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The correlation between the level of hemoglobin and studying concentration was done using Pearson Product Moment test with a confidence interval of 95% (α = 0.05). Based statistic test on </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Pearson Product Moment</span><span class="font1">, it showed that there was a strong and positive correlation between the level of hemoglobin and studying concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar (r = 0.737; p-value &lt;&nbsp;0.001; α = 0.05). This result indicated that the higher the level of hemoglobin, correlates with the higher-level studying concentration on the female students. While the lower level of the hemoglobin causes the lower studying concentration. The value of p is &lt;α, so we can conclude that the Ho were refused and Ha was accepted.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark7"></a>IV.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This study showed that there was a strong and positive correlation between the hemoglobin level and studying concentration on the tenth-grade science class female student in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar. This result indicated that a higher level of hemoglobin caused a higher level of studying concentration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study result was similar to the study done by Lestari in 2016, which showed there was a positive correlation between the levels of hemoglobin, and studying concentration on the female students. She also noted that the higher level of hemoglobin correlated with the higher studying concentration [12]. This result is also parallel with a study conducted by Devi, Rahayu and Kes in 2018 that found the level of hemoglobin correlated with the studying concentration [13].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The low level of hemoglobin on the female students can be happened due to the menstruation period that routinely occur on each month. The menstruation period caused the iron level to decrease because of the release of blood through the menstruation cycle. If there is no substitution of the iron, anemia is possibly happened, especially iron deficiency anemia [14].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The iron deficiency anemia could cause serious health problems for teenage girls. Physiologically, teenage girls would be going through pregnancy in the next couple of years. Iron deficiency anemia could increase the risk of the mother’s death during delivery, premature baby, and baby with low birth weight [15].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The low level of hemoglobin causes a change in individual behavior and cognitive function. The brain, myogenesis of the antibody, and myelin development plays a significant role in transporting the stimulus on the nervous system. This process can be affected by the level of iron on the body. Adequate intake of iron causes the ability to concentrate better, giving a good effect on the way of thinking, and increasing the academic performances[16].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The low level of iron also reduces the neurological monoamine oxidase activity. Neurological activity plays a role in the synthesis of the dopamine and tyrosin, which worked together on managing the motoric coordination and serotonin management (neurotransmitter activity) for the focus and concentration. A low level of iron would be affected the cognitive and studying concentration [14]. Motoric coordination disorder and difficulty concentrating can appear because of iron deficiency. This condition reduces the student’s focus when studying at school [17].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The change, which happened because of the low level of iron, can cause many problems with memory, learning capacity, emotional and psychological problems. Iron deficiency causes change on the brain homeostatic, especially on the dopamine and monoamine metabolism [18]. The change of those metabolism processes could block the development of the nervous system, myelination, neurotransmission, and dopamine basal prefrontal cortex which can be manifested by anxiety. Anxiety and depression feelings could make difficulty concentrating on the school [19].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The low level of hemoglobin also can cause the lower oxygen delivered to the body. This condition usually affects the metabolism. The metabolism activity can be decreased [20]. The inadequate metabolism activity reduced the energy for studying. Hence, the low level of hemoglobin could decrease the ability to study, reduce the level of concentration, and reduce the immunity. These things are</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">affected the academic performances. Studying concentration is playing an important role in determining whether the students can study on the higher grade [21].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The result showed that the studying concentration was classified in the range of moderate. This can be happened due to the effect of some factors which affected that studying concentration during the study. We didn’t investigate in detail about those factors. Other factors that can affect the studying concentration are health status, attention, interest, preparedness, family support, infrastructure, and environment condition.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark9"></a>V.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Results showed that there was a strong and positive relationship between the level of hemoglobin and studying concentration on the tenth-grade science class female students in Senior High School of 3 Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study didn’t describe other factors that affected the studying concentration. Based on the result, further study needs to identify the correlation between the other factors (age, parents’ salary, extracurricular activity, nutritional status, quality of sleep, and menstruation period) with the studying concentration.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Acknowledgment</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">The author thanks to Senior High School of 3 Denpasar for the research permission, and UPPM Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Bali.</span></p>
<h1><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>References</span></h1>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kaimudin, N. I., Lestari, H., &amp;&nbsp;Afa, J. R., “Skrining dan determinan kejadian anemia pada remaja putri SMA Negeri 3 Kendari tahun 2017”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Ilmiah Mahasiswa Kesehatan Masyarakat</span><span class="font0">. 2017.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">2(6), 1-10. ISSN:250-731X</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;World Health Organization (WHO), “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Prevalence of anemia among</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">women of reproductive age (% of women ages 15-49)”,</span><span class="font0">2016. Retrieved from:</span><a href="https://data.worldbank.org/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://data.worldbank.org/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia Ministry of Health, “Riset kesehatan dasar (Riskesdas) 2013”, Jakarta: Badan Penelitian dan Pengembangan Kesehatan, 2013. Retrieved fro</span><a href="http://www.depkes.go.id/"><span class="font0">m </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.depkes.go.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hidayat, N., &amp;&nbsp;Sunarti, S, “Validitas pemeriksaan kadar hemoglobin menggunakan metode hb meter pada remaja putri di Wonosari”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kes Mas: Jurnal Fakultas Kesehatan Masyarakat.</span><span class="font0"> 2015. 9(1), 11-17. doi:</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.12928/kesmas.v9i1.1548"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.12928/kesmas.v9i1.1548</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;World Health Organization (WHO), “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Haemoglobin concentrations for the diagnosis of anaemia and assessment of severity”,</span><span class="font0"> 2011</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font0">Retrieved from:</span><a href="http://www.who.int/vmnis/indicators/haemoglobin.pdf"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.who.int/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kusmiyati, Y., Meilani, N., &amp;&nbsp;Ismail, S., “Kadar hemoglobin dan kecerdasan intelektual anak”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kesmas: National Public Health Journal</span><span class="font0">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2013. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8(3), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;109-114.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">doi:</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.21109/kesmas.v8i3.353"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.21109/kesmas.v8i3.353</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pratama, I. Y., Sinaga, J. L., &amp;&nbsp;Ompusunggu, H. E. S., “Korelasi antara kadar hemoglobin dengan tingkat konsentrasi pada mahasiswa laki-laki Fakultas Kedokteran Universitas HKBP Nommensen Medan”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Nommensen Journal of Medicine,</span><span class="font0"> 2017. 3(2), 58-62. Retrieved from:</span><a href="https://uhn.ac.id/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://uhn.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Almatsier, S., “Prinsip dasar ilmu gizi”, Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama, 2010.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balipost. “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Sekolah ini raih hasil terbaik UN di Bali”,</span><span class="font0"> 2018. Retrieved fro</span><a href="http://www.balipost.com/news/2018/05/02/44481/Sekolah-Ini-Raih-Hasil-Terbaik...html"><span class="font0">m:</span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.balipost.com/news/2018/05/02/44481/Sekolah-Ini-</span></a><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://www.balipost.com/news/2018/05/02/44481/Sekolah-Ini-Raih-Hasil-Terbaik...html"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">Raih-Hasil-Terbaik...html</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Trisnawati, I.G.A., “Hubungan intelegensia dan kadar haemoglobin dengan prestasi belajar siswa SMA Negeri 3 Denpasar”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Unpublished Thesis</span><span class="font0">. Denpasar: Poltekes Denpasar, 2011. Retrieved from:</span><a href="http://repository.poltekkes-denpasar.ac.id/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://repository.poltekkes-denpasar.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Setiani, A. C., “Meningkatkan konsentrasi belajar melalui layanan bimbingan kelompok pada siswa kelas VI SDN 2 Karangcegak, Kabupaten Purbalingga tahun ajaran 2013/2014”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Unpublised Research Paper,</span><span class="font0"> Semarang: Semarang University, 2014. Retrieved from:</span><a href="https://lib.unnes.ac.id/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://lib.unnes.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lestari, N. C. A., “Hubungan antara anemia dengan daya konsentrasi pada remaja putri siswi SMP N 1 Sumowono di Desa Sumowono Kec. Sumowono Kab. Semarang tahun 2012”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Nifas</span><span class="font0">. 2016. 2(1), 1-12.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Devi, S. A., Rahayu, T., &amp;&nbsp;Kes, M., “Hubungan tanda-tanda vital dan kadar hemoglobin dengan konsentrasi belajar pada remaja putri”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Prodi Biologi,</span><span class="font0"> 2018. 7(5).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dumilah, P. R. A., &amp;&nbsp;Sumarmi, S., “Hubungan anemia dengan prestasi belajar siswi di SMP Unggulan Bina Insani”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Amerta Nutrition</span><span class="font0">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2017. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1(4), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;331-340. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DOI:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.20473/amnt.v1i4.2017.331-340"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.20473/amnt.v1i4.2017.331-340</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia Ministry of Health, “</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Kenali masalah gizi yang ancam kesehatan &nbsp;&nbsp;remaja &nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia ”,</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2018. Retrieved from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www.depkes.go.id/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://www.depkes.go.id/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mamun, M. A., &amp;&nbsp;Ghani, R. B. A., “The role of iron and zinc in cognitive development of children”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Asian Journal of Medical and Biological Research</span><span class="font0">. &nbsp;&nbsp;2017. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3(2), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;145-151. DOI :</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">10.3329/ajmbr.v3i2.33561</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sudisa, A., &amp;&nbsp;Rokhanawati, D., “Hubungan kejadian anemia dengan prestasi belajar pada siswa remaja putri kelas XI SMA Negeri 1 Tanjungsari Kecamatan Tanjungsari Kabupaten Gunung Kidul Yogyakarta”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Unpublished Research Paper.</span><span class="font0"> Yogyakarta: Aisyiyah Yogyakarta University, 2017.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thalanjeri, P., Karanth, H., Shankar, V., &amp;&nbsp;Kutty, K., “Impact of iron deficiency anemia on cognition of school children of South India”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Indian Journal of Clinical Anatomy and Physiology</span><span class="font0">. 2016. 3(2), 135-138. DOI:</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.5958/2394-2126.2016.00032.3"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">10.5958/2394-2126.2016.00032.3</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Su, J., Cui, N., Zhou, G., Ai, Y., Sun, G., &amp;&nbsp;Zhao, S. R.,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">“Hemoglobin status and externalizing behavioral problems in children”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Environmental Research and Public &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Health,</span><span class="font0"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2016. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13(8), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1-13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DOI &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;:</span></p>
<p><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13080758"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13080758</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yanti, J. S., Saputri, E. M., Edigan, F., &amp;&nbsp;Muhamadiah, M.,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">“Hubungan anemia dengan prestasi belajar mahasiswa kebidanan tingkat II dan III di Akademi Kebidanan Helvetia Pekanbaru. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Al-Insyirah Midwifery: Jurnal Ilmu Kebidanan (Journal of Midwifery Sciences)</span><span class="font0">. 2019. &nbsp;8(1), 6-9. Retrieved from:</span><a href="https://jurnal.stikes-alinsyirah.ac.id/"><span class="font0"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://jurnal.stikes-</span></a></p>
<p><a href="https://jurnal.stikes-alinsyirah.ac.id/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">alinsyirah.ac.id/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Watuna, P., Mantik, M. F., &amp;&nbsp;Gunawan, S., “Perbedaan kadar hemoglobin antara anak usia sekolah yang berprestasi dan yang kurang &nbsp;berprestasi”, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">e-CliniC</span><span class="font0">. &nbsp;2015. &nbsp;3(1). &nbsp;Retrieved from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://ejournal.unsrat.ac.id/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ejournal.unsrat.ac.id/</span></a></p>