---
layout: full_article
title: "The Effects of Cohesive Devices Used in the Background of the Study of English Department Students’ Undergraduate Theses"
author: "Ni Kadek Lestya Adnya Suari, I Nyoman Udayana, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama"
categories: pustaka
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-85526 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/id-85526"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-85526"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PUSTAKA </span><span class="font1">V</span><span class="font0">OL</span><span class="font1">. 22, N</span><span class="font0">O</span><span class="font1">.2 • 107 – 113</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-5, SK No: 105/E/KPT/2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-7508</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN: 2528-7516</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Effects of Cohesive Devices Used in the Background of the Study of English Department Students’ Undergraduate Theses</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ni Kadek Lestya Adnya Suari, I Nyoman Udayana, I Gusti Ngurah Parthama</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Udayana University Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia Email: lestyasuari2805@gmail.com<sup>1</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This study entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Effects of Cohesive Devices Used in the Background of the Study of English Department Students' Undergraduate Theses</span><span class="font2"> aims to analyse the effects of the overuse, underuse, and misuse cohesive devices employed by the English Department students in the background of the study in their undergraduate theses. The data of this study is taken from ten backgrounds of the studies written by the English Department students, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University submitted in 2021 in various topic. This study is conducted using descriptive qualitative method. In collecting the data, documentation method utilized by a checklist instrument and note-taking technique are used to collect the data. The method for presenting the data analysis in this study could be formal and informal. In analysing the data, this study employs the theory from Halliday and Hassan (1976) about the cohesive devices and supporting theory by Ong (2011). The results of this study show that there are several types of cohesive devices are overused, underused, and misused. The overuse of cohesive devices is dominated by the overuse of repetition, conjunction, reference, and synonym. Then, the underuse of cohesive devices found in conjunction and reference. Lastly, the misuse of cohesive devices is found in reference and conjunction. The effects from these overuse, underuse, and misuse of cohesive devices affect the text, especially the connections of the ideas become not in cohesion. Those cases also affect the effectiveness, clarity, and the way the reader comprehend the meaning of the text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: Cohesive Devices, Background of the Study, Overuse, Underuse, and Misuse</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Cohesive device as a part of discourse analysis is raised as the topic of this study has a correlation with the phenomenon of writing that sometimes faced by students especially for foreign language learners both the use of the types and the effects of the usage of cohesive devices. As stated by White (1986), writing is the process of expressing the ideas, information, knowledge, or experience and understand the writing to acquire the knowledge or some information to share and learn. There are different types of writing, one of which is the production of academic writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In discourse analysis, Halliday and Hassan (1976) emphasize the importance of cohesion in writing is to achieve well-constructed and understandable writing. The concept of connecting the sentences and the link on each word, which influences the text itself, is known as cohesion. The tools to make a text cohesion is called cohesive devices. Grammatical and lexical cohesion are the two kinds of cohesion or cohesive devices. Substitution, ellipsis, reference, and conjunction</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">are all types of grammatical cohesive. While reiteration and collocation are types of lexical cohesive devices (Halliday and Hasan 1976). A writer supposedly has a clear picturization of those types of cohesive devices in order to execute a better application in the writing process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cohesive devices usage, on the other hand, should be appropriate, meaning that they are not overused, underused, or misused. Cohesive devices are frequently overlooked, and the application is occasionally misinterpreted. This occurrence is rather a fatal mistake in producing a writing as the quality, value, and result of the writing less reliable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study will be conducted on the background of the study of English Department students’ undergraduate theses as the object of the study. College students occasionally struggle in composing a well-structured text in portraying their ideas, therefore their writing skills are showcased through the ideas behind the production of the theses. To achieve the goal of this study, the problem that is concerned in this study is:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the effects of the overuse, underuse, and misuse cohesive devices employed by the English Department students in the background of the study in their undergraduate theses?</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHOD</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The primary data of this research was based on the data taken from ten backgrounds of the studies of English Department students’ undergraduate theses submitted in 2021 in Faculty of Humanities Udayana University. The theses which were used in the research were collected from various respected topic of studies from English Department undergraduate theses regardless the object of the study. the background of the study was chosen to be the data since it reflected the undergraduate students' writing skill in the form of their purest reasons and ideas in generating their theses. This was also to learn more about the capacity of college students, particularly foreign learners, in developing the undergraduate thesis as one of the qualifications for graduation that obviously requires suitable cohesion and coherence in order to be approved as academic writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study employed descriptive qualitative method. The documentation method utilized by a checklist instrument and note-taking technique are used to collect the data in this research. Next, in analysing the collected data are interpreted using the theory of cohesive devices by Halliday and Hasan (1976) and the supporting theory by Ong (2011) about the cohesive inaccuracy criteria to support the analysis of cohesive devices overuse, underuse, and misuse. Then, the method and technique of presenting the data analysis is using informal way or presented descriptively. Descriptive explanation is needed to present the analysis in order to make the reader understand the detail of this research.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This part is used to present the findings on the analysis of the effects of cohesive devices overuse, underuse, and misuse which are used in the background of the study of English Department students’ undergraduate theses by using cohesive devices theory which was proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976) and the supporting theory by Ong (2011) about the cohesive inaccuracy criteria to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">support the analysis of cohesive devices overuse, underuse, and misuse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday &amp;&nbsp;Hasan (1976) categorized the notion of cohesive devices into two major types, grammatical cohesion and lexical cohesion. Grammatical cohesion or grammatical cohesive device is a semantic relationship articulated via the grammatical system, which includes reference, substitution, ellipsis, and conjunction. While the lexical cohesion or lexical cohesive device consists of reiteration and collocation. Ong (2011) explained overuse cohesive devices happens when it employed in the text in an unnecessary addition. Cohesive device underuse happens when a specific cohesive device is expected in the text but is not there. Cohesive devices misuse occurs when a certain cohesive device is used incorrectly. The effects of cohesive devices whether overuse, underuse, or misuse are affected to the reader and to text itself. It can also affect whether the idea or value of the text are conveyed to the reader or not.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Overuse of Cohesive Devices</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hence, the phenomena </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">'s very interesting to study, particularly idioms found in the selected song lyrics of Katy Perry's entitled &quot;Roar and Dark Horse&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The overuse of personal reference has been occurred in the sentence above. Overuse is the unnecessary addition of cohesive devices that is employed in the text in an unnecessary or redundant manner. The sentence above contains unnecessary personal reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font3"> that should be omitted due to it does not have any meaning and function in the text. The personal reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font3"> in this sentence is used as a subject. However, in this case there is already a subject in the sentence, it is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the phenomena.</span><span class="font3"> Then, it is appropriate to put the verb that functions as a predicate after the subject and before the adjective. Therefore, it is improper if the writer uses two subjects which one of them is a personal reference specifically for an object at the same time in one sentence. The use of subject </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the phenomena</span><span class="font3"> is clear to understand the meaning of the sentence. On the contrary, the existence of personal reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it</span><span class="font3"> is obviously unclear what subject it refers to. The effects of this overuse of personal reference may lead to misunderstanding on the reader when read the sentence. It delivers multiple presuppositions which add the element of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ambiguity in its use. Moreover, the sentence can be categorized as an ineffective sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Based on the explanation above, the writer is interested in discussing this topic to find out what </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kind of type </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">of idioms are found in Katy Perry's &quot;Roar and Dark Horse&quot; song lyrics and also to know about what is the meaning of idioms found in Katy Perry's &quot;Roar and Dark Horse&quot; song lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The overuse of synonym is found in the first sentence. It is called overuse the synonym due to the use of the same word applied in one sentence. This case is also can be analysed as the underuse of additive conjunction in order to avoid the redundant of the synonym. The words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kind</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">type </span><span class="font3">have the same meaning which is a category of people or things having common characteristics. The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kind of type</span><span class="font3"> is inappropriate so that it is called as overuse synonym. It would be different if the writer puts the conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">or</span><span class="font3"> between the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kind</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">type,</span><span class="font3"> it is not categorized as the overuse anymore because the use of the words would be appropriate. It means that there is alternative of the word whether </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kind</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">type. </span><span class="font3">However, if the existence is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kind of type,</span><span class="font3"> it is better to choose one of them in order to avoid the unnecessary plurality of options which drives the text to be farther than how it may be as punctual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">That's how language works in our calm dialogue </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the media we face, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the presence of norms, policies, and citizen laws that address language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence in the data above shows that there are overuses additive conjunctions </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and.</span><span class="font3"> The use of these additive conjunctions </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> as to add information are categorized unnecessary and those should be omitted in order to make a clear and effective sentence. The sentence presents that there is more than one information about how the language works. The sentence is appropriate when the use of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> only put before the last option and use comma to separate between one information to another to clearly emphasize the additional information and the other is enough to separate with comma. The proper sentence would be </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">That's how language works in our calm dialogue, the media we face, the presence of norms,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">policies, and citizen laws that address language. </span><span class="font3">Thus, by these overuses of additive conjunctions, the sentence belongs to ineffective sentence and monotonous due to the redundant repetition of the same conjunction in the sentence. The unnecessary repetition also reduces the reliability of the idea in the sentence due to the lack of punctuality in the sentence contained in an academic writing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Locutionary act is the act of saying something. It contains a statement or information when communicating with others. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Therefore, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">others</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Therefore, the utterance only has one meaning without any reference to the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The overuse of causal conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">therefore </span><span class="font3">occurred in the third sentence. It should be omitted due to the existence of the conjunction there is unnecessary, and the sentence is also incomplete. So, the function of conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font3"> as to show the cause-effect relation does not appear in the sentence. In addition, the use of conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font3"> is also used in the next sentence but in appropriate sentence. Hence, this overuse of causal conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">therefore</span><span class="font3"> can make the sentence become disconnected to the previous one and aside from causing ambiguity, the sentence also drives the reader away from the constructed idea in the previous sentence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This study discussed the types of figurative language based on the theory of interpreting literature proposed by, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker and Renninger (1974) and Mezo (1999) also analyzing the meaning based on the theory of meaning proposed by Leech (1974).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above is overusing the additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and.</span><span class="font3"> In the conjunction, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> belongs to additive conjunction due to the function is to give additional information. The second </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Knickerbocker and Renninger (1974)</span><span class="font3"> used to indicates that the theory of interpreting literature was made by two authors together in the specific year. Then, another </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> also used to indicates the second theory with different author. However, the use of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> after the preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">by</span><span class="font3"> is categorized as overuse because it is unnecessary, and it does not link the preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">by</span><span class="font3"> with the proper nouns. Moreover, it does not have any functions in the sentence. Therefore, it is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">improper to put the conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> after the preposition </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">by.</span><span class="font3"> As a result, the sentence becomes unclear and does not perform as effective as how it should be.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Underuse of Cohesive Devices</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">When someone feels happy, they listen to or sing happy songs like what they feel, and when someone feels sad or angry, they also choose the song they want </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">to hear to describe </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their feelings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above shows the underuse of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> between the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to hear to describe.</span><span class="font3"> It should be placed there because the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to hear to describe</span><span class="font3"> give two information contain in the text. The appropriate sentence would be </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">they also choose the song they want to hear </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to describe their feelings.</span><span class="font3"> The sentence contains additional information that the listener of the song chooses the song not only the song they want to hear, but also the song that can describe their feelings. So, the additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> between those words is needed in order to emphasize the information. The effect of this underuse of additive conjunction is that the sentence is unclear because the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">to hear to describe</span><span class="font3"> are only two verbs or in the context of the sentence are two activity that can be done by the listener to the song. The two information could have been effectively emphasized to deliver broader meaning to the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There are two kinds of language: informal language and formal language. Formal language used </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">professional, literal wording</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">informal </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">used figurative language (such as metaphors and similes).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Two underuses of cohesive devices are found in the sentences. The first one is the underuse of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and.</span><span class="font3"> It should be put between the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">professional</span><span class="font3"> and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">literal wording </span><span class="font3">to emphasize that there are two additional information about the formal language. Then, the second one is the underuse of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">on the other hand</span><span class="font3"> before the sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">informal used figurative language (such as metaphors and similes).</span><span class="font3"> To connect the sentence with the previous one and also to emphasize the message conveyed</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">by the text, the use of additive conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">on the other hand</span><span class="font3"> is important in order to point another information or idea about the topic of informal language that is related to the first sentence. As a result, the underuses of these additive conjunctions make the points of the sentences unclear and not properly emphasized. So, the ideas of the text are not conveyed properly to the reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There are ten women's language features based on Lakoff (1975) study therefore specific topic has been chosen to be analyzed in this study which is intensifier and superpolite forms in Ocean's 8 movie based on the most frequent device used by women and the device believed to be used by </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">women </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">those devices are boosting devices is frequently used by women (intensifier) and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">women </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">also believed to be more polite than men (super polite forms).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence is categorized as underuse of reference due to the same word is repeated several times. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">women</span><span class="font3"> (in bold) should be replaced by the reference specifically the personal pronoun in order to avoid repetition. The first </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">women</span><span class="font3"> is better replaced by the personal pronoun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">them</span><span class="font3"> due to the function as the object in the passive clause. Next, for the second </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">women</span><span class="font3"> also should be replaced by the personal pronoun </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">they</span><span class="font3"> in reference which is functioned as the subject of the clause. Both of the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">women</span><span class="font3"> are referred to the previous </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">women</span><span class="font3"> in the previous clauses. The use of repetition is good in order to emphasize the specific subjects in the sentence. However, when the use of it is redundantly, might affect the effectiveness of the sentence. This underuse of reference brings the effect to the sentence such as make the sentence ineffective and monotonous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Moreover, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">directive illocutionary act </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">was chosen as the topic of this study because they perform an action by using their language uttered by the character is very worth to be analyzed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence belongs to underuse of the demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> before the words </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">directive illocutionary act.</span><span class="font3"> The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> as a definite article should be put in the sentence because the information about the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">directive illocutionary act has already been explained in the previous sentences or paragraph. Hence, in order to make the text in cohesion with the previous sentences, the demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> should be applied to make the reference of the subject which is directive illocutionary act signals back to the same subject in the previous sentences. The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> functions as a modifier and it is clear that the use of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> helps to present the definite directive illocutionary act that is being discussed. The effect of underusing the definite article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence can bring ambiguity whether the directive illocutionary act that is being discussed in this sentence is the same as the directive illocutionary act that has been explained in the previous sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Generally, signs can be divided into two types those are verbal and visual sign. Verbal sign relates to words or phrases that imply their meaning and usually messages that are conveyed both of oral and written forms. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Visual sign </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">is commonly referred to a picture or image and the information or message conveyed without a word but using gestures, facial expressions, and appearance that presented in the form of an image.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There is an underuse of conjunction found in the third sentence. There should be put the adversative conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">on the other hand</span><span class="font3"> in the beginning of the third sentence. The conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">on the other hand</span><span class="font3"> functions as a contrastive relation between the second sentence which talk about verbal sign and the third sentence which talk about the visual sign. It is used when comparing two different ideas or two opposite things about a situation. The meanings of verbal and visual signs are in stark contrast to each other, so that the use of conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">on the other hand</span><span class="font3"> is needed to emphasize and distinguish both of the signs. The effect of this underuse is that the information on the difference in meaning of verbal and visual signs are not clearly highlighted and the idea of separation is not properly delivered.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Misuse of Cohesive Devices</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">When people watch a movie that is not </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">his </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">own country, they can get various information that does not belong to </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">his </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">country. Therefore, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">existence of this print media helps the public to find out information in other countries and certainly adds insight for people, both those containing verbal signs and visual signs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two misuses of personal reference specifically the possessive determiner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">his</span><span class="font3"> are occurred in the sentences. Those possessive determiners </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">his</span><span class="font3"> in the first sentence are placed incorrectly. The possessive determiner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">his</span><span class="font3"> should be used in referring to a singular male person that placed in front of nouns to express possession or belonging. However, the subject of this sentence is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">people</span><span class="font3"> which is categorized as plural noun. So that, the possessive determiner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">his</span><span class="font3"> should be replaced by possessive determiner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font3"> to make the sentences in cohesion and the reference of the possessive determiner is suitable. As a result, the effects of the misuse of personal reference can bring the ambiguity of the sentence that the meaning of the sentence is unclear. It also leads the misinterpretation about what subject of the personal reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">his</span><span class="font3"> actually refers to.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">By analyzing lexical cohesion within the text, this study will know the types of lexical cohesion in an article entitled culture of Indonesia and how lexical cohesion creates coherence in a text. To gain a deeper understanding of </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">an </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">article, lexical cohesion elements consisting of reiteration and collocation play a very important role.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Misuse of demonstrative reference is found in the second sentence. The article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence is considered as misused due to its function is to point the indefinite singular noun. However, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">article</span><span class="font3"> after indefinite article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">an </span><span class="font3">is referred to the article entitled Culture of Indonesia. So, the proper article to place in front of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">article</span><span class="font3"> is the definite article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> which is also categorized as demonstrative reference. The definite article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> should be used because the article that is used as a data of the text has been specified. It is also used to indicate that the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">article</span><span class="font3"> being discussed is the same as the article in the previous sentence which is Culture of Indonesia. Hence, by misusing the definite article </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the</span><span class="font3"> may lead to misunderstanding about the existence of the article whether similar with the previous article or not. In addition, the text can be</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">considered as incomprehensible text and incoherent with the previous sentences.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code-switching is mostly used within bilingual or multilingual groups, and there are functions why speakers' code switch the language, such as the need to fit in in the group to make them understand, to convey or opinions that might be easier to explain in a specific language. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">This </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ensures that the meaning of the message to be conveyed is able to be understood properly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The misuse of demonstrative reference occurred in the second sentence. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this</span><span class="font3"> is not suitable to be used in referring to the previous subject which are the functions of code switching by the speakers. It should be replaced by using </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">these.</span><span class="font3"> The demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this</span><span class="font3"> is only used for the singular object and for the plural one is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">these</span><span class="font3">. However, to refer to the functions of code switching that have more than one function belong to plural object. So, instead of using the demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this,</span><span class="font3"> using the plural one will lead the text into more comprehensible. Due to the misuse of demonstrative reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">this</span><span class="font3"> can make the sentences ambiguous and its reference in the previous sentence become unclear.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">And the &quot;Dark Horse&quot; song talks about an Egyptian Queen searching for her love. Kings from all over the world come confidently to make the Queen their &quot;one and only&quot; true love. A long line of men bearing gifts awaits </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">their </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">decision, whether they are genuinely hers or not, and meet their end.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the data above, there is a misuse of personal reference </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their.</span><span class="font3"> As stated by Ong (2011), cohesive device misuse happens when a certain cohesive device is used incorrectly. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their </span><span class="font3">in the last sentence is not suitable with the meaning of the sentence. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font3"> in the context of the sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A long line of men bearing gifts awaits </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">their </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">decision, whether they are genuinely hers or not, and meet their end</span><span class="font3"> should be replaced with the possessive determiner </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">her</span><span class="font3"> due to the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">their</span><span class="font3"> in the sentence refers to the </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Queen. </span><span class="font3">As a result, the misuse of this personal reference drives toward ambiguity on the sentence and misinterpretation about the meaning of the text. The message of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">text cannot be delivered completely due to the unclarity of the text, and it does not stand firmly as the background of an analysis carried upon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Data 5</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A text is a passage of discourse which is coherent in these two regards: it is coherent with respect to the context of the situation, and therefore consistent in the register, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">it is coherent with respect to itself, and therefore cohesive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence is misusing the conjunction. The conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> which is used to indicate the second regard of the coherent in a text is improper. Although the use is to inform the additional information, but it makes the sentence incomprehensible for the reader due to the repetition of the conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">and</span><span class="font3"> itself. It should be replaced by using the temporal conjunction </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">then</span><span class="font3"> or </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the second</span><span class="font3"> to emphasize the next thing of coherent and separate the sentence into another sentence. Therefore, this misuse of conjunction can make the sentence lost its narrative aspect which directs the reader on specific sequence, resulting in a difficulty to understand the information as it cannot be highlighted or emphasized properly.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Deriving from the discussion on cohesive devices used in ten backgrounds of the studies of English department students’ undergraduate theses, the finding signifies that there are several types of cohesive devices are overused, underused, and misused. The overuse of cohesive devices is dominated by the overuse of repetition, then continued by conjunction, reference, and synonym. The overuse of other types such as substitution, ellipsis, superordinate, general word, and collocation are not found. Then, for the underuse of cohesive devices only found in conjunction and followed by reference. Last one, the misuse of cohesive devices is similar to the underuse only found in reference and followed by conjunction. The effects derived from the overuse, underuse, and misuse of cohesive devices affects the text themselves especially the effectiveness, clarity, interpretation, and the comprehension of the text. Aside it affects to the meaning of the text, the case of cohesive devices overuse, underuse, and misuse also resulting in the failure of bridging one sentence to the other which elevate the clear picture that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">sentences are not in cohesion. This puts the text off the rail and the intention of the writer is not entirely comprehensible to the reader.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Aqmarina, A. (2020). The Exploration of Cohesive Devices in Synopsis Writings Produced by English Study Program Students of Universitas Gadjah Mada. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">SALEE: Study of Applied Linguistics and English Education</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">1</span><span class="font3">(1), 5166.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fox, C., Manning, E., Murphy, M., Urbom, R., Marwick, K. C. (2003). Practice In Longman dictionary of contemporary English. London, England: Harlow Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Guna, S., &amp;&nbsp;Ngadiman, A. (2015). The Cohesive Devices Used in the Cause Effect Essay Written by the English Department Students of STKIP St. Paulus Ruteng. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Magister Scientiae</span><span class="font3">, (38), 93-107.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday, M. A. K. and Ruqaiya Hasan. (1976). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font3">. London: Longman Group Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Malki, F.Z. and Labed, N. (2018). The Effect of the Use of Cohesive Devices on Students’ Writing Quality (Doctoral dissertation). Constantine: University of Mentouri Brothers - Constantine 01.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meisuo, Z. (2000). Cohesive features in the expository writing of undergraduates in two Chinese universities. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">RELC journal</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">31</span><span class="font3">(1), 6195.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Othman, A. K. (2019). Investigation of grammatical cohesive devices errors made by Saudi EFL students in written paragraphs: A case study of the University of Tabuk, Saudi Arabia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">European Scientific Journal ESJ</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">15</span><span class="font3">(2), 1-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ong, J. (2011). Investigating the use of cohesive devices by Chinese EFL learners. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Asian EFL Journal Quarterly</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">11</span><span class="font3">(3), 42-65.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">White, F. D. 1986. The Writer’s Art: A Practical Rhetoric and Handbook. New York: Wadsworth Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yin, Z. (2015). The use of cohesive devices in news language: overuse, underuse or misuse?. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">RELC Journal</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">46</span><span class="font3">(3), 309-326.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">113</span></p>