---
layout: full_article
title: "On The Observance of Grice’s Maxims in Nathan Greno’s Movie Script Tangled"
author: "Ida Ayu Made Wulan Sri Dewi"
categories: pustaka
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-85487 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/id-85487"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/pustaka/full-85487"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">PUSTAKA </span><span class="font1">V</span><span class="font0">OL</span><span class="font1">. 22, N</span><span class="font0">O</span><span class="font1">.2 • 102 – 106</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Sinta-5, SK No: 105/E/KPT/2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 2528-7508</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">e-ISSN: 2528-7516</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>On The Observance of Grice’s Maxims in Nathan Greno’s Movie Script </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Tangled</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Ida Ayu Made Wulan Sri Dewi</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia Email: </span><a href="mailto:yugek.wulan@yahoo.com"><span class="font3">yugek.wulan@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">This study entitled “On the Observance of Grice’s Maxims in Nathan Greno’s Movie Script Tangled” discussed about the obedience conversational maxims that are found in the conversations that occurred in the movie script. This study aims at finding and analyze the type of Grice’s maxims are applied by the characters in the movie script, along with the meaning of the types are applied by the characters in the movie script Tangled by using Grice (1975) theory. The data were collected by using documentation method and note-taking technique, and were analysed by using a descriptive qualitative method. Based on the result of the data analysis, it showed that the analysis of Grice’s maxims in the Tangled movie script applied all types of the maxims; which are maxim of quantity, quality, relation, and manner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: conversational rules, maxims, movie script.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian yang berjudul “On the Observance of Grice’s Maxims in Nathan Greno’s Movie Script Tangled” ini membahas tentang maksim percakapan kepatuhan yang ditemukan dalam percakapan yang terjadi dalam naskah film. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menemukan dan menganalisis tipe maksim Grice yang diterapkan oleh para tokoh dalam naskah film, beserta makna dari jenis maksim yang diterapkan oleh para tokoh dalam naskah film Tangled dengan menggunakan teori Grice (1975). Data dikumpulkan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan teknik catat, serta dianalisis dengan metode deskriptif kualitatif. Berdasarkan hasil analisis data menunjukkan bahwa analisis maksim Grice dalam naskah film Tangled menerapkan semua jenis maksim; yaitu maksim kuantitas, kualitas, relasi, dan cara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci: kaidah percakapan, maksim, naskah film.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Communication does not only serve as the foundation for how people convey information but also plays an important role in human life and society. Particularly in our daily lives, communication is not only facilitating the process of sharing information and knowledge with others but also assists people in developing relationships with others. However, not only in our daily lives, but we also need good communication to be applied in other applications, one of them is a movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Movie is one of literally works from the language creation that has a function mostly to entertain the audience. Because, in the movie, we can find many interesting things such as the gestures of the actors, conversations, and points of the message inside the movie seem more certainly to those who watch it. There are movies produced for the purpose as a way of education, like</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">amusement, even a few movies produced with the intention of political pastimes. There are many forms of movie, including comedy, romantic, movement, dramatic comedy, horror, and any other movie genre.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">However, to meet the standards of society, it takes several parts to complete a movie. One of them is characters. To build a story, characters are needed as the main element of the storyline of a movie. In the movie, the characters are also expected to be able to carry out their roles by communicating well with one another. Then, the most important element or the part that created the movie is the movie script. Movie scripts will help the addressee to have a better understanding of the storyline of the movie because people need to think further to get all the messages of the dialogue or the story inside the movie script just like the speaker’s attended, which means of his utterances, the mindset of the speaker while he talks to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">addressee as referent honorific, the gesture that is used by the speaker and addressee, and so forth.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">However, in order to make a good movie script, some rules must be included in the movie script. That rules are under the pragmatics study called Cooperative Principle theory. Linguist Herbert Paul Grice (1975) refined the Cooperative Principle (CP) and its maxims based on ordinary language philosophy as a mode of interaction for successful communication. According to Yule (1996:37), people will have a successful conversation if they fulfill the Cooperative Principle that is elaborated into four sub-principles or maxims; the maxim of quantity, quality, relation, and manner.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It is possible to conclude that the cooperative principle, which leads to conversational maxims, is very important in conversation. The decision to study Grice's maxims in the movie script was an excellent way of explaining the connection between utterances and what others understand. The above explanation is the motivation for analyzing the Cooperative Principle, specifically about Gricean maxims. On the observance of Grice's maxims in the movie script, &quot;Tangled&quot; will be examined to determine whether the conversations in the movie are obeying the maxims. It is very interesting to conduct this study to analyze Grice's maxims and the meanings that occur in the conversations in the &quot;Tangled&quot; movie script to prove that conversational communication is still successful.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>METHODE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The data source of this study was taken in the form of the movie script from a movie entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled. Tangled</span><span class="font3"> was an American computer-animated, three-dimensional musical adventure story. The data was taken from the internet, from </span><a href="https://www.princessmovies.io/disney-princess/tangled/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.princessmovies.io/disney-princess/tangled/</span></a><span class="font3">. The movie script was also from the internet, it was from </span><a href="https://www.scribd.com/document/450012408/Ta"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.scribd.com/document/450012408/Ta</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> ngled-Movie-Script</span><span class="font3">. The movie was well-known and contains a lot of conversation. Therefore, this movie was chosen as the data source of this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study collected the data information through the documentation method and using the note-taking technique; there were three steps in data collection that were completed by the writer. First, the script and the movie Tangled were obtained by downloading it from the internet;</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, note-taking and collecting the sentences or utterances that indicated and were thought to be Grice's maxims; Last, to identify each sentence that has been gathered.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study used a content analysis method to analyze the data, which was using a descriptive technique. There were three steps in analyzing the data of this study. The first step was to identify the movie's characters' utterances as data related to Grice's maxims and eliminated them to obtain the best data; the second step was to classify the data into types of Grice’s maxims that were applied in Tangled movie; the Last step, all representative data collected, and the selected data were further analyzed to determine each meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data from this data source were descriptively analyzed using a descriptive technique based on Paul Grice's theory (1975). Then, all of the dialogue containing Grice's maxims were bolded and were made into a dialogue between the speaker and the hearer, as well as the meanings of Grice's maxims that were applied by the characters in the movie based on Grice's theory (1975).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In analyzing the data, this study will apply the Cooperative Principle theory proposed by Grice (1975). Grice (1975: 26–30) presumed a common Cooperative Principle and four maxims that specify how to cooperate. He asserted that people often follow these rules for effective communication. These maxims are; Grice's four maxims are: first, the maxim of quantity, in which the speaker tries to give as much information as possible; second, the maxim of quality, in which the speaker tries to be honest; third, the maxim of relation, in which the speaker tries to be relevant; fourth, the maxim of manner, in which the speaker tries to give information clearly to avoid ambiguity.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the dialogues that have been selected, it was found what maxim the characters in the movie Tangled have applied. Tangled’s genre is a three-dimensional musical adventure story that shows a lot of scenes where the characters only sing, it made only few data points of the total found that applied the four Maxims with the maxim of relation is being the most frequent maxim, followed by the maxim of quantity and maxim of quality, and the maxim of manner is being the least maxim applied by the character. The procedures of the analysis are as follows: the scene of the movie is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">first presented it is then followed by the dialogue and the analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This part discussed about Maxim application which is maxim of quantity, maxim of quality, maxim of relation, and maxim of manner that are found in the movie script Tangled.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: hello, welcome back, mother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gothel: Oh, Rapunzel. how you control to do that each single day without fail, it appears certainly exhausting, darling.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Oh, it's nothing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel’s response applied a Maxim of quantity, as Grice (1975:45) stated the speaker must not give an informative answer contributed more information than is necessary. So as what Mother Gothel asked Rapunzel, she just responded without following the unnecessary information.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: Why in the world might I need your hair? look, i was being chased, I noticed a tower, I climbed it, give up of the tale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: you are, telling the truth?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">YES!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn’s answer to Rapunzel applied a Maxim of quantity because as Grice (1975:45) stated the speaker must be contributed as informative as is necessary for the current exchange, and Flynn has given an informed answer as is needed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: [sobs] You have been right, mum. You have been right approximately the whole lot.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gothel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I understand, darling. I understand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">As Mother Gothel’s answer, it applied a Maxim of quantity rules. Because she answered Rapunzel as informative as it is required as the theory stated by Grice (1975:45) to not make our contribution more information than is necessary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gothel: Rapunzel, mother’s feeling a little run-down. might you sing for me, darling?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Rapunzel sings quick)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gothel: Rapunzel!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">So, mom, earlier i was saying day after today’s a quite massive day, and you did not surely reply, So i am just going to inform you. it is my birthday! </span><span class="font3">TADA!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the utterance made by Rapunzel, it shows that Rapunzel applied a Maxim of quality. As the function of Maxim of quality is that every speaker provides accurate information or contribution to their audience; and Rapunzel was telling Mother Gothel true information about her upcoming birthday, proved by the celebration she got every year.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: that is all my fault. She was right, I in no way must have done this. i am so... i am so sorry, Flynn.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: Eugene.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: What?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">My actual name is, Eugene Fitzherbert. so that you would possibly as well know.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Grice (1975:46), this utterance consists of two rules of the maxim; the first means don't lie and the second says don't say things you're not sure about. Regarding the theory, Flynn has given true information about his true name that made him apply a Maxim of quality. It has been also mentioned in the narration of the story about Flynn’s true name.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: i had magic hair that glows after I sing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: What?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">i had... magic hair, that glows after I sing! Flower gleam and glow. allow your energy shine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From Rapunzel’s utterances it could be concluded that her utterances conducted a Maxim of quality, based to Grice (1975:46), the maxim of quality must not say what you think is wrong and not saying what you lack suitable evidence, and Rapunzel was telling the truth and proved it by did it immediately.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 7)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stabbington: Now assist us up, beautiful boy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Sorry, my arms are full.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn’s response to the stabbington brothers conducted a Maxim of relation. Flynn’s answer was related to the utterances the brothers said; according to Grice (1975:46) in this maxim, the rule is related and Flynn was referring to the stabbington’s order without failing to bring up the topic of an extended conversation.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>(Data 8)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: [she threatens him with the pan again] i can use this. Is it, ruffians, thugs? Have they arrive for me?!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: stayed calm, it may possibly smell worry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Oh, sorry. Getting only a little bit, jumpy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel’s answer applied a Maxim of relation. As the function of Maxim of relation is trying to be relevant; then looked by Rapunzel’s answer referred to Flynn, she admitted that she was a little bit jumpy when Flynn said to stay calm. It showed as a Maxim of relation category as the utterances were related to one another.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flynn: Are you hungry? I knew a excellent place for lunch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Wherein?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">it showed that Rapunzel was giving a Maxim of relation answer to Flynn. As Grice (1975:46) mentioned, points out that when you engage in communication, the maxim of relation assumes you to be relevant; in the context, Flynn was asking Rapunzel to a restaurant he knew, then as that is pertinent to the discussion Rapunzel answered it by “wherein” referred to Flynn. It proved that Rapunzel was giving a relevant answer to Flynn. She replied with the answer that still had the same subject as the speaker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hook Hand: Oh, it is him all right. Greno, move discover some guards. That reward goes to buy me a brand new hook.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Attila: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I could use the money.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Referring to the hook hand’s utterances. It could be concluded, the hook hand friend’s answer applied a Maxim of relation. He used a relevant answer shown as the Maxim of relation. The meaning of &quot;relevant&quot; is that the connection between what the speaker says and what the receiver hears is related. As the explanation, the hook hand was talking about the price he could get for Flynn’s reward, then his friend responded in a relevant way, saying he could also use the money without talking about another subject as the response.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: Why cannot i'm going outside?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gothel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">The outside world is a risky place. packed with horrible, selfish humans. You should live here, in which you're safe. </span><span class="font3">Do you understand, flower?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: Sure, Mommy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In Mother Gothel’s explanation, she applied a Maxim of manner. Grice (1975:46) stated that Maxim of manner should avoid obscurity, and Mother Gothel explained to Rapunzel well-orderly that the world was very cruel as Mother Gothel answered in a firm and unambiguous answer made it into the category of this maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">(Data 12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: All i was gonna say, mom, is that... I understand what I need for my birthday, now. Gothel: And what's that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">New paint. That paint crafted from the white shells you once brought me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rapunzel’s answer applied a Maxim of manner, as the function of Maxim of manner when the speaker asks a question, the listener should answer as clearly and unambiguously as possible. Then, referring to Rapunzel’s utterances she has given a clear answer, she explained in detail the present she wanted for her birthday to make the listener understand what the meaning of the utterances was told.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the previous data analysis, it can be concluded that the analysis in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled</span><span class="font3"> movie script is applying all types of the maxims; found twelve data consisting of three data of maxim of quantity, three data of maxim of quality, four data of maxim of relation, and two data of maxim of manner. The explanations are as follow:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The characters in the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled</span><span class="font3"> were found using all types of maxims. The type of maxim which is mostly found obeyed by the character is Maxim of relation. These were proved that the characters always tried to answer the speaker or the hearer as relevance as possible. Then, the maxim of quality and the maxim of quantity is the second most obeyed by the characters. Because the characters replied to each other as informative as possible without telling something that lack of evidence truthfully. Lastly, the maxim of manner is the fewest found obeyed by the characters. However, the characters are still</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">tried to be brief and more orderly to avoid ambiguity in their utterances.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Anum, Romesa. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Importance of Communication in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Society.</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.academia.edu/20198715/Impor"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.academia.edu/20198715/Impor</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> tance_of_Communication_in_Society </span><span class="font3">accessed April May 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Andresen, Niclas. (2013). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Flouting the maxims in comedy: Analysis of flouting in the comedy series Community&quot;.</span><span class="font3">Karlstads University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Burhan, Rezuwana. (2018). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Flouting Maxims in BBC Series &quot;Sherlock A Study in Pink”. </span><span class="font3">Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Champaca, Isabella. (2020). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Maxims in the Movie Scripts Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets”</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Graham, G. (2005). Philosophy of the arts: An introduction to aesthetic (3rd cd.). Routledge: London</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Greno, Nathan. (2010). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled Movie.</span><span class="font3"> Available from </span><a href="https://www.princessmovies.io/disney-princess/tangled/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.princessmovies.io/disney-princess/tangled/</span></a><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Greno, Nathan. (2010). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tangled Movie Script.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.scribd.com/document/4500124"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.scribd.com/document/4500124</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> 08/Tangled-Movie-Script</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grice, H. P. (1975). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Conversation and Logic. </span><span class="font3">Berkeley : University of California</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Janardana, Made. (2019)</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Analysis of Gricean Maxim in Supernatural Movie Series”</span><span class="font3">. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Leech, Geoffrey. (1983). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of Pragmatics</span><span class="font3">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Levinson, Stephen C. (1983). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font3">. Cambridge: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cambridge &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;University</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Murad, Amal, &amp;&nbsp;Hana. (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Violation of the Grice's maxims in Jordanian newspapers' cartoons: pragmatic study&quot;.</span><span class="font3"> Al Balaqa Applied University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pramudyastuti, Wening. (2014). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Effectiveness of Using Animated Film in Teaching Writing at the 8th Grade Students of SMP Muhammadiyah Purworejo in the Academic Year 2013/2014”.</span><span class="font3"> Purworejo: Muhammadiyah university.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Purwaningsih, Siti (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Pragmatics Analysis of The Cooperative Principle in Comedy Movie Entitled “Meet the Parents”</span><span class="font3">. Salatiga: English Education Departement of (IAIN).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Raharja, Satria. (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Analysis on Maxim of Cooperative Principle Violation by Dodit Mulyanto in Stand Up Comedy Indonesia Season 4”.</span><span class="font3"> Salatiga: English Education Departement of (IAIN).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Siddiqui, Ali (2018). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“The principle features of English Pragmatics in linguistics applied”. </span><span class="font3">Pakistan: Mehran University of Engineering and Technology (MUET).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Slotta, James. (2018). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics.</span><span class="font3"> Austin: University of Texas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. (2015). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Gricean Theory</span><span class="font3">. Available from: </span><a href="https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/implicature"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/implicature</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> /#GricTheo</span><span class="font3"> accessed April 4, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Thomas, Jenny. (1995). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning in interaction: An introduction to pragmatics</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yule, George. (1996). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">106</span></p>