---
layout: full_article
title: "Code Mixing In The Ussy Sulistiawaty Songs"
author: "Arini Hidayah, Asfi Aniuranti"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91796 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-91796"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91796"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p02"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p0</span><span class="font0">2</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Code Mixing In The Ussy Sulistiawaty Songs</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Arini Hidayah<sup>1</sup>, <sup>2</sup>Asfi Aniuranti <sup>1</sup> Surakarta University, Indonesia </span><span class="font2">2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5"><sup>2</sup> Nahdlatul Ulama Purwokerto University, Indonesia e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:ariniunsa@gmail.com"><span class="font5"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font5" style="text-decoration:underline;">ariniunsa@gmail.com</span><span class="font5">,</span></a><a href="mailto:2a.aniuranti@unupurwokerto.ac.id"><span class="font5"> </span><span class="font5" style="text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup>a.aniuranti@unupurwokerto.ac.id</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract-- </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pada zaman sekarang banyak berbagai jenis hiburan yang muncul dikalangan masyarakat, salah satunya musik. Lagu menggunakan bahasa sebagai media menyampaikan pesan atau maksud kepada orang yang mendengarkan lagu. Banyak penyanyi di Indonesia yang sudah lahir dan terkenal, salah satunya Ussy Sulistiawaty. Ussy Sulistiawaty termasuk penyanyi yang sering mencampurkan bahasa Inggris ke dalam lirik di beberapa lagunya. Istilah linguistik yang mencampurkan dua bahasa atau lebih dan saling memasukkan unsur-unsur bahasa seperti kata dalam bahasa lain secara konsisten disebut campur kode.Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menemukan bagaimana wujud campur kode berbahasa Inggris dan alasan apa yang melatarbelakangi adanya campur kode bahasa Inggris dalam lirik lagu Ussy Sulistiawaty. Objek penelitian ini berupa lirik dalam lagu Ussy Sulistiawaty. Data dan sumber data berupa data tertulis yang terdapat dalam kumpulan lirik lagu Ussy Sulistyawaty. Teknik pengumpulan data dengan metode catat. Hasil penelitian ini yakni campur kode yang paling banyak ditemukan dalam lirik lagu Ussy Sulistiawaty yaitu (1) campur kode klausa bahasa Inggris dan (2) latar belakang munculnya campur kode bahasa Inggris dalam lirik lagu Ussy Sulistiawaty karena untuk menarik perhatian, menghibur pendengar, dan menyesuaikan terhadap bahasa yang sering digunakan oleh kalangan remaja zaman sekarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font5">— </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">campur kode, lirik lagu, bahasa Inggris</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak-- </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">There are many kinds of entertainment that are popular among the people, one of which is music. Songs use language as a medium to convey ideas or meanings to people who listen to them. Many singers in Indonesia are born and famous. One of them is Ussy Sulistiawaty. Ussy Sulistiawaty is a singer who often mixes English into the lyrics of some of her songs. A linguistic practice that mixes two or more languages and includes each other's terms of language elements, such as words, in other languages consistently is called code-mixing. Sulistiawaty. The object of this research is the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. Data and data sources in the form of written data are contained in a collection of song lyrics by Ussy Sulistyawaty. The data collection technique is the note-taking method. These results are the most common code mixing found in Ussy Sulistiawaty's song lyrics, namely (1) English clause code mixing and (2) the background of the emergence of English code mixing in Ussy Sulistiawaty's song lyrics because it is to attract attention, entertain listeners, and research on language that is often used by teenagers today.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">— mixing code, song lyrics, English language</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">A language is a system of sound symbols used by members of a society to work together, interact, and identify themselves (Kridalaksana, 2008). Humans are social beings. They must socialize with other creatures. Humans communicate with each other in social life to meet the needs of life.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The social system would not exist without linguistic communication.The language used to communicate is sometimes in the form of a spoken language, a written language, or a sign language (Nababan, 1986). In communicating, humans need media or tools, namely language, to convey messages, ideas, thoughts, desires, and the opinions they want to convey to other humans. Language is a form that cannot be separated from life. The use of language can make people understand each other, relate to each other, and learn from each other. A speaker can express everything he wants to express so that his interlocutor can understand what he means.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The use of language is related to the practice of communication between members of the community. Language is also involved in cooperation in various fields, for example in the field of art. In this day and age, there are many kinds of entertainment that appear among the people, one of which is music. Songs use language to convey messages or intentions to people who listen to them. In everyday life, humans always enjoy music through various kinds of electronic media because music contains aesthetics that are formed from copyrighted works by the author through creativity in expressing a language that lives in the mind of the author as outlined in a song. The song is an oral discourse when viewed based on the medium, but the song is also a written discourse when viewed in terms of literary genre and includes recreational (Sumarlan, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The spoken language delivered by each individual is different because each individual has their own characteristics depending on the context in which the spoken language is delivered. In this modern era, human life cannot be separated from</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">music. Humans always listen to music on TV, radio, VCD/DVD, mp3 and so on. Music is one of the branches of entertainment that is favored by the community, from children to adults, including all circles of society. Basically, humans like to listen to music because it can entertain them, get rid of bad moods, increase enthusiasm, and so on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Many singers, both solo and in music groups, in Indonesia have been born and are well-known, one of whom is a solo singer, Ussy Sulistiawaty, who is a singer who often mixes English into the lyrics of some of her songs. In this paper, the author takes the title &quot;Analysis of English Code Mixing in Ussy Sulistiawaty's Song Lyrics&quot;. Based on the above background, two problem formulations can be described: (1). What is the form of mixed code in English in the lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty's song? (2). What are the reasons behind the mixing of English codes in the lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty's song?</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The aims of this research are: (1) finding the form of code-mixing in English in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty; (2). Find out the reasons behind the mixing of English codes in the lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty's song.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Code Mixing, Code is a language system in a society or variations in a language (Kidalaksana, 2008). Fill in the code is intended to mention one of the variants in the linguistic hierarchy. Code includes language and intra-language differences used to communicate and variations of that language, including dialect, speech level, and variety.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Code switching (Suwito, 1983) is a transition from one code to another. In a bilingual or multibilungual society, it is very difficult for absolute speakers to only use one language. In code switching, each language still tends to support each function according to its context.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Code mixing (Kridalaksana, 2008) is the use of language units from one language to another to expand language style or language variety, including the use of words, clauses, idioms, greetings, etc. Meanwhile, according to Thelander (Suwito, 1983) the language elements involved in the mixed event are limited to the clause level. If in</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">a speech there is a mixing or combination of different variations in the same clause, then the event is called code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The background to the occurrence of code mixing can basically be categorized into two types: the type that has an attitude background and the type that has a language background, but the two types often overlap. On the basis of the background in attitudes and the background in language that overlap each other, several reasons or causes for code mixing can be identified. The causes of code mixing include: (a). Role identification. Measures of role identification are social, registering, and educational. (b). Variety identification. Identification of variety is determined by the language in which a speaker mixes codes and will place himself in the social hierarchy. (c). The desire to explain and interpret appears because code mixing also marks attitudes and relationships with other people (Suwito, 1983).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">As a result of the use of two or more languages with the inclusion of language elements into other language elements, code mixing has certain characteristics (Sumarsono and Partana, 2002), namely as follows: (1). There is an aspect of language dependence in a multilingual society. (2). The characteristic of language dependence is characterized by a reciprocal relationship between the role and function of language. The role means who uses the language, while the linguistic function means what the speaker wants to achieve with his speech. If someone in his speech mixes the code, then he must first be asked who he is. (1). The existence of language features, language elements or variations that are inserted in other languages that no longer have their own functions. These elements have been integrated into the language it is embedded in and as a whole only support one function. (2). The form of the codemixing component never takes the form of a sentence, but only in the form of words, phrases, clauses, repetition of words and idioms. (3). Code mixing in maximum conditions is a linguistic convergence whose elements come from several languages that have removed their functions and support the functions of the language they are</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">inserted. As a result, such elements are divided into two, elements originating from the original language with all its variations are called inward code mixing, while the second is elements originating from foreign languages called outward code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Code mixing (Suwito, 1983) can be divided into several types based on linguistic elements: (a). The insertion of elements in the form of words. (b). The insertion of elements in the form of phrases. (c). The insertion of elements in the form of baster (the result of the combination of two language elements that form one meaning). (d). The insertion of elements in the form of repetition of words. (e). The insertion of elements in the form of idioms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Song Lyrics, Lyrics are literary works (poetry) that contain an outpouring of personal feelings and the atmosphere of the words of a song (KBBI, 2002). The definition of song is a form of music in the form of a framework including melodies and rhythms that are composed of normal, tempo, and dynamic. A song is an oral discourse when viewed based on the medium, but a song is a written discourse when viewed based on the text of the song. Song discourse can be categorized as poetry discourse in terms of literary genre and includes recreational (Andhami in Sumarlan, 2002).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Song is a product of culture. The song (lyric) uses language to convey the meaning of a goal from the singer to the listener. The language in song lyrics must be simple, orderly, and effective so that listeners can easily understand the song's message. In the lyrics of the song has its own peculiarity because the lyrics of the song have an important role in describing the life experienced by humans everyday. Songs are basically expressions of feelings, the overflow of the singer's heart, therefore songs can make people entertained, fascinated if the lyrics of songs sung by singers really impress the listeners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Language (Kridalaksana, 2008) states that language is a system of arbitrary sound symbols used by members of a community to work together, interact and identify themselves.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Awareness and truth of language in human life has a large and closely related function, meaning to realize human expression that reflects social aspects. Language can be interpreted as arbitrary symbols used by a social group as a means of communication (Block and Trager in Hidayat, 2006). Language has several functions which can be divided into general functions and special functions. The function of language in general is a tool for expression, while the function of language in particular is to establish relationships in the association of art, study, ancient texts and to exploit science and technology.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The language functions according to Haliday in Sumarlam (2003) are as follows: (a). Instrumental function, namely language functions to produce certain conditions and cause events to occur. This function is related to the imperative, which contains communicative actions that produce certain conditions. The core function is related to stating, inviting, criticizing, stating prohibitions, and reminding. (b). The function of regulation is as a supervisor, controller, or organizer of events, or to control other people. This function is related to the function of stating prohibitions, reminding, and criticizing. (c). The function of description is making statements in conveying facts, explaining facts or reporting actual reality as seen and experienced. Included in this function are questioning something, providing information, and satire. (d). The interaction function is to ensure and strengthen, the resilience and continuity of communication and establish social interaction. This function is related to the function of stating an invitation to support members, questioning requests for information and satire. (e). The individual function is to give the speaker the opportunity to express feelings, personal emotions, and deep reactions which are included in this function, namely questioning, stating, inviting, providing support, criticizing, expressing requests, gathering feelings, or attitudes, praying, saying thank you. love, congratulate, offer something, and remind. (f). The heuristic function is that language is likened to seeking as much knowledge as possible in studying</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">its intricacies. This function is related to the function of questioning something and providing information.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Methodology</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Every research is always using a certain and appropriate method in accordance with the object of research. This research is a qualitative research because the data collected is in the form of words, pictures, and not numbers (Moleong, 2004). Data can be obtained through manuscripts, interviews, field notes, photos, personal documents, memos, and can be in the form of other official documents. According to Moleong (2004) a personal document is a written record or essay of a person about actions, experiences and beliefs, while the research report contains excerpts of data to provide an overview of the presentation of the report.The object of this research is code mixing between English and Indonesian which is used in the lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty's song. In qualitative research, it is inseparable from the data needed to find research results, the data material in this study is the types of code mixing in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. While the source of data in this study is a collection of song lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty. Every research is always using a certain and appropriate method in accordance with the object of research. This research is a qualitative research because the data collected is in the form of words, pictures, and not numbers (Moleong, 2004). Data can be obtained through manuscripts, interviews, field notes, photos, personal documents, memos, and can be in the form of other official documents. According to Moleong (2004) a personal document is a written record or essay of a person about actions, experiences and beliefs, while the research report contains excerpts of data to provide an overview of the presentation of the report.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The object of this research is code mixing between English and Indonesian which is used in the lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty's song. In qualitative research, it is inseparable from the data needed to find research results, the data material in this study is the types of code mixing in the lyrics</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. While the source of data in this study is a collection of song lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data collection in this study used the method of listening with an advanced technique, namely the note-taking technique. In this study using the listening technique because the method used to obtain data is by listening to the use of language (Mahsun, 2005). In this study, the method used in this study is the matching method and the agih method. According to Sudaryanto (1993) the equivalent method is a data analysis method whose research tools are detached and do not become part of the language in question. While the agih method is a language analysis method whose research tools are concerned and become part of the language concerned. There are several steps in taking data in this study, namely as follows: (1). Read a collection of song lyrics of Ussy Sulistiawaty several times. (2). Writing code-mixing data found in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. (3). Classify the data found into the types of code mixing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Several steps to analyze the data, namely by selecting the data, recording the data, and classifying the form of code mixing contained in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. The next stage is to classify the data obtained from the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty. The data that has been collected is then classified according to the form of language variety, so that it can be seen the number and total variety of languages contained in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Table 1. Code Mixing Total</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Kind of Code Mixing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Total</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Sentence</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Phrase</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Baster</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Claus</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">15</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Code Mixing Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">23</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font5">Table 2. Embodiment of Code Mixing in Ussy Sulistiawaty's Song Lyrics</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Code Mixing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Song Lyrics</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">English</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Language</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Indonesian Language</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Word</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">itulah aku</span><span class="font5">..well…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">well (adjective)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">baik</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">...</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bukan dengan</span><span class="font5"> magic </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cuma asik</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">magic (adjective)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ajaib</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">...</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">katamu setiap nge</span><span class="font5">-date </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">denganku selalu banyak orang &nbsp;&nbsp;yang</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">mengganggu</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">date (verb)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kencan</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Phrase</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">..</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">seperti yang kurasa</span><span class="font5"> my love…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">my &nbsp;&nbsp;love</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(nominal phrase)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cintaku</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">itulah cerita</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">punya pacar seorang</span><span class="font5"> pop star…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">pop &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;star</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(nominal phrase)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bintang</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hidup berdampingan denganmu</span><span class="font5"> my lovely…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">my &nbsp;lovely</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">(nominal phrase)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cintaku</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Baster</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">..</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hei sayangku hari ini kamu a neh</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kok</span><span class="font5"> BBM </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">gak dibales sih</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">BBM</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">BBM</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">..</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kok</span><span class="font5"> BBM </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">gak dibales sih </span><span class="font5">...</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">tapi</span><span class="font5"> twitter </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">e kasis mulu</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">twitter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">twitter</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Clause</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">...</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ingin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">my love, I</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cintaku,</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kukatakan</span><span class="font5"> my love, I love you…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">love you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku mencintai mu</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">apa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kau</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">menantangku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">I will do it</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku akan melakukan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">I’m a pop star</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">seorang</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">untuk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">nya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bintang</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">menjadikanmu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">terkenal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">cita-cita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">you are so</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kamu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hatiku.</span><span class="font5"> I will</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">sweet</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sangat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">…I love you it’s you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">itu kamu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">do it…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">manis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">setiap hembus</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">angin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">tiap &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">what’s</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ada &nbsp;apa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">membawa</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;life &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;is</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hidup itu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bertemu</span><span class="font5">. &nbsp;You</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">wrong my</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sayang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">namamu</span><span class="font5">… &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;perfect</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sempurna</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">are so sweet…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">darling</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">…I want you perfect’s</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hidup</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kok</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;BBM</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">what’s</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ada &nbsp;apa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">di &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kilauan</span><span class="font5"> life is you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sempurna</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">gak &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dibales</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">wrong my</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sayang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bintang &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">itu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sih, tapi</span><span class="font5"> twitter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">baby</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">melihat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">b</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ersamam</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">eksis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mulu</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">senyummu</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">u</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">What’s wrong</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">my darling…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">di &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;serbu</span><span class="font5"> you are my</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kamu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kok</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;BBM</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">this is the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">hal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ini</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">penggemar</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lovely</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sayangku</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">gak &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dibales</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">sad that you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">adalah hal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kamu &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pun</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">sih, tapi twitter</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">ever heard</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">buruk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">harus &nbsp;&nbsp;sabar</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">eksis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mulu</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">yang kamu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">I’m a popstar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">What’s wrong</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dengar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">digosipin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">my darling…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">wartawan</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">What’s wrong</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">it’s all about</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">ini tentang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">my baby…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">you &nbsp;cause</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kamu yang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">…it's &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">you always</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">selalu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">bagiku berarti</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">on my mind</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berada</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">untukku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dalam</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dirimu</span><span class="font5">…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">pikiranku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berpijarlah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">...this is the sad</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">I wish I’m</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">selalu</span><span class="font5">. Life is</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">song that you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">tired &nbsp;&nbsp;with</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berharap</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">perfect…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">ever heard. It’s</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dapat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">all about you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berbagi</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berpijarlah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">cause &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">rasa lelah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">selalu</span><span class="font5">. Life is</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">always on my</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dengan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">perfect.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">mind. I wish</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">mu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Perfect’s life is</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">I’m tired with</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">you…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">you…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">I love you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku cinta</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kamu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">…</span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">betapa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">I want you</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">aku</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">berartinya kau</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">mengingin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">You are my</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">kanmu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">lovely…</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From the table above, it can be described that the types of code-mixing in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty were found to be code word mixed as much as 3 words, code word mix was 3 phrases, baster code mixed was 2 baster, and clause code mixed was 15 clauses. The number of code word mixes is 3 words of the same type, namely adjectives, while the number of mixed phrases of the same type is noun phrases.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The background that gave rise to the mixing of English and Indonesian codes in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty was due to the singer's desire to attract attention, entertain music listeners, and adapt the language usually listened to by teenagers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Based on the description of the discussion above, it can be concluded that: (1). The most common code mixing found in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty is the English clause code mix. (2). The background of the emergence of mixed code English in the lyrics of the song Ussy Sulistiawaty is because it is to attract attention, entertain listeners, and adapt to the language that is often used by teenagers today.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The results of this study are not perfect like the saying 'no ivory is not cracked', the researcher hopes that there will be other researchers who discuss the topic of code mixing with different research objects such as: comics, slogans, advertisements, various novels, various fairy tales, events TV shows, articles in various magazines and newspapers, billboards, banners, leaflets, announcements, and billboards. Discussing a mixture of codes from various languages, both domestic and</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">foreign languages. In order to find more variations in the discovery of the form of code-mixing types.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Hidayat, A. A (2006). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Filsafat Bahasa: Mengungkap Hakikat Bahasa, Makna, dan Tanda</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Remaja Rosda Karya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kridalaksana, H. (2008). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kamus Linguistik</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: PT. Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Mahsun (2005). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Bahasa: Tahap &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strategi, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metode, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tekniknya</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jakarta: Rajawali Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Moleong, L (2004). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font4">. Bandung: Remaja Rosda Karya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nababan, PWJ. (1993). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik Suatu Pengantar</span><span class="font4">. Jakarta: &nbsp;PT. Gramedia</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pustaka Utama.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudaryanto (1993). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode dan Teknik Analisis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bahasa &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengantar</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian Wahana Kebudayaan Secara Linguis</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: &nbsp;Duta Wacana</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Univerdity Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sumarlam, dkk. (2003). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teori dan Praktik Analisis Wacana.</span><span class="font4"> Surakarta: Puspita Cakra Surakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sumarsono dan Partana, P. (2002). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik</span><span class="font4">. Yogyakarta: &nbsp;&nbsp;Sabda</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">bekerjasama dengan Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Suwito. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(1983). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Awal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sosiolinguistik Teori dan Problema</span><span class="font4"> . Surakarta: Haneri Offset Solo.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">100</span></p>