---
layout: full_article
title: "Effect of Physical Activity on Sclerostin Concentrations in Blood Serum"
author: "Stefani Luziani, Helena Candy, Elisabeth Raysa, Sri Juniari, Prahasari Darma, Indira Vidiari Juhanna, I Putu Gede Adiatmika"
categories: sport
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-85202 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/id-85202"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-85202"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Sport and Fitness Journal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Volume 10, No.2, May 2022: 138-147</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">E-ISSN: 2654-9182</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>EFFECT OF EXERCISE ON SCLEROSTIN CONCENTRATIONS IN BLOOD SERUM</span></h1>
<p><span class="font6">Stefani Luziani<sup>1*</sup>, Helena Candy<sup>1</sup>, Raysa Angraini<sup>1</sup>, Prahasari Darma<sup>1</sup>, Sri Juniari<sup>1</sup>, Indira Vidiari Juhanna<sup>2</sup>, I Putu Gede Adiatmika<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Magister Program of Biomedical Science Anti-Aging Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia Email: </span><a href="mailto:stefani_luziani@hotmail.com"><span class="font4">stefani_luziani@hotmail.com</span></a></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">After entering adulthood, the quality and quantity of bone decrease with age. Bone metabolism is influenced by many factors and signaling pathways. Sclerostin is an antagonist of the Wnt signaling pathway in osteoblast lineage cells, thus causing a decrease in bone formation. Recent studies have shown that mechanical loading of the bones, for example by doing exercise, can affect the concentration of sclerostin in blood serum. However, research on this topic still has wide variations in terms of frequency, intensity, duration, and the type of exercise that can cause changes in serum sclerostin concentrations. This study was conducted using the literature review method, we reviewed and compared the latest journals that discussed the relationship between exercise and sclerostin concentrations in blood serum. Based on the studies that we have compared and analyzed, exercise with a frequency of 3x/week with a minimum duration of about 30 minutes, performed for at least 12 weeks with cardio type and intensity of 85-90% HRmax decrease sclerostin levels in blood serum. Meanwhile, a single bout of exercise will increase sclerostin levels transiently.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords : bone turnover markers; sclerostin; exercise</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">It is estimated that more than 9 million fractures a year are caused by osteoporosis worldwide<sup>1</sup>. Osteoporosis becomes a major global health problem because it decreases the quality of life and life expectancy. It reduces psychological and physical health<sup>2</sup>. Low bone mass is one of the characteristics of osteoporosis, besides deterioration of architecture<sup>3,4</sup>. A study concludes that the bone mass density of people in Southeast Asia, in general, is lower than Caucasian people<sup>5</sup>. Women are more at risk of osteopenia and osteoporosis than men with a prevalence of 61% and 16% for women while for men the prevalence was 38% and 4%<sup>1</sup>. Around one-third of postmenopausal women have osteoporosis<sup>6</sup>. Women in the United States over 50 years of age who are at risk of fracture in the next 10 years have percentage rates of 3.4%, 5.3%, and 6.8% and based on bone mass are classified into normal, low and osteoporosis. An important risk factor of fragility fractures later in life is the failure to achieve and maintain optimal bone mass in adulthood. Although pharmacotherapy and medical techniques are effective to treat osteoporosis, prevention is still the best option. Exercise is a contributor to bone health that is accessible, inexpensive, and can be modified<sup>7,8</sup>. It is supported by evidence that is increasing about the effectiveness of exercise in increasing bone mass<sup>5,9,10</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Exercise exerts a mechanical load on bone tissue which has the combined effect of external forces and muscle contraction resulting in a higher impact on bone than other forces associated with gravity. The exercise intensity, the interval between repetitions of the same exercise and certain training sessions, these three things influence the effectiveness of the exercise in preventing osteoporosis<sup>11,12</sup>. What is needed and must be implemented is to design the right training program to be oriented towards the effective stimulation of the osteogenic process<sup>13</sup>. Regular exercise is one of the factors that stimulate bone formation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sclerostin is exclusively produced by osteocytes which have a function to inhibit signals sending of activation, proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts derived from mesenchymal cells. It has an inhibitory effect on bone formation by blocking osteogenic Wnt signaling, it is a negative regulator<sup>13–16</sup>. Wnt pathway signaling is important for bone strength because osteoblast differentiation, formation of bone tissue, and suppression of the resorption process are stimulated by it. Inactivation of sclerostin activity in the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway will give an anabolic effect and influence the osteogenic mechanism prevalence<sup>13,17,18,19</sup>. Osteocytes have been shown to have a role in the metabolism of bone tissue in addition to osteoblasts and osteoclasts, this has been demonstrated in recent years<sup>20</sup>. Osteocytes have the function of suppressing sclerostin secretion to activate the process of osteogenesis and repair of bone structure<sup>21</sup>. Osteoblast apoptosis is stimulated by sclerostin and further processes potential mechanisms that can inhibit the process of osteogenesis. The synthesis of sclerostin may be stimulated by immobilization and lack of physical activity. The process of overexpression of sclerostin in the bone can induce osteopenia<sup>13</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">After puberty, sclerostin levels decline and regular athletic activity can alter the relationship of sclerostin to areal bone mineral density (aBMD). In healthy adults sclerostin concentrations were also positively correlated with aBMD, but not in prepubertal children. Sclerostin levels have been reported to be higher in athletes (for example gymnasts and swimmers) than in non-athletes. The increase in sclerostin can be influenced by mechanical loads<sup>14,22</sup>. Research on this topic still has gaps and wide variations in terms of frequency, intensity, duration, and the type of exercise that can cause changes in serum sclerostin concentrations. There are no basic standards and guidelines regarding the change of sclerostin concentrations in blood serum that is caused by exercise. Therefore, we made this literature review with the aim of comparing and analyzing several studies with different frequency, intensity, duration, and type of exercise to see the effect of exercise to sclerostin and draw conclusions from these variations.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">The method used in this literature review is search methods such as internet searches, various journal searches, journal reviews, and articles. Information used in this literature review was from Google Scholar, ProQuest, Pubmed, Science Direct, and Scopus using the keywords “Exercise” in combination with “Sclerostin” or “Sclerostin Concentrations”. The eligibility criteria include literature in the English language that were published between 2012 and 2022. The literature reporting the relationship between exercise and sclerostin concentrations in blood serum were selected. Reference lists from selected literature were also checked to identify additional relevant reports. We found 60 articles and then selected 44 articles, all articles included in this study has been checked through the Scimago Journal &amp;&nbsp;Country Rank.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESULTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Five author teams searched for literature on Google Scholar, ProQuest, Pubmed, Science Direct, and Scopus using the keywords “Exercise” in combination with “Sclerostin” or “Sclerostin Concentrations”. We include literature in the English language that were published between 2012 and 2022. The literature reporting the relationship between exercise and sclerostin concentrations in blood serum were selected. We reviewed 60 abstracts for inclusion with 44 selected for full-text review. A total of 10 studies were analyzed and compared. Information was extracted using the PICO format (ie, participants, intervention, comparison, outcomes). Descriptive findings are then reported on Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table 1. Studies examining the effects of exercise on sclerostin</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Author and year of publicatio n</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Participan ts</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Intervention</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Result’s Comparison</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Outcomes</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Hinton et al, 2017<sup>23</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">38 men, aged 25 to 60 years with osteopenia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants were randomly divided into 2 group: 12 months of RT (2×/week) or 12 months of jump training (3×/week)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Baseline:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">39.2 ± 11.6 pmol/L After 12 months of RT or jump training:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">36.8 ± 13.3 pmol/L (p=0.012)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">After 12 months of RT or jump training, sclerostin levels significantly decreased about 7% from the baseline.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Janik et al, 2018<sup>13</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">50 women, aged 50 to75 years with osteopenia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">First 12 weeks: participants remained at their usual level of physical activity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Next 12 weeks: participants undergo a cardio workout on a bike ergometer, 3×/week for 36 minutes.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Baseline: 275.82±38.15 After the first 12 weeks (no physical training): 277.07±38.35</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">After the next 12 weeks (with physical Training): 242.60±43.04 (p&lt;0.001)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">After 12 weeks of cardio workout on a bike ergometer, sclerostin levels significantly decreased.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Ghardashi-Afousi et al, 2018<sup>24</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">59 sedentary patients (31 men, 28 women), aged 45 to 60 years with type 2 diabetes</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Patients were randomly divided into 2 groups: the control group or the HIIT group. The HIIT group was trained for 6 intervals, each with a duration of 4 minutes at 85%-90% of HRmax, then interspersed with 3 minutes of training at 45%-50% of HRmax. The training was done 3 times a week for 12 weeks.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Control group (Men): 238.87 ± 84.57</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">HIIT group (Men): 163.38 ± 46.95</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Control group (Women):</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">203 ± 66.27</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">HIIT group (Women):</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">170.60 ± 42.53 (p=0.001)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">After 12 weeks of HIIT, sclerostin levels significantly decreased in patients with type 2 diabetes.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sharma-Ghimire et al, 2019<sup>25</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">9 women, aged 20 to 30 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants completed 2 exercise protocols in random order: RE and WBV + RE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">WBV + RE PRE: 0.276 ± 0.015 POSTWBV: 0.302 ± 0.011 IP: 0.324 ± 0.025 30P: 0.268 ± 0.021 (p&lt;0.05)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Sclerostin levels were found significantly increased from preexercise to immediately after resistance exercise, then decreased back to the pre-exercise level.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Guerriere et al, 2018<sup>26</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">14 men, aged 18 to 39 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants completed a rest phase and a plyometric training in random order.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">No significant effects were found on sclerostin levels that are measured at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hours after the plyometric training is conducted.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(p&gt;0.05)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">After an acute bout of plyometric jump exercise, there were no significant responses of sclerostin concentrations in blood serum.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Kouvelioti et al, 2018<sup>27</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">20 women, aged from 18 to 28</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants completed 2 exercise trials: High-Intensity Interval Cycling (HIIC) performed on a bike ergometer and High-Intensity Interval Running (HIIR) performed on a treadmill in random order.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Sclerostin increased from pre-exercise to 5 min after exercise in both trials. HIIC: 102.3 to 135.8 pg/ml HIIR: 100.2 to 131.6 pg/ml Then returned to baseline levels by 1 hour (p&lt;0.001) There is no difference between exercise modes (p&gt;0.05)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">After a single bout of high-intensity training, there was an increase in serum sclerostin found in young women, irrespective of the exercise mode.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Jürimäe et al, 2020<sup>28</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">16 male rowers, mean age 19.0 ± 2.2 years, who had rowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">training experience:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">4.3 ± 1.7 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants completed a 2 hours rowing exercise, with distance 23.8 ± 0.9 km and intensity 79.8 ± 2.1% of the anaerobic threshold.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sclerostin levels were found significantly increased about 36% from baseline.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(p&lt;0.05)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">In trained male rowers, a 2-hour water resistance training session at 80% anaerobic threshold intensity (AnT) resulted in increased of serum sclerostin in blood.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Dror et al, 2021<sup>29</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">13 males aged 20–29 years old</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants completed 2 exercise: cycling on a cycle ergometer (CE) or running on a treadmill (TM). For the second visit, participants completed the other exercise, cycling or a 30 minutes running at 70% heart rate reserve.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Sclerostin levels significantly increased after running (27.7%), which was not found after cycling. (p= 0.015)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">A greater transient in sclerostin level was found in running group compared with cycling group, at the same moderate-to-vigorous exercise intensity.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Gombos et al, 2016<sup>30</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">150 females with osteoporosi s or osteopenia</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants were divided into 3 groups: resistance exercise (RG), walking group (WG), and control group (CG).</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Baseline [pmol/L]: RG: 26.8 ± 14.0 WG: 23.6 ± 10.0</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">CG: 24.0 ± 8.8 Post-intervention [pmol/L]: RG: 29.8 ± 15.7 WG: 29.9 ± 10.8</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">CG: 24.2 ± 8.8 (p&lt;0.01)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Sclerostin level increased in the resistance exercise (RG) and walking (WG) groups, and it was found that there was a difference after the exercise intervention between the control</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">(CG) and WG groups.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Neves et al,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">193 male</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Participants were</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Baseline [ng/mL]:</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">There was a</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">2021<sup>31</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">and female</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Divided randomly into three</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">CTL: 1.93 ± 0.48</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">decrease in the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">patients</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">groups: CTL (n = 60), DRT (n</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">DRT: 1.86 ± 0.67</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">levels of sclerostin</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">with glomerular filtration rate &lt;15 mL/min/1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">73<sup>2</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">= 66), and IRT (n = 67).</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">IRT: 1.82 ± 0.81 Post-intervention [ng/mL]: CTL: 1.88 ± 0.60 DRT: 1.34 ± 0.43 IRT: 1.73 ± 0.58</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(p</span><span class="font2">=</span><span class="font4">0.0084)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">in the DRT group compared to baseline, and in the CTL and IRT groups.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">*Statistically Significant (p &lt;0,05). RT: resistance training, HIIT: High Intensity Interval Training, RE: resistance exercise, WBV: whole-body vibration, PRE: before exercise, POSTWBV: immediately after WBV, IP: immediately after RE, 30P: 30 min after RE, CE: cycle ergometer, TM: treadmill, CTL: control group, DRT: dynamic resistance training, IRT: isometric resistance training.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Roles of sclerostin in bone remodeling</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Bone is continually remodeled throughout life to maintain plasma calcium homeostasis and prevent the accumulation of old bone. Osteoclasts resorb bone and then the new bone is formed to replace the amount of bone reabsorbed by osteoblasts. This is called bone remodeling, and balanced bone remodeling stabilizes bone mass. The imbalance between bone resorption and bone formation results in low or high bone mass<sup>32</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sclerostin is a glycoprotein secreted by osteocytes. Sclerostin inhibits the intracellular Wnt signaling pathway, which activates the process of cell differentiation into osteoblasts, inhibits bone formation and the process of resorption. Wnt/β-catenin signaling function is regulated by the production of 5/6 receptor inhibitors (LRP) sclerostin and Dickkopf-1 (DKK-1), which cause phosphorylation and degradation of b-catenin, thereby inhibiting osteoblasts. The inhibitory effect of Wnt signaling on bone has led to the development of pharmacological interventions (eg sclerostin antibodies) that could be beneficial in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis<sup>7,13–15,33–38</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In patients with bone injuries, sclerostin secretion is inhibited by osteocytes to activate osteogenesis and bone repair processes. Overexpression of sclerostin in bone causes osteopenia. Sclerostin stimulates osteoblast apoptosis, resulting in a potential mechanism that can inhibit osteogenesis. Bones that are not exposed to mechanical stress are at risk for increased sclerostin concentrations resulting in a higher incidence of osteocyte apoptosis. This is what increases the recruitment of osteoclasts and the process of resorption and bone loss occurs<sup>13</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sclerostin may act as a biomarker of osteoporosis. Low lumbar bone mineral density (BMD) is associated with an increase of serum sclerostin in the elderly female of hemodialysis (HD) patients in a study conducted by Lu et al (2022)<sup>39</sup>. Estradiol is one of the factors that regulates sclerostin synthesis. Decreased estradiol levels are associated with the pathogenesis of postmenopausal osteoporosis. It has been suggested that estradiol inhibits osteoblast apoptosis. Higher levels of sclerostin were observed in postmenopausal women than in perimenopausal and levels were inversely related to the free estradiol index<sup>40,41</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Effects of exercise on sclerostin concentrations in blood serum</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Some studies have shown exercise can lower serum sclerostin levels, while some other studies have shown the opposite which is increase in serum sclerostin levels after certain physical activity. A study by Hinton et al (2016), showed that an exercise intervention that modulated intensity over time decreased circulating sclerostin as bone mineral density increased. It should be noted that exercise—resistance training or jumping exercise—both increases bone mass and decreases sclerostin. These results are consistent with the concept that osteocyte expression of sclerostin is capable to increase bone mass in humans by mechanical stimulation type of exercise<sup>23,42,43</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">A study from Janik et al. has shown serum sclerostin levels as one of bone turnover markers were significantly decreased after 12 weeks of physical training program in women with osteopenia. The program is interval training on a bicycle ergometer 3x/week for 36 minutes which is a moderate level. All 50 participants received calcium 500 mg and vitamin D3 1800 IU as daily supplementation during the study. The study concluded physical training effectively stimulates the formation of bone in women with osteopenia. The decrease of the serum sclerostin level after a physical training program may stimulate osteoblastogenesis. Sclerostin may be considered as a marker of physical activity and as a parameter for monitoring and predicting further therapy in osteopenia and postmenopausal osteoporosis cases<sup>13</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Another study investigated the association between 12 weeks of high-intensity interval training (HIIT) on serum levels of sclerotin, Dkk-1, and carotid intima media thickness (cIMT). There was a decrease in cIMT, serum Dkk-1 and sclerostin levels after HIIT. The decrease in cIMT after HIIT is an effect of decreased serum levels of sclerostin and Dkk-1<sup>24</sup>. On the opposite, serum sclerostin levels increased after acute whole-body vibration plus resistance exercise in 9 young women. Sharma-Ghimire et al. assumed it may have been mediated by plasma volume shift<sup>25</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Guerriere et al. determined whether an acute bout of exercise reduces serum sclerostin level, one of the biochemical markers that inhibit the Wnt signaling pathway. The study controlled dietary calcium intake to stabilize parathyroid hormone (PTH) which regulates sclerostin expression in osteocytes. As we know, the circulating concentration of calcium regulates PTH, so by regulating it, the results likely reflect the mechanical stimulus effect alone. 14 young healthy men participants did a 5 up to 10 minutes warm-up that consisted of leg presses, lightly weighted Plyo Press jumps, and stretching and were assessed several times. The result is no significant effect on serum sclerostin level after an acute bout of exercise. But, this study did not assess the serum sclerostin level immediately post-exercise and may have missed a change of it which usually increased immediately post-exercise. The duration of the plyometric exercise also may be too short to alter serum sclerostin level in this study<sup>26</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">A crossover design by Kouvelioti et al. compared the response of sclerostin to high-intensity impact exercise (running/HIIR) versus high-intensity no-impact exercise (cycling/HIIC) in the same group of young women participants. The result is there is a significant time effect on serum sclerostin level in both exercise modes 5 minutes after exercise which the level increased and returned to baseline level by 1 hour as shown in the table above. The higher serum sclerostin level after exercise is more probably because osteocytes release the previously synthesized sclerostin into the blood, rather than because of increasing gene expression of sclerostin in a short time<sup>27,44</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The first three studies have shown the same results that serum sclerostin levels significantly decreased after regular exercise (two or three times a week) for a long period (12 weeks and 12 months). Otherwise the last three studies have shown serum sclerostin levels significantly increased or had no significant response after an acute or a single exercise only. So, according to sclerostin’s role explained before, doing exercise regularly for a lifetime, may improve bone health and slow down the bone aging process, regardless of the mode of exercise.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sclerostin secreted by bone tissue is not only involved in bone remodeling but can be used as a biological marker of energy homoestasis. A study by Jürimäe et al (2020) showed that a 2-hour water resistance training session at 80% anaerobic threshold intensity (AnT) resulted in increased serum sclerostin in trained male rowers. The distance covered was used as a marker of the metabolic demands of rowing training while the weekly training volume was used as a marker of exercise stress that would increase exercise-induced sclerostin concentration in male rowers<sup>28</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Different types of physical exercise have different impacts on sclerotin. N. Dror et al (2021) found that moderate to vigorous intensity exercise, running appeared to produce a greater sclerostin response compared to cycling<sup>29</sup>. Another study by Gombos et al (2016) who observed 150 female subjects with osteoporosis or osteopenia divided their patients into 3 groups: resistance exercise (RG), walking group (WG), and control group (CG). From the observations, it was found that the level of sclerostin increased in the resistance exercise (RG) and walking (WG) groups, and it was found that there was a difference after the exercise intervention between the control (CG) and WG groups<sup>30</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Research on dynamic resistance training (DRT) also found that DRT was able to increase bone mineral density (BMD) in various body parts. This occurs by increasing several factors of pro-osteogenic such as Klotho and calcitriol and also reducing sclerostin levels, FGF23, and PTH which affect bone loss. It was argued that the benefit did not occur after isometric RT (IRT). The researchers then recommended DRT based on the perceived exertion rating (RPE) as sufficient to provide a significant improvement. In addition, the external load can play an important role because IRT shows the same RPE for low external loads. This could explain how the process of bone remodeling<sup>31</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Mechanism of type, duration, frequency, intensity in affecting sclerostin</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">As a bone formation inhibitor, sclerostin has an important role in mechanotransduction in bone<sup>29</sup>. The different response of sclerostin between the exercise typess may because of the different mechanical loading<sup>16</sup>. Some animal studies have shown that prolonged mechanical loading is followed by decreased sclerostin, while sclerostin increased during prolonged mechanical unloading<sup>29</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">High impact exercise and prolonged bed rest would increase the sclerostin. It is assumed that high sclerostin levels which is persistent will cause a catabolic effect of bone, while high sclerostin levels which is transient or intermittent will cause an anabolic effect of bone<sup>29</sup>. In single bout of exercise, the transient increase in sclerostin may because of the existence of previously synthesized sclerostin pool that is released into bloodstream as a response to the exercise stimulus. Physiological regulation of kidney also may relate with the increase of sclerostin<sup>16</sup>. It may because of a decreased excretion or an increased reabsorption of sclerostin in tubule<sup>16</sup>. Another speculation is it may relate to a threshold of mechanical strain intensity which bone turnover may be stimulated<sup>35</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sclerostin levels may depend on type, duration, frequency, and intensity of exercise. However, those mechanisms is still unclear and needs further research<sup>16,29</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Other Factors that Influences Sclerostin Levels</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Age, diabetes, BMD, male sex, weight, height, and serum uric acid levels were all linked to sclerostin levels. In patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), serum sclerostin levels increase due to lower BMD and renal function. Yamada et al. published in 2015 that serum sclerostin levels in PD patients were significantly associated to age. Sclerostin levels correlated with spinal trabecular bone loss in patients undergoing dialysis. In this investigation, lumbar BMD and serum sclerostin had a negative connection with age and female sex, but not with DKK1 HD patients. These data show that sclerostin could be used as an osteoporosis biomarker in HD patients.<sup>39</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In perimenopausal and postmenopausal women, many studies have examined the factors that influence sclerostin levels. Ardavi et al. discovered that until the age of 45, circulating sclerostin levels increased with age. Longitudinal studies have also shown that sclerostin levels increase with age. The increase occurred from reproductive age to menopause, and also from menopause to early postmenopause. Furthermore, Amrein et al. also found an increase in sclerostin levels with age in healthy patients, which was not affected by gender.<sup>40</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Research by Jurimae et almain showed that serum sclerostin levels were associated with the mass of body fat and serum fat-derived leptin levels, implying that bone-derived sclerostin may be involved in adipose tissue management. Resting sclerostin levels were not different between normal weight and obese teenage girls in a recent research of adolescent girls, whereas resting leptin levels were considerably greater in obese adolescent girls than in their lean counterparts.<sup>42</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Based on the author's direct experience in the research process, there were some limitations that could be given more attention to future researchers, for example, the information provided by previous authors in describing exercise is not always complete in terms of frequency, intensity, duration, and type of exercise. Further studies are still needed with a larger number of respondents in order to describe the actual situation, and studies in a variety of populations to investigate the effect of the increase in serum sclerostin levels.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">This literature review shows evidence from several studies that certain physical activity has a good impact on bone health that can be evaluated with biomarker assessment. Sclerostin which has the function to inhibit bone formation may be a marker of physical activity towards the aging of bones. Based on the studies that we have compared and analyzed, exercise with a frequency of 3x/week with a minimum duration of about 30 minutes, performed for at least 12 weeks with cardio type and intensity of 85-90% HRmax decrease sclerostin levels in blood serum. Meanwhile, a single bout of exercise will increase sclerostin levels transiently. Further studies are still needed in a variety of populations to investigate the effect of the increase in serum sclerostin levels.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>CONFLICT OF INTEREST</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">The authors declare no conflict of interest.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">The authors are grateful for the cooperation of the Head and all staff of the Physiology Department Medical Faculty Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Indonesia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rinonapoli G, Ruggiero C, Meccariello L, Bisaccia M, Ceccarini P, Caraffa A. Osteoporosis in men: A</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">review of an underestimated bone condition. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22(4):1–22.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barnsley J, Buckland G, Chan PE, Ong A, Ramos AS, Baxter M, et al. Pathophysiology and treatment of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">osteoporosis: challenges for clinical practice in older people. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2021;33(4):759–73.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zhai T, Chen Q, Xu J, Jia X, Xia P. Prevalence and Trends in Low Bone Density, Osteopenia and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Osteoporosis in U.S. Adults With Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease, 2005–2014. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022;12(January):1–12.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fulzele K, Dedic C, Lai F, Bouxsein M, Lotinun S, Baron R, et al. Loss of Gsα in osteocytes leads to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">osteopenia due to sclerostin induced suppression of osteoblast activity. Bone. 2018;117:138–48.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Min C, Yoo DM, Wee JH, Lee HJ, Choi HG. High-Intensity Physical Activity with High Serum Vitamin D</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Levels is Associated with a Low Prevalence of Osteopenia and Osteoporosis: A Population-Based Study. Osteoporos Int. 2021;32(5):883–91.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sadeghi H, Ashraf A, Zeynali N, Ebrahimi B, A Jehu D. Balance and functional mobility predict low bone</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">mineral density among postmenopausal women undergoing recent menopause with osteoporosis, osteopenia, and normal bone mineral density: A cross-sectional study. Geriatr Nurs (Minneap). 2021;42(1):33–6.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Troy KL, Mancuso ME, Butler TA, Johnson JE. Exercise early and often: Effects of physical activity and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">exercise on women’s bone health. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15(5).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hagman M, Helge EW, Fristrup B, Jørgensen NR, Helge JW, Krustrup P. High bone mineral density in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">lifelong trained female team handball players and young elite football players. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2021;121(10):2825–36.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Śliwicka E, Cisoń T, Pilaczyńska-Szcześniak Ł, Ziemba A, Straburzyńska-Lupa A. Effects of marathon race</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">on selected myokines and sclerostin in middle-aged male amateur runners. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):1–9.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Liao HW, Huang TH, Chang YH, Liou HH, Chou YH, Sue YM, et al. Exercise alleviates osteoporosis in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">rats with mild chronic kidney disease by decreasing sclerostin production. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20(8).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gharbia O, Hegazy A, Elhelaly R, ElGhaweet A. Serum sclerostin in rheumatoid-induced osteoporosis.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Egypt Rheumatol Rehabil. 2020;47(1).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Turoń-Skrzypińska A, Dutkiewicz G, Marchelek-Myśliwiec M, Rył A, Dziedziejko V, Safranow K, et al.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Physical activity versus sclerostin and interleukin 6 concentration in patients receiving renal replacement therapy by hemodialysis. Risk Manag Healthc Policy. 2020;13:1467–75.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Janik M, Stuss M, Michalska-Kasiczak M, Jegier A, Sewerynek E. Effects of physical activity on sclerostin</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">concentrations. Endokrynol Pol. 2018;69(2):142–9.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jürimäe J, Karvelyte V, Remmel L, Tamm AL, Purge P, Gruodyte-Raciene R, et al. Sclerostin, preadipocyte</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">factor-1 and bone mineral values in eumenorrheic adolescent athletes with different training patterns. J Bone Miner Metab. 2021;39(2):245–52.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Holdsworth G, Roberts SJ, Ke HZ. Novel actions of sclerostin on bone. J Mol Endocrinol.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">2019;62(2):R167–85.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pickering ME, Simon M, Sornay-Rendu E, Chikh K, Carlier MC, Raby AL, et al. Serum Sclerostin</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Increases After Acute Physical Activity. Calcif Tissue Int. 2017;101(2):170–3.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Delgado-Calle J, Sato AY, Bellido T. Role and mechanism of action of sclerostin in bone. Bone.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">2017;96:29–37.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Drake MT, Khosla S. Hormonal and systemic regulation of sclerostin. Vol. 96, Bone. Elsevier Inc; 2017. 8–</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">17 p.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bestaş E, Dündar Ü, Köken T, Koca B, Yeşil H. The comparison of effects of balneotherapy, water-based</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">and land-based exercises on disease activity, symptoms, sleep quality, quality of life and serum sclerostin level in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: A prospective, randomized study. Arch Rheumatol. 2021;37(x).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Plinta R, Czajkowska M, Pisula M, Brzęk A, Knapik A, Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M, et al. The effect of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">regular fitness training, sex hormones, and turnover of selected bone markers on sclerostin levels in young women. Arch Med Sci. 2020;1–7.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lapauw B, Vandewalle S, Taes Y, Goemaere S, Zmierczak H, Collette J, et al. Serum sclerostin levels in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">men with idiopathic osteoporosis. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;168(4):615–20.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">22. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Confavreux CB. Sclerostin and energy metabolism during physical activity. Calcif Tissue Int.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">2018;102(3):382–3.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hinton PS, Nigh P, Thyfault J. Serum sclerostin decreases following 12 months of resistance- or jump</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">training in men with low bone mass. Bone. 2017;96:85–90.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">24. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ghardashi-Afousi A, Davoodi M, Hesamabadi BK, Asvadi-Fard M, Bigi MAB, Izadi MR, et al. Improved</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">carotid intima-media thickness-induced high-intensity interval training associated with decreased serum levels of Dkk-1 and sclerostin in type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes Complications. 2020;34(1):107469.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sharma-Ghimire P, Chen Z, Sherk V, Bemben M, Bemben D. Sclerostin and parathyroid hormone responses</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">to acute whole-body vibration and resistance exercise in young women. J Bone Miner Metab.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2019;37(2):358–67.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guerriere KI, Hughes JM, Gaffney-Stomberg E, Staab JS, Matheny RW. Circulating sclerostin is not</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">suppressed following a single bout of exercise in young men. Physiol Rep. 2018;6(10):1–9.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kouvelioti R, Kurgan N, Falk B, Ward WE, Josse AR, Klentrou P. Response of sclerostin and bone turnover</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">markers to high intensity interval exercise in young women: Does impact matter? Biomed Res Int. 2018;2018.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jürimäe J, Purge P, Tillmann V. Serum sclerostin and cytokine responses to prolonged sculling exercise in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">highly-trained male rowers. J Sports Sci. 2021;39(5):591–7.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dror N, Carbone J, Haddad F, Falk B, Klentrou P, Radom-Aizik S. Sclerostin and bone turnover markers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">response to cycling and running at the same moderate-to-vigorous exercise intensity in healthy men. J Endocrinol Invest. 2022;45(2):391–7.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gombos GC, Bajsz V, Pék E, Schmidt B, Sió E, Molics B, et al. Direct effects of physical training on</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">markers of bone metabolism and serum sclerostin concentrations in older adults with low bone mass. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2016;17(1):1–8.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Neves RVP, Corrêa HL, Deus LA, Reis AL, Souza MK, Simões HG, et al. Dynamic not isometric training</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">blunts osteo-renal disease and improves the sclerostin/FGF23/Klotho axis in maintenance hemodialysis patients: A randomized clinical trial. J Appl Physiol. 2021;130(2):508–16.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Koide M, Kobayashi Y. Regulatory mechanisms of sclerostin expression during bone remodeling. J Bone</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Miner Metab. 2019;37(1):9–17.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">33. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sharma-Ghimire P, Buchanan S, Bemben MG, Knehans A, Campbell J, Bemben DA. Sclerostin and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Dickkopf-1 Characteristics According to Age and Physical Activity Levels in Premenopausal Women. J Clin Densitom. 2021;</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">34. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kuo TH, Lin WH, Chao JY, Wu AB, Tseng CC, Chang YT, et al. Serum sclerostin levels are positively</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">related to bone mineral density in peritoneal dialysis patients: A cross-sectional study. BMC Nephrol. 2019;20(1):1–10.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">35. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Falk B, Klentrou P. Elevation in Sclerostin After Exercise: Is It Affected by Age and Sex? Calcif Tissue Int.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">2018;102(3):380–1.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">36. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amrein K, Amrein S, Drexler C, Dimai HP, Dobnig H, Pfeifer K, et al. Sclerostin and its association with</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">physical activity, age, gender, body composition, and bone mineral content in healthy adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(1):148–54.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">37. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ardawi MSM, Rouzi AA, Qari MH. Physical activity in relation to serum sclerostin, insulin-like growth</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">factor-1, and bone turnover markers in healthy premenopausal women: A cross-sectional and a longitudinal study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(10):3691–9.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">38. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Straburzyńska-Lupa A, Cisoń T, Gomarasca M, Babińska A, Banfi G, Lombardi G, et al. Sclerostin and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">bone remodeling biomarkers responses to whole-body cryotherapy (- 110 °C) in healthy young men with different physical fitness levels. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):1–11.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">39. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lu CW, Wang CH, Hsu BG, Tsai JP. Serum osteoprotegerin level is negatively associated with bone</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">mineral density in patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis. Med. 2021;57(8):1–10.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">40. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Czajkowska M, Plinta R, Owczarek A, Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M, Skrzypulec-Plinta V. Circulating</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">sclerostin levels in relation to nutritional status, sex hormones and selected bone turnover biochemical markers levels in peri- and postmenopausal women. Ginekol Pol. 2019;90(7):371–5.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">41. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nelson K, Kouvelioti R, Theocharidis A, Falk B, Tiidus P, Klentrou P. Osteokines and bone markers at rest</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">and following plyometric exercise in pre-and postmenopausal women. Biomed Res Int. 2020;2020.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">42. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jürimäe J, Karvelyte V, Remmel L, Tamm AL, Purge P, Gruodyte-Raciene R, et al. Serum sclerostin</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">concentration is associated with specific adipose, muscle and bone tissue markers in lean adolescent females with increased physical activity. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2021;34(6):755–61.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">43. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gaudio A, Rapisarda R, Xourafa A, Zanoli L, Manfrè V, Catalano A, et al. Effects of competitive physical</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">activity on serum irisin levels and bone turnover markers. J Endocrinol Invest. 2021;44(10):2235–41.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">44. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kouvelioti R, LeBlanc P, Falk B, Ward WE, Josse AR, Klentrou P. Effects of High-Intensity Interval</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Running Versus Cycling on Sclerostin, and Markers of Bone Turnover and Oxidative Stress in Young Men. Calcif Tissue Int. 2019;104(6):582–90.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">147</span></p>