---
layout: full_article
title: "Reiteration Used by the Participants of Warmadewa University  Reading News Contest"
author: "Dewa Ayu Kadek Claria"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84076 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-84076"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-84076"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p06"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i01.p06</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Reiteration Used by the Participants of Warmadewa University Reading News Contest</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Dewa Ayu Kadek Claria</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">English Department, Warmadewa University, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:clariadewaayu@gmail.com"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">clariadewaayu@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font4">--</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">This paper discusses about reiteration used by the participants of reading news contest conducted in Warmadewa University. Reiteration is part of lexical cohesion. The lexical cohesion has two functions; first to link between word and word, phrase and phrase within a text and second to indicate co-occurrence of words in which their meaning related in the same environment. The reiteration refers to first function of lexical cohesion. The theories applied to support this paper are the theory of cohesion from a book entitled Introducing Discourse Analysis by Nunan (1993) and a book entitled Cohesion in English by Halliday and Hasan (1976). The data of this paper taken from six texts made by the participants of the contest. The text contains with the participants’ perspectives on Indonesian culture in the globalization era. The data was analyzed by using qualitative method. Based on the result of the analysis, it is found that reiteration used in the text by the participants of reading news contest consists of repetition, synonym/nears synonym, superordinate and general word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Text; Lexical Cohesion; Reiteration</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font4">--</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Makalah ini membahas tentang reiterasi yang digunakan oleh peserta lomba membaca berita yang diadakan di Universitas Warmadewa. Reiterasi merupakan bagian dari kohesi leksikal. Kohesi leksikal memilik dua fungsi; pertama untuk menghubungkan antara kata dan kata, frasa dan frasa dalam teks dan kedua untuk menunjukkan hubungan terjadinya kata-kata di mana maknanya terkait dalam lingkungan yang sama. Pengulangan mengacu pada fungsi pertama kohesi leksikal. Teori-teori yang digunakan untuk mendukung tulisan ini adalah teori kohesi dari buku Introducing Discourse Analysis by Nunan (1993) dan buku Cohesion in English karya Halliday dan Hasan (1976). Data dari tulisan ini diambil dari enam teks yang dibuat oleh peserta lomba. Teks berisi pandangan peserta tentang budaya Indonesia di era globalisasi. Data dianalisis dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif. Berdasarkan hasil analisis, diketahui bahwa reiterasi yang digunakan pada teks yang digunakan untuk membaca berita terdiri dari repetisi, sinonim/mendekati sinonim, superordinate dan general word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teks; Kohesi Leksikal; Reiterasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Lexical cohesion is the cohesive effect achieved by selection of vocabulary (Halliday and Hasan, 1976:274). It holds a text together and has meaning. Lexical cohesion refers to the relations of meaning that exist within the text. It means that the selection of vocabulary can build a connection within the text. Lexical cohesion occurs when two words in a text are semantically related in some way – in other words, they are related in terms of their meaning (Paltridge, 2008: 133). Those statements are in line with Nunan (1993:21) which believes that cohesion can show the unity of the text. Lexical cohesion basically is relationship between the elements semantically (Antony, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Halliday and Hasan, the classification of lexical cohesion can be divided into two, they are 1) Reiteration which consist of repetition, synonym, superordinate and general word, and 2) Collocation as lexical items which is achieved through the association that regularly cooccur. Lexical cohesion has two functions. First, to link between word and word, phrase and phrase within a text then it can be divided again like to indicate a repetition, to indicate synonym or near synonym, to indicate superordinate, and to indicate general word; second, it is used to indicate cooccurrence of words in which their meaning related in the same environment. According to Sari and Anindita (2020: 22), by using reiteration, the audience or listener will have different impact based on what kinds of reiteration used the most in the text. They said that by using repetition on the text will emphasis the meaning of the word and what the author wants to convey can be further clarified. Meanwhile, Tambunan (2019) said that the use of lexical cohesion brings the text to the harmony so the text has meaning.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This topic was chosen because reiteration as part of lexical cohesion often appear in speeches and due to the complexities of the cohesion, most of the listener or audience found difficulties to understand when it is used. Beside those reasons, the high school students who participated in English Contest were the selected students who</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">represented their school. They created the news by themselves so the cohesiveness of the text can be seen by the use of reiteration in the text and the text can be said to be cohesive if it is successfully understood by the listener. By analyzing the reiteration used by the participant of the contest, the message of texts will be easier to understand for the listener.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">This research is qualitative descriptive research. The purpose of the qualitative research is to explain about the central phenomenon (Creswell, 2016). The data source of this paper is taken from six news texts made by some of high school students in Bali who joined the English Contest conducted by student comitte Faculty Warmadewa University especially in news reading. The data are collected through qualitative method. After that, the collected data are classsified refers to its kinds whether it is reiteration or collocation as a part of lexical cohesion and then clasiffied the reiteration which consists of repetition, synonym/nears synonym, superordinate and general word in their types to be analyzed based on the theories applied according to the scope of discussion. The analysis was done by giving some examples and explanations using a descriptive method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The concepts are described based on the theory of lexical cohesion which is proposed by Nunan in his book entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“Introducing Discourse Analysis”</span><span class="font4"> (1993:28) as the main theory and supported by the theory of cohesion which is proposed by Halliday and Hasan in their book entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“Cohesion in English”</span><span class="font4"> (1976:4). The problem which is discussed here are the kinds and functions of reiteration used by participants of reading news contest conducted in Warmadewa University found in their reading news texts. The kinds of reiteration found in the news reading texts are: repetition, synonymy or near synonym, superordinate, and general word.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The concept of cohesion is a semantic one; it refers to relations of meaning that exist within the text, and that define it as a text. Cohesion occurs where the interpretation of some element in the discourse is dependent on that of another (Halliday and Hasan, 1976:4). It means that the concept of cohesion is closely related and cannot be separated from the concept of text. There are two kinds of cohesion namely; grammatical cohesion which is recognized through the grammar and lexical cohesion which is recognized through the vocabulary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lexical cohesion is a group of words which is lexically cohesive when all the words are semantically related. Halliday and Hasan state that Lexical cohesion is the cohesive effect achieved by selection of vocabulary (1976:274). According to Nunan in his book entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font4">, lexical cohesion occurs when two words in a text are semantically related in some way – in other words, they are related in terms of their meaning (1993:28). Lexical cohesion is the central advice for making texts hang together experientially, defining the aboutness of a text (Halliday and Hasan, 1976:276)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">We can conclude that lexical cohesion holds a text together and it has meaning. Lexical cohesion refers to the relations of meaning that exist within the text. It means that the selection of vocabulary can build a connection within the text. Lexical cohesion has two major categories namely; reiteration and collocation. The kinds of lexical cohesion that are found in the speech texts are: first, reiteration including repetition, synonymy or near synonym, superordinate, general word, and the second is collocation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reiteration</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">According to Halliday, reiteration involves the repetition of lexical item, the use of general word where its function is to refer back to a lexical item, the use of synonym or near synonym and superordinate. (1976:278). The item of reiteration can be divided again, such as: repetition, synonym or near synonym, superordinate, and general word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Repetition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Repetition is the first type of reiteration. It has the cohesive effect when it refers to the same lexical item. Repetition is the act of repeating the exact same lexical item that has been mentioned before. It can be said that repetition is a word that exists in the first sentence is repeated in the second sentence. From the data source, some examples of repetition are found as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We are no doubt that the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">youth</span><span class="font4"> today are much modernized and IT dependent. Not just the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">youth</span><span class="font4">, young adult also. (Fitra Ariesta Wismaningrum, 2017:1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are many </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">efforts</span><span class="font4"> to perpetuate Indonesia’s culture, but that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">efforts</span><span class="font4"> aren’t maximum yet. (Genijayendra Sahya, 2017:9)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (1) above, we can see that there is a type of lexical reiteration namely repetition. There is a repetition of a noun. The repetition type can be seen through the word “youth”. It is called repetition because the word “youth” in the first sentence here is repeated once by the same lexical item “youth” in the second sentence without any variations added. The repetition itself has its own function. The function of repetition in the example number (2) above is to show the cohesiveness of the text by repeating the same word. In this case, to emphasizes and focuses only to the word “efforts”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.1.2 Synonym or Near Synonym</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Synonym or near synonym occurs the words within the text have the same meaning or closely related meaning, whenever a lexical item is substituted with another lexical item without losing the meaning. According to Crystal, synonym is lexeme which has the same meaning – a definition which sounds straight forward enough (1995:164). From the data source, there are some examples of synonym or near synonym, as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The main </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">road</span><span class="font4">, Malioboro </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Street</span><span class="font4">, is always crowded and famous for its traditional foodculture. (Grathia Putri Millana, 2017:6)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">recognize</span><span class="font4"> our own culture first, how do we conserve it while we don’t even </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">know</span><span class="font4"> what are our culture is. (Grathia Putri Millana, 2017:7)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (3) above, we can see that there is a type of lexical reiteration namely synonym or near synonym. The synonym or near synonym type can be seen through the word “road” and the word “street”. Both of these words can be categorized as synonym or near synonym type because they almost have the same meaning. This example above shows that the word “road” and the word “street” almost have the same meaning, which is a long piece of hard ground which is built between two places so that people can drive or ride from one place to another. It is said to be near synonym because there are some differences between the word “road” and the word “street”. Streets connect people for interaction and they have sidewalks, while roads connect towns and cities for travel and do not have sidewalks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (4) above, we can see that there is a type of lexical reiteration namely synonym or near synonym. The synonym or near synonym type can be seen through the word “recognize” and the word “know”. Both of these words can be categorized as synonym or near synonym because they have the same meaning. This example above shows that the word “recognized” and the word “know” have the same meaning, which is like identify someone or something from having encountered them before.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.1.3 Superordinate</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Superordinate is a general term for words that refers to the upper class of the word itself. Superordinate can have a hyponym which means a term for words that refers to the lower class of the word itself. As Nunan mention in his book that the word “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pneumonia”</span><span class="font4"> is considered as one kind of illness which strikes lungs. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“illness”</span><span class="font4"> is the superordinate of the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“pneumonia”</span><span class="font4"> and the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“pneumonia”</span><span class="font4"> itself is the hyponym of the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“illness”</span><span class="font4"> because the meaning is more</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">specific. (1993:29) From the data source, there are some examples of superordinate, as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">5) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Before I deliver my speech, I would like to give a proper </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hindu salutation</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Om Swastyastu</span><span class="font4">. (Fitra Ariesta Wismaningrum, 2017:1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Such as the beautiful beach with the white sand in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bali</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tanah Lot</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Uluwatu,</span><span class="font4"> and many more. (Anggun Putri, 2017:24)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (5) above, we can see that there is a type of lexical reiteration namely superordinate. The superordinate type can be seen through the italic words. The words “Om Swastyastu” refers back to the preceding words “Hindu Salutation”. As we know that Om Swastyastu is one of many Hindu salutation, so Om Swastyastu is in the lower class of the word comparing to Hindu salutation. Here, the words “Hindu salutation” can be categorized as the superordinate of Om Swastyastu, and Om Swastyastu is the hyponym of Hindu salutation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (6) above, we can see that there is a type of lexical reiteration namely superordinate. The superordinate type can be seen through the italic words. The words “Tanah Lot” and the word “Uluwatu” refers back to the preceding word “Bali”. As we know that Bali is an island which has Tanah Lot and Uluwatu in it, so Tanah Lot and Uluwatu are in the lower class of the word comparing to Bali. Here, the word “Bali” can be categorized as the superordinate of Tanah Lot and Ulluwatu. Meanwhile, Tanah Lot and Uluwatu are the hyponyms of Bali</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.1.4 General Word</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">General word is the forth and the last type of lexical reiteration. It is the word in level of generally. This type is commonly used with the cohesive force. They are on the borderline between lexical items and substitutes (Halliday and Hasan, 1976:280). General word is used to show the general relation within the text in other to create the cohesive effect. General word is the word in level of generally. In the other word, it is the use of the word in the text that shows general relation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From the data source, there are some examples of general word, as follow:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">7) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As a proof, there are a lot of tourist come to visit </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesia</span><span class="font4"> because they are interested in Indonesia’s culture. If our culture has no value, tourist doesn’t come to visit our </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">country</span><span class="font4">. (Ni Putu Wahyuni, 2017:4)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4">8)</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bali</span><span class="font4"> is frequently referred to as “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Paradise Island</span><span class="font4">” because its reputation in the world as a tropical paradise of untold beautiful nature, idyllic mood, and never ending fascination. (Grathia Putri Millana, 2017:6)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In the example number (7) above, we can see that there is the last type of lexical reiteration namely general word. The general word type can be seen through the italic words, the word “Indonesia” and the word “country”. It is called general word because the word “country” refers back to the word “Indonesia” within the text and the word “country” is considered as the general word of Indonesia. It is clear that the word “Indonesia” has more specific meaning than the word “country”. In the example number (8) above, we can see that there is the last type of lexical reiteration namely general word. The general word type can be seen through the italic words, the word “Bali” and the phrase “The Paradise Island”. It is called general word because the phrase “The Paradise Island” refers back to the word “Bali” within the text and the phrase “The Paradise Island” is considered as the general word of Bali. It is clear that the phrase “Bali” has more specific meaning than the word “The Paradise Island”.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the previous chapter, it can be concluded that there are two kinds of lexical cohesion found in speech texts that are used by particpants of English Contest conducted in Warmadewa University, they are reiteration and collocation. In the pattern of reiteration, this research found four different types namely repetition, synonym or near synonym, superordinate, and general word. All these findings also have different functions. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">function of repetition is to show the cohesiveness of the text by repeating the same word. Synonym or near synonym such as The function of synonym or near synonym is to show the cohesiveness of the text by using two or more words that have the same meaning or closely related meaning. The function of Superordinate is to give a cohesive tie by showing the generic-specific relation. The function of general word is to show the general relation within the text in other to create the cohesive effect.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Antony. (2012). Pemarkah Kohesi Gramatikal pada Kumpulan Cerpen Bintang Kecil di Langit Kelam Karya Jamal T. Suryanata. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa Dan Sastra Indonesia</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">1</span><span class="font4">(1), 339.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Halliday, M. A. . and H. R. (1976). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cohesion in English</span><span class="font4">. Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">John W, C. (2016). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design, Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Method</span><span class="font4">. Pustaka Pelajar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Novi Eka Purnama Sari &amp;&nbsp;Widyashanti K.Anindita. (2020). Lexical Cohesion Analysis on Adele’s Songs Lyrics in The Album 25. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Surakarta English and Literature Journal</span><span class="font4">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font4">(2), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;22.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.ejournal.unsa.ac.id/index.php/selj"><span class="font4">http://www.ejournal.unsa.ac.id/index.php/selj</span></a><span class="font4"> u/article/view/360</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nunan, D. (1993). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Discourse Analysis</span><span class="font4">. Penguin English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Paltridge, B. (2008). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Discourse &nbsp;&nbsp;Analysis</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Continuum,Print.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tambunan. (2019). Lexical and Grammar Cohesion in The Collection of “Museum Penghancur Dokumen” Poetry by Afrizal Malna. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal &nbsp;&nbsp;BASIS</span><span class="font4">, &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font4">(2), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;185.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ejournal.upbatam.ac.id/index.php/basis"><span class="font4">https://ejournal.upbatam.ac.id/index.php/basis</span></a><span class="font4"> /article/view/1426/862</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">51</span></p>