---
layout: full_article
title: "The RESISTANCE TRAINING EFFECT ON IGF1 LEVEL OF SARCOPENIA"
author: "A A Ayu Tri Bhuana Komala Sari, Nanang Masrani, Ni Ketut Rake Putri Saraswati, Putu Dyah Agustina Lestari, Made Rendra Wisnu Rahasbistara, Nila Wahyuni, I Putu Gede Adiatmika"
categories: sport
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-84960 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/id-84960"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-84960"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Sport and Fitness Journal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Volume 10, No.2, May 2022: 104-110</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">E-ISSN: 2654-9182</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>RESISTANCE TRAINING EFFECT ON IGF1 LEVEL OF</span><br><br><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>SARCOPENIA</span></h1>
<p><span class="font5">Tri Bhuana<sup>1*</sup>, Nanang Masrani<sup>1</sup>, Rake Putri<sup>1</sup>, Dyah Agustina<sup>1,</sup>, Rendra Wisnu<sup>1</sup>, Nila Wahyuni<sup>2</sup>, I Putu Gede Adiatmika<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Magister Program of Biomedical Science Anti Aging Medicine Medical Faculty Udayana University, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiology Department Medical Faculty Udayana Univsersity, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia Email :</span><a href="mailto:gungtri.gt3@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> gungtri.gt3@gmail.com</span></a></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Aging is a natural physiological process that everyone goes through as they get older. The quality and quantity of muscle mass decrease with age. Sarcopenia is a loss of muscular mass that is followed by a loss of muscle strength. Many factors and signaling pathways regulate muscle metabolism. The amount of IGF-1 in the blood has a significant impact in skeletal muscle quality. Resistance training has been demonstrated to be necessary for muscular development and boosting the efficiency of agonist and antagonist muscle groups in recent studies. The study was conducted using the literature method. We reviewed and compared the most recent journals discussing the relationship between sarcopenia and regular long-term physical exercise. Resistance training showed significant results for muscle strength and muscle mass in the elderly. High-resistance training has a major effect on increasing GH and cortisol. In conclusion, resistance training have a positive effect on muscle health that can be withdrawn by IGF1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: Sarcopenia; IGF-1; Resistance training</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Aging is something that definitely and we can't avoid it but we can prevent it. There are so many signs of aging that occur in our bodies, including decreased body functions, and physical performance abilities, which will cause a risk condition for health problems that interfere with the quality of life<sup>1,2,3</sup>. Sarcopenia comes from the Greek, namely “sarx” and “penia” which means &quot;muscle&quot; and lost&quot; which when put together means reduce of muscle mass. Sarcopenia is a condition that occurs as a result of multifactorial<sup>2,3,4</sup>. Of all the forms of aging that occur, sarcopenia which is a condition of decreased muscle strength accompanied by a decrease in muscle mass is often considered normal or physiological, even though it is something that can be prevented<sup>1,5,6</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sarcopenia is often associated with aging and usually occurs at the age of 60 years and over when the body's condition has decreased in function and strength. Progressive loss of muscle mass occurs in the early 40s and increases to an 8% decline in function every 10 years<sup>3,5,7</sup>. Judging from the epidemiology, sarcopenia is more at risk, especially in Asian people. It is associated with a lack of physical activity and exercise. In addition, nutrition also plays a role in risk factors for sarcopenia<sup>3,4,8</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sarcopenia can be identified by looking at the limit values the measurement of muscle mass (5.4 kg/m2 for women and 7.0 kg/m2 for men) they using dual X-ray absorptiometry to measure the values, and 5.7 kg/m2 for women and 7.0 kg/m2 for men that can be analyzed by bioimpedance analysis, grip strength (&lt;18 kg for women and &lt;26 kg for men), and walking speed (&lt;0.8 m/s)<sup>3,9,10</sup>. Many studies have discussed the relationship between sarcopenia and the role of growth hormone and as a growth factor. The pathophysiology of sarcopenia is still uncertain, but the link between the decline in hormones associated with aging is said to be the main cause of sarcopenia<sup>9,10,11</sup>. The decrease in the level of the anabolic hormone IGF-1 in old age greatly influences Growth Hormone (GH), which plays a role in increasing the number of myocytes<sup>3,12,13</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The diagnosis of sarcopenia can be made with a diagnostic criteria and the “stages of sarcopenia” that have been determined based on the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People (EWGSOP)<sup>13,4,15</sup>. The criteria for the diagnosis of sarcopenia are certainly based on 3 things, namely muscle strength, muscle mass, and decreased physical performance. In addition, the degree of sarcopenia can also be determined based on these 3 things<sup>4,16,17,18</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One of the modalities of therapy or prevention that we can do is to do regular physical exercise. However, the type of exercise must be adapted to age, ability and gender.<sup>10</sup> Physical exercise with resistance exercise showed significant results for muscle strength and muscle mass in the elderly<sup>18,19,20</sup>. High resistance training has a major effect on increasing GH also cortisol<sup>11,21</sup>. The main effects obtained are grip strength, balance, walking speed, and other physical abilities<sup>12,22,23</sup>. This literature review aims to analyze the relationship between resistance training effect on IGF1 level of sarcopenia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This literature review was conducted utilizing secondary data gathered from the internet, various journal searches, journal reviews, and articles. The article databases bases examined were Google Scholar, Pubmed, Science Direct, Mendeley and Scopus, with the keywords &quot;Resistance Training, IGF-1, and Sarcopenia&quot; and a range of years used from 2012 to 2022. The articles which been chosen were those that investigated the association between resistance training and IGF-1 in sarcopenia. Articles are screened using Scimago Journal and Country Rank. We included some research article related to this study, as show in table 1.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>RESULTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. Studies examining the effects of resistance training on IGF1 level on sarcopenia</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Author and year of publication</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Sample</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Intervention</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Result</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Conclusion</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Chen et al, 2017<sup>24</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">60 total participants were women and men, aged from 65 to 75 years with sarcopenia comorbid with obesity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Participants were randomly divided into 4 groups : 15 allocated to AT (2x/weeks for 8 weeks), 15 for RT (2x/weeks for 8 weeks), 15 for CT (1x/ with the AT 48 hours after the RT) and 15 for CON</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Baseline :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">AT : 4.07 ± 1.43</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">RT : 4.07 ± 1.97</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">CT : 4.49 ± 1.47</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">CON : 4.39 ± 1.27</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">After 8 weeks :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">AT : 3.43 ± 1.44</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">RT : 4.23 ± 2.06<sup>a</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">CT : 4.55 ± 1.35<sup>bc</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">CON : 3.42 ± 1.30</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">IGF-1 levels were higher in the elderly with sarcopenic obesity who had CT and RT than in the control group.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Negaresh, et al. 2019<sup>25</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">31 elderly men, age from 55 to 70 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Participant were divived into 2 groups: 16 in SE, 15 in the HE. 8-week RT program, 3 days per week (24 sessions). For a total of 8 weeks, the RT protocol consisted of four sets of ten repetitions.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Baseline HE : 130.15±22.23 after 8 weeks of RT : 138.11±16.41 Baseline SE : 115.56±16.86<sup>d</sup> after 8 weeks of RT 113.67±17.06 (p = 0.026)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The HE group had a significantly higher mean level of serum IGF 1 than the SE group.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Singh, et al. 2022<sup>26</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">100 participants, 63</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Participants were</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">IGF-1 staining %</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The presence of IGF-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">females and 37 males range 72-98 years</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">randomized into 4 groups: lower extremity RT, Nutritional Supplementation, Placebo-Control, both Active Interventions and. Resistance training every 3 days/weeks for 10 weeks composed of 3 sets of 8</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">RM (1-RM) for the hip and knee extensor muscles.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Baseline Exercise group: 6 ±2 after 10 weeks 22 ± 4 Baseline No</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Exercise Group: 8±2 after 10 weeks 7±3 (p= 0.007)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">I in skeletal muscle tissue increased considerably after progressive resistance exercise. Which accompanied the damage and repair.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Ghayomzadeh, et al.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">40 HIV-infected</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Participants</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">CT : 74.36 ± 56,64</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Combined training</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2022<sup>27</sup>.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">patients relate sarcopenia (20 women and omen) between the ages of 23 and 45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">randomized into 2 groups. CT group (10 men, 10 women), CON group (10 men, 10 women). Training protocol 3 sets of 8 resistance exercises (press, bench shoulder press, leg extension, squat, lat pull down, triceps extension, plank, and back extension) for 6 months on 3 days (non-consecutive) per week</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">pg/mm3, Women vs men (56.62 ± 36.75 pg/mm3 and 83.22 ± 64.25</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(p &lt;0.001)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">can be considered to improve muscle function in PLWH</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">*Statistically Significant (p&lt;0,05). <sup>ab,c,</sup>:The mean for the RT, AT, CT, and CON groups were substantially higher than the result for the RT, AT, CT, and CON groups (P &lt;&nbsp;.05). <sup>d</sup>: At the baseline, there was a significant difference in SE and HE values (P&lt;0.05). AT: Aerobic Training, RT: Resistance Training, CT: Combination Training, CON: Control, SE: Sarcopenic Elderly, HE: Healthy elderly, PLWH: People living with HIV, RM: Repetition Maximum.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The role of exercise on sarcopenia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Exercise is important for health because it reduces body fat and can increase muscle mass, increase muscle strength, endurance, the function of the immune, and cardiovascular system<sup>18,19,28</sup>. Lack of physical activity is closely related to decreased muscle mass (sarcopenia), physical fitness, the performance of physical, which can cause chronic disease and disability, exercise can be an important therapy for sarcopenia. Physical activity can become into aerobics, which can low intense exercise for long periods of time and resistance training, which can become exercising vigorous movement for short periods of time<sup>1,13,29</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Resistance exercise with low/moderate and high intensity performed regularly effective treat and preventive sarcopenia, can regulate muscle protein synthesis, increase skeletal of muscle mass, the mass of muscle index, strength of leg, and strength of grip thereby increasing strength of muscle, mass of muscle boosted IGF-1, testosterone, and insulin responses. Resistance exercise can also play an important role, regulate metabolism in individuals<sup>29,30,32,34</sup>. Suggest that resistance of regular training increases the size and cross-sectional area of fast responding (type IIa and IIx) fibers of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">muscle than slow responding (type I) fibers. muscle protein synthesis and increased muscle mass can improve yielding capacity, muscle quality, and physical performance<sup>28,29,32,33</sup>. Recived a report that 10 weeks of resistance training on participants older than 60 years, both male and female, resulted in significantly elevated IGF-1 levels, besides that, Peter Putra et al showed resistance training for 3 months can increase the maximal strength of knee extension<sup>28,31</sup>. Because of it, we must promote resistance training to anyone over the age of 60 in order to avoid muscle damage from not exercising regularly<sup>38</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 3. Table of Resistance Exercise<sup>29</sup></span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Subjects</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Types</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Duration</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Significance</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Older adults</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Leg extension (70% of 1RM)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Acute bout of RE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">No significant mTOR, S6K1, 4E-BP1, ERK1/2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Old women</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Knee extension (70% of 1RM)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Acute bout of RE</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">↑ MuRF-1, FOXO3A, atrogin-1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Older adults</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Combined RE (80% of 1RM)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Chronic exercise (6 months)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">↑ Skeletal muscle strength, mitochondrial function</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">↓ Senescence-related transcriptional genes</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Aged rats</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Ladder climbing (10 repetitions)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Chronic exercise (9 months)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">↑ Skeletal muscle strength and mass, IGF-1 ↓ LC3-II/LC3-I ratio, p62</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Most study on effects of exercise have focused on aerobic or resistance training. a combined exercise program consisting of aerobic and resistance training is recommended. As noted above. Gudlaugsson et al showed the results of research from 117 elderly subjects for 6 months doing combined exercise to get the results of increasing muscle mass. This report shows that regular combination exercise can treat sarcopenia<sup>28,29</sup>.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effects of resistance training on IGF1 of sarcopenia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Anabolic hormone levels decline with age, particularly IGF-1, which is a key mediator for GH-related signaling pathways. The IGF-1 signaling cascade has emerged as a crucial mechanism and regulator of the aging process<sup>9</sup>. Sarcopenia is the elderly is caused by a variety of factors, including age, gender, lifestyle, nutrition, and exercise. The levels of GH/IGF-1 are critical for sustaining skeletal muscle quality<sup>35</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">IGF-1 is generated in tissues and cells on a local level (through autocrine and paracrine processes). IGF-I is involved in the commencement of the cell cycle and the production of developmental factors. Proliferation, activation, differentiation, and survival of satellite cells, as well as increasing myotube size, stimulating amino acid and protein synthesis and muscle hypertrophy, neuronal myelinization and damage repair, reducing chronic inflammatory reactions, increasing free fatty acid utilization, and improving insulin sensitivity to receptor binding and intracellular signaling and glucose metabolism, are just a few of the many advantages of IGF<sup>36</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">An increase in the number of myocytes and the expression of IGF-1 muscles are two of the effects of GH on muscles. Resistance training is important for muscular growth because it improves the efficiency of both agonist and antagonistic muscle groups<sup>11</sup>. High resistance training resulted in a much larger rise in GH and cortisol concentrations when compared to high-intensity exercises. Exercise boosted IGF-1, testosterone, and insulin responses in a prominent example<sup>37</sup>. Resistance exercise on participants older than 60 years, both male and female, resulted in significantly elevated IGF-1 levels. Because of it, we must promote resistance training to anyone over the age of 60 in order to avoid muscle damage from not exercising regularly<sup>38</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The best way to improve muscular function in people with GH insufficiency is to substitute GH with workouts that stimulate nerve activation and muscle IGF-1 stimulation<sup>11</sup>. Resistance training has been demonstrated to result in a large increase in lean body mass and metabolic rate, as well as a considerable decrease in fat mass. Resistance exercises can help with lower back pain, rheumatic discomfort, functional independence, movement control, and walking speed, among other things. To combat type 2 diabetes, resistance exercise is also suggested<sup>39</sup>.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">After a relatively short duration of resistance exercise, local IGF-1 muscle synthesis increases dramatically<sup>11</sup>. Resistance training for ten weeks can raise resting metabolic rate by 7%, and improve muscle mass by 1.4 kg<sup>39</sup>. Resistance training appears to affect IGF-1. This reaction is supported by research, which shows that it improves musculoskeletal health. Increased hormones linked to anabolic signals contribute to promoting homeostatic systems for metabolism and skeletal muscle improvement</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"><sup>40</sup>.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This literature review shows evidence from several studies that high resistance training has a favorable impact on musculoskeletal health that can be evaluated by IGF1. IGF1 has an important role in maintaining the quality of skeletal muscle mass. IGF1 stimulates myogenin expression by satellite myoblasts. The decrease in the level of anabolic hormone IGF-1 in old age greatly influences Growth Hormone (GH), which plays a role in increasing the number of myocytes. Resistance training improves the effectiveness of both agonist and antagonistic muscle units, which is necessary for muscular growth. As compared to high intensity activities, high resistance training resulted in a substantially higher increase in GH and cortisol concentrations. IGF-1, testosterone, and insulin were all increased by exercise. The increase in hormones associated with anabolic signals supports homeostatic mechanisms for target metabolism and repair involving skeletal muscle. Further studies still need to be carried out in various populations to investigate the effect of resistance training on increasing IGF1 hormone for the prevention and treatment of sarcopenia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>CONFLICT OF INTEREST</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The authors declare no conflict of interest</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The authors are grateful for the cooperation of the Head and all staff of the Physiology Department Medical Faculty Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Indonesia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wu X, Li Xue, Xu M, Zhang Z, He L, Li Y. Sarcopenia prevalence and associated factors among older chinese population: findings from the china health and retirement longitudinal study. 2021; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">PLoS ONE</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">16</span><span class="font3">(3):1–16.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Giovannini S, Brau F, Forino R, Berti A, D’ignazio F, Loreti C, et al. Sarcopenia: diagnosis and management, state of the art and contribution of ultrasound. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Clinical Medicine</span><span class="font3">. 2021;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">10</span><span class="font3">(23).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dhillon RJS, Hasni, S. Pathogenesis and management of sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Clinics in Geriatric Medicine</span><span class="font3">. 2017;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">33</span><span class="font3">(1): 17–36.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Avgerinou, C. Debate &amp;&nbsp;analysis sarcopenia: Why it matters in general practice. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">British Journal of General Practice</span><span class="font3">. 2020;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">70</span><span class="font3">(693): 200–201.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kim TN, Choi KM. Sarcopenia: Definition, Epidemiology, and Pathophysiology. J Bone Metab. 2013;20:1-10.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chen LK, Liu LK, Woo J, Assantachai P, Auyeung TW, Bahyah KS, et al. Sarcopenia in Asia: Consensus report of the Asian working group for sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of the American Medical Directors Association</span><span class="font3">. 2014;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">15</span><span class="font3">(2):95–101.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dodds RM, Roberts HC, Cooper C, Sayer AA. The Epidemiology of Sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Clinical Densitometry</span><span class="font3">. 2015;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">18</span><span class="font3">(4):461–466.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ascenzi F, Barberi L, Dobrowolny G, Villa NBA, Nicoletti C, Rizzuto E, et al. Effects of IGF-1 isoforms on muscle growth and sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Aging Cell</span><span class="font3">. 2019;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">18</span><span class="font3">(3):1–11.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gubbi S, Quipildor GF, Barzilai N, Huffman DM, Milman S. 40 years of IGF1: IGF1: The Jekyll and Hyde of the aging brain. Vol. 61, Journal of Molecular Endocrinology. 2018; p. T171–85.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rodrigues F, Domingos C, Monteiro D, Morouço P. A Review on Aging, Sarcopenia, Falls, and Resistance Training in Community-Dwelling Older Adults. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health</span><span class="font3">. 2022;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">19</span><span class="font3">(2).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amer NM, Modesto MJ, Dos Santos CD, Erichsen O, Mascarenhas LPG, Nesi-França S, et al. Resistance exercise alone improves muscle strength in growth hormone deficient males in the transition phase. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2018; 28;31(8):887–94.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Del Campo Cervantes JM, Macías Cervantes MH., Monroy TR. Effect of a Resistance Training Program on Sarcopenia and Functionality of the Older Adults Living in a Nursing Home. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging</span><span class="font3">. 2019; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">23</span><span class="font3">(9): 829–836.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Law TD, Clark LA, Clark, BC. Resistance excercise to prevent and manage sarcopenia and dynapenia. HHS Public Access. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Physiology &amp;&nbsp;Behavior</span><span class="font3">. 2019.; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">176</span><span class="font3">(3) : 139–148.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hurst C, Robinson SM, Witham MD, Dodds RM, Granic A, Buckland C, et al. Resistance exercise as a treatment for sarcopenia: Prescription and delivery. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Age and Ageing</span><span class="font3">. 2022; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">51</span><span class="font3">(2) :1–10.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ghayomzadeh M, Hackett D, Seyedalinaghi S, Gholami, M. Combined training improves the diagnostic measures of sarcopenia and decreases the in fl ammation in HIV-infected individuals. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal of Cochexia, sacopenia and muscle.</span><span class="font3"> 2022.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naranjo JD, Dziki JL, Badylak SF. Regenerative Medicine Approaches for Age-Related Muscle Loss and Sarcopenia: A Mini-Review. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Gerontology</span><span class="font3">. 2017; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">63</span><span class="font3">(6): 580–589.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Van Nieuwpoort IC, Vlot MC, Schaap LA, Lips P, Drent ML. The relationship between serum IGF-</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">1, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;handgrip strength, physical performance and falls in elderly men and women. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">European Journal of Endocrinology</span><span class="font3">. 2018; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">179</span><span class="font3">(2), 73–84.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barclay RD, Burd NA, Tyler C, Tillin NA, Mackenzie RW. The Role of the IGF-1 Signaling Cascade in Muscle Protein Synthesis and Anabolic Resistance in Aging Skeletal Muscle. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frontiers in Nutrition</span><span class="font3">. 2019; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Beas-jimenez JD, Lopez-lluchb G, Martinez S, Muro-Jimenez A, Rodriguez-bies E, Navas P. Sarcopenia: implications of physical exercise in its pathophysiology, prevention and treatment. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Acta Médica Colombiana</span><span class="font3">,. 2019; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">43</span><span class="font3">(2S): 176.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kemmler W, Kohl M, Fröhlich M, Jakob F, Engelke K, von Stengel S, et al. Effects of High-Intensity Resistance Training on Osteopenia and Sarcopenia Parameters in Older Men with Osteosarcopenia— One-Year Results of the Randomized Controlled Franconian Osteopenia and Sarcopenia Trial (FrOST). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Bone and Mineral Research</span><span class="font3">. 2020; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">35</span><span class="font3">(9) : 1634–1644.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barbalho SM, Flato UAP, Tofano RJ, Goulart R, Guiguer EL, Detregiachi CRP, et al. Physical exercise and myokines: Relationships with sarcopenia and cardiovascular complications. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Molecular Sciences</span><span class="font3">. 2020; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font3">(10).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">22. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shalaby MN, Sakoury MMA, Abdi E, Elgamal S, Elrkbwey S, Ramadan W, et al.. The impact of resistance training on gene expression of igf1 and athletes’ physiological parameters. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences</span><span class="font3">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fragala MS, Cadore EL, Dorgo S, Izquierdo M, Kraemer WJ, Peterson MD, et al.. Resistance training for older adults: Position statement from the national strength and conditioning association. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research</span><span class="font3">,. 2019; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">33</span><span class="font3">(8) :2019–2052.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">24. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chen HT, Chung YC, Chen YJ, Ho SY, Wu, HJ.. Effects of Different Types of Exercise on Body Composition, Muscle Strength, and IGF-1 in the Elderly with Sarcopenic Obesity. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of the American Geriatrics Society</span><span class="font3">. 2017;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">65</span><span class="font3">(4) : 827–832.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Negaresh R, Ranjbar R, Baker JS, Habibi A, Mokhtarzade1 M, Gharibvand, MM, et al. Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy, Insulin-like Growth Factor 1, Myostatin and Follistatin in Healthy and Sarcopenic Elderly Men: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Preventive Medicine</span><span class="font3">. 2019; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">:1–7.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Singh MA, Ding W, Manfredi TJ, Solares GS, O’Neill EF, Clements KM.,et al. Insulin-like growth factor I in skeletal muscle after weight-lifting exercise in frail elders. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">American Journal of Physiology -Endocrinology and Metabolism</span><span class="font3">. 2022; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">277</span><span class="font3">(1 40-1) : 1–3.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ghayomzadeh M, Hackett D, Seyedalinaghi S, Gholami M. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Combined training improves the diagnostic measures of sarcopenia and decreases the in fl ammation in HIV-infected individuals</span><span class="font3">. 2022.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yoo SZ, No MH, Heo JW, Park DH, Kang JH, Kim SH, et al. Role of exercise in age-related sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Exercise Rehabilitation</span><span class="font3">. 2018;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(4): 551–558.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seo DY, Hwang BG. Effects of exercise training on the biochemical pathways associated with sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Physical Activity and Nutrition</span><span class="font3">. 2020; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">24</span><span class="font3">(3): 32–38.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Steffl M, Bohannon RW, Sontakova L, Tufano JJ, Shiells K, Holmerova I. Relationship between sarcopenia and physical activity in older people: A systematic review and meta-analysis. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Clinical Interventions in Aging</span><span class="font3">. 2017; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">12</span><span class="font3">: 835–845.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Secondary Sarcopenia: A Comprehensive Literature Review. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Biology.</span><span class="font3"> 2022; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">11</span><span class="font3">(1).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kakehi S, Wakabayashi H, Inuma H, Inose T, Shioya M, Aoyama Y, et al. Rehabilitation nutrition and exercise therapy for Sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">World Journal of Men’s Health</span><span class="font3">. 2021;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">39</span><span class="font3">(1):1–10.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">33. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Makanae Y, Fujita S. Role of exercise and nutrition in the prevention of sarcopenia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Nutritional Science and Vitaminology</span><span class="font3">. 2015; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">61</span><span class="font3">: S125–S127.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">34. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fochi S, Giuriato G, De Simone T, Gomez-Lira M, Tamburin S, Piccolo LD, et al. Regulation of micrornas in satellite cell renewal, muscle function, sarcopenia and the role of exercise. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Molecular Sciences</span><span class="font3">. 2020; </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">21</span><span class="font3">(18) :1–24.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">35. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bian A, Ma Y, Zhou X, Guo Y, Wang W, Zhang Y, et al. Association between sarcopenia and levels of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-1 in the elderly. BMC Musculoskelet Disord [Internet]. 2020 Apr 7 [cited 2022 Mar 24];21(1):1–9.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">36. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kraemer WJ, Ratamess NA, Hymer WC, Nindl BC, Fragala MS. Growth Hormone(s), Testosterone, Insulin-Like Growth Factors, and Cortisol: Roles and Integration for Cellular Development and Growth With Exercise. Vol. 11, Frontiers in Endocrinology.2020.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">37. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mangine GT, Hoffman JR, Gonzalez AM, Townsend JR, Wells AJ, Jajtner AR, et al. The effect of training volume and intensity on improvements in muscular strength and size in resistance-trained men. Physiol Rep. 2015;3(8):1–18.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">38. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ye G, Xiao Z, Luo Z, Huang X, Abdelrahim MEA, Huang W. Resistance training effect on serum insulin-like growth factor 1 in the serum: a meta-analysis. Aging Male [Internet]. 2021;23(5):1471–9.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">39. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Westcott WL. Resistance training is medicine: Effects of strength training on health. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2012;11(4):209–16.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">40. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kraemer WJ, Ratamess NA, Nindl BC. Recovery responses of testosterone, growth hormone, and IGF-1 after resistance exercise. J Appl Physiol. 2017;122(3):549–58.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">110</span></p>