---
layout: full_article
title: "IDENTIFICATION OF CONCENTRATE QUALITY FROM LOCAL RAW MATERIALS THROUGH HEMATOLOGY PROFILE ON BALI CATTLE"
author: "I Putu Agus Kertawirawan, Ni Luh Gde Budiari, I Nyoman Adijaya, Made Rahayu Kusumadewi"
categories: buletinvet
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-86540 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/id-86540"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-86540"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Volume 14 No. 4: 433-439</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Agustus 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: 10.24843/bulvet.2022.v14.i04.p17</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Buletin Veteriner Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">pISSN: 2085-2495; eISSN: 2477-2712</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Online pada: </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Nasional Sinta 4, berdasarkan Keputusan Direktur Jenderal Pendidikan Tinggi, Riset, dan Teknologi No. 158/E/KPT/2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">IDENTIFICATION OF CONCENTRATE QUALITY FROM LOCAL RAW MATERIALS THROUGH HEMATOLOGY PROFILE ON BALI CATTLE</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>(Identifikasi Kualitas Konsentrat Berbahan Baku Limbah Berdasarkan Profil Hematologi pada Sapi Bali)</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">I Putu Agus Kertawirawan<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font4">*</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">, Ni Luh Gde Budiari<sup>1</sup>, I Nyoman Adijaya<sup>1</sup>, Made Rahayu Kusumadewi<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup>Assessment Institute for Agricultural Technology (AIAT) Bali, Jl. ByPass Ngurah Rai Pesanggaran, Denpasar, Bali Indonesia;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>2</sup>Balai Pembibitan Ternak Unggul dan Hijauan Pakan Ternak Denpasar, Jl. Gurita III, Pegok, Sesetan, Denpasar Selatan, Kota Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">*Email:</span><a href="mailto:agus_kwirawan@yahoo.com"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">agus_kwirawan@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Innovation in the use of local feed is an alternative to reducing production costs in livestock business. However, feeding at different levels will affect physiological conditions such as differences in blood counts This study was conducted to determine the quality of concentrate made from local raw materials toward rice bran through a hematological profile. The observed hematological parameters were total erythrocyte, hemoglobin level, and hematocrit value. The treatment given was P0 = group of cattles that were given green feed plus 1 kg of rice bran/cattle/day; P1 = group of cattles given forage plus 1 kg of concentrate (50% substitution of corn waste and peanut shells); P2 = group of cattles given forage plus 1 kg/cattle/day of concentrate (75% substitution of corn waste and peanut shells). This study used a randomized block design. Blood is drawn through the jugular vein using a venoject. Total erythrocytes, hemoglobin levels and hematocrit values were calculated using the routine hematology examination method with a Hematology Analyzer machine. The results showed that the provision of additional feeds in the form of bran and concentrate made from local raw materials to weaning Bali cattle had no significant effect (P&gt;0.05) on total erythrocytes, hemoglobin levels, and hematocrit values. These results indicate that concentrate made from local raw material has the potential as an alternative feed to replace rice bran without affecting the physiological conditions of the cattle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Keywords: Bali cattle; feed; erythrocytes; hemoglobin; hematocrit</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Inovasi penggunaan pakan lokal merupakan salah satu alternatif untuk menekan biaya produksi dalam usaha peternakan. Namun pemberian pakan pada kadar yang berbeda akan mempengaruhi kondisi fisiologis seperti perbedaan jumlah darah. Penelitian ini dilakukan untuk mengetahui kualitas konsentrat berbahan baku lokal terhadap dedak melalui profil hematologi. Parameter hematologi yang diamati adalah jumlah eritrosit, kadar hemoglobin, dan nilai hematokrit. Perlakuan yang diberikan adalah P0 = kelompok ternak yang diberi pakan hijauan ditambah 1 kg dedak/ekor/hari; P1 = kelompok ternak yang diberi hijauan ditambah 1 kg konsentrat/ekor/hari (substitusi 50% ampas jagung dan kulit kacang tanah); P2 = kelompok ternak yang diberi hijauan ditambah 1 kg/ekor/hari konsentrat (75% substitusi ampas jagung dan kulit kacang tanah). Penelitian ini menggunakan rancangan acak kelompok. Darah diambil melalui vena jugularis menggunakan venoject. Jumlah eritrosit, kadar hemoglobin dan nilai hematokrit dihitung menggunakan metode pemeriksaan hematologi rutin dengan mesin Hematology Analyzer. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa pemberian pakan tambahan berupa dedak dan konsentrat berbahan baku lokal pada sapi bali sapih tidak berpengaruh nyata (P&gt;0,05) terhadap total eritrosit, kadar hemoglobin, dan nilai hematokrit. Hasil ini menunjukkan bahwa konsentrat berbahan baku lokal berpotensi sebagai pakan alternatif pengganti dedak tanpa mempengaruhi kondisi fisiologis ternak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kata kunci: Sapi Bali, pakan, eritrosit, hemoglobin, hematokrit</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Feed has an important role in the success of livestock business, because 6080% of the total production costs are used for feed costs (Siregar, 2008). To increase efficiency, the development of alternative feeds is a must. Utilization of local resource potential needs to be developed in an effort to provide alternative feed in rural areas. In dry land areas, corn and peanut waste are potentials that can be optimized as feed ingredients combined with several other feed ingredients.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The provision of different levels of feed will affect physiological conditions such as frequency of breathing, pulse rate, body temperature and different amounts of blood due to differences in fermentation or metabolism processes that occur in the body, so that it will affect the production response of an animal (Astuti </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font4"> 2015). Feeding other than forage allows physiological changes of livestock. Therefore, it is necessary to study the physiological changes of cattle by measuring the levels of hemoglobin, erythrocytes and leukocytes as a result of feeding. All of these elements have an important role in the metabolic processes in the body of livestock. If there is a change in the elements in the body, there will be a change in the metabolic process which will have an impact on the performance of the livestock. Hematological status changes in livestock can be used to detect metabolic disorders, diseases, structural damage to organ, and stress </span><span class="font0">(</span><span class="font4">Kubkomawa et al,2015) and (Ihedioha et al,2012). According to Fitria and Sarto (2014), blood is one of the main parameters in preclinical / biomedical research. Hematological values or blood profiles are useful for assessing health conditions and as a reference for baseline or control values in a study. The presence of metabolic disorders, disease, damage to the structure or function of organs, the influence of agents / drugs, and stress can be seen from changes in blood profiles [4].</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hematologic examination may help monitoring &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;livestock &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;metabolism</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">conditions (Lager and Jordan, 2012), which can then determine the physiological and livestock health conditions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Blood has a very complex role so that physiological processes can run well, so that livestock productivity can be optimal. There are several factors that influence the concentfeed of erythrocytes, hematocrit (PCV) and the concentfeed of constituents of the blood. The feed feed is an essential ingredient for blood metabolism because for the formation of blood, protein, vitamins and minerals are needed. Erythrocyte examination is performed to determine the state of anemia and polycythemia. This research was conducted to see the blood profile of Bali cattles which were given additional feed in the form of rice bran and concentrate feed made from local raw materials. These results are expected to provide an overview of the quality of the feed based on the physiological functions of the body through a hematological profile.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHODS</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Sample</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The research was conducted at the Tunas Mekar Livestock Group, Musi village, Gerokgak sub-district, Buleleng district, Bali for seven months from February to August 2019. The cattles used were 30 male Bali cattles aged 12 months with an average weight of 151.11 kg.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Research Design</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The design used in this study was a randomized block design (RBD) with 3 (three) feed treatments and 10 replications. The treatments in this study are:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">P0: Group of cattle given forage plus rice bran 1 kg/cattle/day (without waste corn and peanuts),</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">P1: Group of cattle given forage plus 1 kg of concentrate (50% substitution of corn waste and peanut shells),</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">P2: Group of cattle given forage plus 1 kg/cattle/day of concentrate (75% substitution of corn waste and peanut shells).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Feeding consists of 40% king grass </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(Pennisetum purpureum)</span><span class="font4">, 20% gamelina </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(Gmelina arborea Roxb)</span><span class="font4">, 20% “kayu santen”leave </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(Lannea coromandelica Merr)</span><span class="font4"> and 20% gamal </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(Gliricidia sepium)</span><span class="font4">. Concentrate constituents in this study consisted of rice bran, corn waste, peanut shells, mollases and minerals. The feed composition for each treatment group is presented in Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Feeding is given 3 times a day, in the morning, afternoon and evening, while the concentrate is given once a day, every morning before the livestock is given forage feed. The concentrate is given by mixing it with water (wet). Before being given feed treatment, cattle are given antiworm drugs and protozoa to anticipate worm infections in the digestive tract.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The materials and equipment used in the research data collection were in the form of weaning cattle blood, syringes, and tubes containing EDTA anticoagulants. Proximate analysis was carried out at Beef Cattle Research Station in Grati, East Java, and hematology profile testing on the Denpasar Veterinary Center Laboratory using a Hematology Analyzer.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Research Variable</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The variables observed were proximate analysis of rice bran and concentrate made from local raw materials, blood profiles including: hemoglobin (g%), erythrocytes (million/mm3), and hematocrit (%) (PCV or Packed Cell Volume).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The data obtained were tested using analysis of variance (ANOVA) use SPSS 22.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Results</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Proximate analysis of feeds</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">To measure the quality of the additional feed given, a test was carried out on bran</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(group P0) with concentrates made from local raw materials (groups P1 and P2). This test was carried out as a comparison regarding the quality of the feed of each treatment group against the hematological profile. The results of the proximate feed analysis for each treatment are presented in Table 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the results of the proximate analysis, it can be seen that the nutritional content of the feed for each treatment is not much different. This shows that concentrate feed made from local raw materials has almost the same quality as rice bran which is sold commercially. This quality indicates that local feed waste has enormous potential to supporting the provision of sitespecific quality feed at the field level. The potential use of agricultural waste has an economic function in the development of cattle.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Hematology Profile</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The mean results of total erythrocyte examination, hemoglobin levels and hematocrit values of weaning Bali cattles which are given additional feed in the form of bran and concentrate made from local raw materials are presented in Table 3.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Discussion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Erythrocyte and hemoglobin are important components in maintaining the health of ruminants. Erythrocytes and hemoglobin play a role in the transport of nutrients and oxygen for the body’s metabolism (Yanti dkk,2013). Erythrocytes have an average diameter of 5-6 μm in cattle, smaller than in other species. The main function of erythrocytes is to transport the oxygen, which is bound to hemoglobin. Erythropoiesis, which takes about 5 days, is stimulated by erythropoietin and occurs in the bone marrow parenchyma. Cattle erythrocytes have a relatively long life span of 130-160 days (Brockus, 2011): (Wood and Quiroz-Rocha,2010).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">From table 3, it can be seen that the examination of the total erythrocyte mean, hemoglobin level and hematocrit value of weaning Bali cattle which are given</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">additional feed in the form of bran and concentrate made from local raw materials is not statistically significant (P&gt;0.05). This means that the provision of additional feeds in the form of bran and concentrate feed made from local raw materials has no effect on total erythrocytes, hemoglobin levels and the value of hematocrit in Bali cattles. These results indicate that the concentrate made from local raw material has a quality that is not different from rice bran, so it is very feasible to be utilized.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The total erythrocyte of Bali cattle in this study was still in the range of normal values, namely between 6.24 million/mm3 and 6.53 million/mm3. Likewise with hemoglobin levels between 12.10 g/dL to 12.43 g/dL. While the lowest value of hematocrit was 36.77% and the highest was 37.55%. According to Smith and Mangkoewidjojo (1988) total bovine erythrocyte is between 5.8-10.4x106 μl, while the hemoglobin level is between 8.614.4 g/dL, and the value of hematocrit is between 33-47%. Dharmawan (2002) reported that the total normal value of erythrocytes, hemoglobin levels and bovine hematocrit values were 5.0-10.0x106 μl, 8.0-15.0 g/dL, and 24-46.0%, respectively. While Roland et al (2014) reported that the normal range of total bovine erythrocyte was 4.9-10x106 μl, hemoglobin levels were 8.4-14 g/dL, and hematocrit values were 21-38%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Darmawan (2002) states that the factors that affect the number of erythrocyte cells are protein content (amino acids), vitamins B2, B6, B12, folate, thiamin, vitamins C and E, as well as several minerals such as Fe, Cu, Mn, and Co. Measuring the number of erythrocyte cells is an important part of research because erythrocytes are blood cells that have the function of binding and circulating oxygen to all body tissues (Ganong, 2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Hemoglobin</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Blood hemoglobin concentfeed is measured based on color intensity using a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">photometer and expressed in grams of hemoglobin per hundred milliliters of blood (g/100 ml) or grams/deciliter (Arifin, 2013). Based on the analysis of variance, it shows that there is no significant difference between treatments (P&gt;0.05). This is influenced by the protein content in the additional feed between rice bran and concentrates made from local raw materials which are not so different. Hemoglobin levels are influenced by the adequacy of feed, especially protein in the feed and digestibility, apart from age, sex, and type of livestock (Schalm, 1965). According to Schalm (2010) and Komalasari (2014), the high and low levels of hemoglobin depend on the number of erythrocytes, and one of the factors that causes high and low levels of hemoglobin depends on the high and low amount of oxygen in the blood. Frandson (1992) explains that low oxygen content causes an increase in hemoglobin production and the number of erythrocytes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hemoglobin levels in this study ranged from 12.10 + 2.17 g/dl to 12.43 + 1.30 g/dl and were still in the normal range of bovine hemoglobin values between 8-16 g/dl (Banks,1993).Given the very important function of hemoglobin in the body of livestock, the use of concentrate feed made from local raw materials is still very suitable for use as an alternative feed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lack of hemoglobin will lead to reduced oxygenation (oxygen transfer) in the tissue resulting in cyanosis (Duncan and Prase 2011), and hemoglobin is the most important part of erythrocytes which fill one-third of the erythrocyte components after water and stroma (Reece, 2006). The presence of hemoglobin is important in regulating oxygen to body tissues (Jain,1993)and the ability of blood to carry oxygen is produced by hemoglobin levels and the chemical characteristics of hemoglobin (Cunningham, 2002).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Hematokrit (PCV/ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Packed CellVolume</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hematocrit is the percentage of red blood cells in 100 ml of blood. According</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">to Rosadi (2013) in normal animals, the hematocrit is proportional to the number of erythrocytes and hemoglobin levels. The hematocrit value in this study was still below normal. The average hematocrit value in this study ranged from 21.30% -30.03%. However, seen from the results of statistical analysis, the concentfeed of hematocrit showed no significant difference (P&gt;0.05) with the number of hematocrit. According to Guyton and Hall (2006), the normal value of bovine hematocrit is 28% - 32%. Hematocrit values that are far from normal can cause anemia due to the amount of fluid in the total blood. It is further explained that a decrease in the value of the hematocrit can occur due to a decrease in the degree of body activity.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Concentrate made from local raw material has the same quality as rice bran based on the hematological profile. These results indicate that concentrate made from local raw material has the potential as an alternative feed to replace rice bran without affecting the physiological conditions of the cattles.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Suggestion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The use of local raw materials as feed should pay attention to the quality of the ration. Minimum levels of feed rations should contain 12% crude protein.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>DECLAFEED OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The authors would like to thank to Assessment Institute for Agricultural Technology (AIAT) Bali for providing the funding for this study</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Arifin HD. 2013. Profil darah kambing jawarandu pengaruh substitusi atas daun papaya (Caricapapaya Leaf). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Surya Agritama.</span><span class="font4"> 2(1): 96 -104.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Astuti A, Erwanto, Santosa PE. 2015. Pengaruh cara pemberian konsentrat-hijauan terhadap respon fisiologis dan performa sapi peranakan simmental. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">J. Ilmiah Peternakan Terpadu.</span><span class="font4"> 3(4): 201207.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Banks WJ. 1993</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">. Applied Veterinery Histolo</span><span class="font4">gy. Mosby Inc, Texas (US).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Brockus CW. 2011. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Erythrocytes.</span><span class="font4"> In: Duncan and &nbsp;Prasse’s &nbsp;Veterinary</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Laboratory &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Medicine: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clinical</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pathology, ed. Latimer, KS, 5th ed., Pp. 3–44. Wiley, Chichester, UK. Google Scholar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Cunningham JG. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Textbook of Veterinary Physiology</span><span class="font4">. Saunders Company, USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dharmawan NS. 2002. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengantar Patologi Klinik Veteriner Hematologi Klinik</span><span class="font4">. Denpasar: Udayana Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Duncan JR, Prase KW. 2011. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Veterinary Laboratory Medicine</span><span class="font4">. Ame, Iowa Clinical Pathology, The IowaState University Press, USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Fitria L, Sarto M. 2014, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Profil Hematologi Tikus (Rattus norvegicus Berkenhout, 1769) Galur Wistar Jantan dan Betina Umur 4, 6, dan 8 Minggu.</span><span class="font4"> UGM,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Frandson RD. 1992</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">. Anatomi dan Fisiologi Ternak</span><span class="font4">. Edisi ke-4. Terjemahan: B. Srigandono dan Koen Praseno. Gajah Mada University Press. Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ganong WF. 2003. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Review of Medical Physiology.</span><span class="font4"> 21<sup>st</sup> Ed. USA, McGraw Hill. Pp. 669–672.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Guyton AC, Hall JE. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Medical Physiology.</span><span class="font4"> Edisi 11, Jakarta: Penerbit Buku Kedokteran EGC, Terjemahan dari: Review of medical physiology 11th edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ihedioha JI, Ugwuja JI, Noel-Uneke OA, Udeani IJ, Daniel-Igwe G. 2012. Reference values for the haematology profile of conventional grade outbred</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">albino mice (Mus musculus) in Nsukka, Eastern Nigeria. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ARI.</span><span class="font4"> 9(2): 1601-1612.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jain NC. 1993. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Essential of Veterinary Hematology</span><span class="font4">. Lea and Febriger, Philadelphia,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Komalasari L. 2014. Dampak suhu tinggi terhadap respon fisiologis, profil darah dan performa produksi dua bangsa ayam berbeda. [Skripsi]. Sekolah Pascasarjana. Institut Pertanian Bogor. Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kubkomawa IH, Tizhe MA, Emenalom OO, Okoli IC. 2015. Handling, reference value and usefulness of blood biochemichal of indigenous pastoral cattle in tropical: A review. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dynamic J. Anim. Sci. Technol.</span><span class="font4"> 1(2): 18-27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lager K, Jordan E. 2012. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The Metabolic Profile for the Modern Transition Dairy Cow</span><span class="font4">. The &nbsp;Mid-South Ruminant</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nutrition &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conference.Texas,Texas</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Agrilife Extension Service.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Reece WO. 2006. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Functional anatomy and physiology of domestic animals.</span><span class="font4"> 3<sup>rd</sup> Ed. Blackwell Publishing, USA.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rosadi F. 2013. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Profil darah kambing peranakan etawah laktasi yang mendapat ransum dengan berbagai level Indigofera sp. berbentuk pellet</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Skripsi. Fakultas Peternakan, Institut Pertanian Bogor, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Roland L, Drillich M, Iwersen M. 2014. Hematology as A Diagnostic Tool In Bovine Medicine. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Diag. Invest. </span><span class="font4">26(5): 592-598.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Schalm OW. 1965. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Veterinary Hematologi</span><span class="font4">. 6<sup>th</sup> Ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Schalm OW, Carrol EJ, Jain NC. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Veterinary Hematology</span><span class="font4">, 6<sup>th</sup> Edition Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Siregar SB. 2008. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Penggemukan Sapi.</span><span class="font4"> Edisi Revisi. Cetakan XVII. Depok: Penerbit Penebar Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Smith J, Mangkoewidjojo S. 1988. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pemeliharaan, Pembiakan Dan Penggunaan Hewan Percobaan Di Daerah &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tropis</span><span class="font4">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;International</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Development Program of Australian Universities And Colleges.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wood D. Quiroz-Rocha GF. 2010. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Normal Hematology Of Cattle</span><span class="font4">. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">In: Schalm’s Veterinary Hematology, Ed. Weiss,</span><span class="font4"> DJ, Wardrop, KJ, 6<sup>th</sup> Ed., Wiley, Ames, IA. Google Scholar. Pp. 829–835.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Yanti EG, Isroli, Suprayogi TH. 2013. Performans darah kambing peranakan ettawa dara yang diberi ransum dengan tambahan urea yang berbeda. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Anim. Agric. J.</span><span class="font4"> 2(1): 439-444.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table 1. Feed composition in the treatment group</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Composition of feeds</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Treatments</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">P0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">P1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">P2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Rice Bran (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">100,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">50,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">25,00</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Corn Waste (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24,90</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">37,00</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Peanut Skin Waste (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">24,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">36,90</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Molases (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">1,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">1,00</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Mineral (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">0,10</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Total</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">100,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">100,00</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">100,00</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Table 2. Nutritional content of feeds based on proximate analysis in the treatment</span><span class="font4"> group</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Nutritional Content</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Treatments</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">P0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Dry Material (BK) %</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Crude protein (PK) %</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Crude Fat (LK) %</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Crude Fiber (SK) %</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Total Digestible Nutrient (TDN) %</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">93,88 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;94,96 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;89,25</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">8,63 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8,15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8,39</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">7,02 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4,11 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1,08</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">20,87 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;25,61 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;38,09</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">58,30 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;53,87 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;48,00</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Note: Results of Proximate Analysis of Animal Feed Nutrition, Beef Cattle Research Station in Grati, East Java.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table 3 Hematological Profile of Bali cattle given additional feed feeds in the form of bran and concentrate made from local raw materials.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Parameter</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Treatments</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">P0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">P1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">P2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Eritrosit (juta/ mm3)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">6.53 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 1.00<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">6.24 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 0.78<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">6.48 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 0.88<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Hemoglobin (g/ dl)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12.43 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 1.30<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12.17 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 1.50<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">12.10 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 2.17<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">PCV (%)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">37.55 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 3.84<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">36.88 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 3.65<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">36.77 </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">+</span><span class="font4"> 4.35<sup>a</sup></span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Note: Numbers on the same line followed by the same letter (a) indicate in non significant differences (P&gt;0.05).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">439</span></p>