---
layout: full_article
title: "Positive Compliance Strategies About Covid-19 in @raffinagita1717 Caption Instagram"
author: "Irene Pabuntang, Gusnawary Gusnawaty, Kaharruddin Kaharruddin"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91798 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-91798"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91798"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p03"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p03</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Positive Compliance Strategies About Covid-19 in @raffinagita1717 Caption Instagram</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Irene Pabuntang¹, Gusnawaty², Kaharruddin³</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Email: </span><a href="mailto:pabuntang20f@student.unhas.ac.id"><span class="font5">pabuntang20f@student.unhas.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5">Master of Indonesian Language, Faculty of Humanities, Hasanuddin University <sup>1</sup>Email:</span><a href="mailto:gusnawaty@unhas.ac.id"><span class="font5"> </span><span class="font5" style="text-decoration:underline;">gusnawaty@unhas.ac.id</span><span class="font5">,</span></a><span class="font5"> <sup>2</sup>Email: </span><a href="mailto:kaharuddintg@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font5">kaharuddintg@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5"><sup>1,2</sup>Faculty of Humanities, Hasanuddin University</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Abstratc—This study aims to determine positive politeness strategies regarding Covid-19 in the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717. The source of the research data is the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 which discusses Covid-19 by posting from January 1, 2020, to June 30, 2021. The methode of this research is the observation method with the note-taking technique. Listening is done by listening to the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 which discusses Covid-19. After that, record the speech that has been chosen purposively. The results show that the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 which discusses Covid-19 uses positive politeness strategies. The research found four forms of positive politeness strategies, namely paying more attention to the interlocutor, using group intimacy markers, involving speakers and interlocutors in activities, and being optimistic. The form of paying more attention to the interlocutor using the form of a directive speech strategy in the form of attention. As for the form of using group intimacy markers, the strategic form is the use of close calls (bun, kawan, dan teman-teman). The form involves the speaker and the interlocutor in the activity using a strategic form of using exclamation points to invite (ayo, yuk, dan mari). Next, be optimistic using the form of a hope marker strategy (semoga dan bismillah)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness, Positive Politeness Strategy, Instagram Caption @raffinagita1717</span><span class="font5">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak—</span><span class="font5">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui strategi kesantunan positif mengenai Covid-19 dalam caption instagram @raffinagita1717. Sumber data penelitian adalah caption instagram @raffinagita1717 yang membahas mengenai Covid-19 sejak postingan 1 Januari 2020 hingga 30 Juni 2021. Metode yang digunakan adalah metode simak dengan teknik catat. Penyimakan dilakukan dengan cara menyimak caption instagram @raffinagita1717 yang membahas mengenai Covid-19. Setelah itu, mencatat tuturan yang telah dipilih secara purposif. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa caption instagram @raffinagita1717 yang membahas mengenai Covid-19 menggunakan strategi kesantunan positif. Dalam penelitian ditemukan empat wujud strategi kesantunan positif, yaitu memberi perhatian lebih kepada lawan tutur, menggunakan penanda keakraban kelompok, melibatkan penutur dan lawan tutur dalam kegiatan, dan bersikap optimis. Wujud memberi perhatian lebih kepada lawan tutur menggunakan bentuk strategi tuturan direktif yang berwujud perhatian. Adapun wujud menggunakan penanda keakraban kelompok bentuk strateginya ialah penggunaan panggilan akrab (bun, kawan, dan teman-teman). Wujud melibatkan penutur dan lawan tutur dalam kegiatan menggunakan bentuk strategi penggunaan kata seru untuk mengajak (ayo, yuk, dan mari). Selanjutnya, bersikap optimis menggunakan bentuk strategi penanda harapan (semoga dan bismillah).</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Kesantunan, Strategi Kesantunan Positif, Caption Instagram @raffinagita1717</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Social media is a medium used to interact online regardless of age, social status, skin color, religion, race, and so on. According to Kadaruddin (2020:65), social media is an online media that makes it easy for users to conduct social interactions online. One of the social media that is often used today is Instagram social media. Instagram is a visual platform that is used to share images or videos with its audience (Ratnasari, Anggi, and Hannie, 2021:31). Through Instagram, netizens can upload photos or videos related to daily activities or events that are currently viral. Then, the photos and videos can be explained (caption). One of the events currently being hotly discussed on social media Instagram is Covid-19. Covid-19 is a virus that was first detected in Wuhan, China in December 2019 (Compass,2020). Then, the virus began to spread in various countries, including Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The pros and cons of society against Covid-19 can affect the form of news on Instagram. Those who are pro will upload positive things, for example inviting the public to vaccinate. On the other hand, the opposing party will upload negative things, for example making news about dangerous vaccines. As an artist who has many fans, @raffinagita1717 must use polite speech in writing Instagram captions. Captions that use polite speech can be used to help the government deal with Covid-19. Through this caption, @raffinagita1717 can invite the public to continue to comply with health protocols. According to Pramujiono (2011:235), the word polite has the meaning of softening speech or speech that can threaten face or self-esteem and can hurt feelings. This understanding clearly shows that politeness in speaking is very important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Politeness is respecting someone in communicating. Everyone has two faces that must be respected, namely the positive face and the negative face. A positive face is a person's desire to be appreciated and recognized by others. A negative face is a person's desire to be free from having to do something (Brown and Levinson, 1987). Two factors influence politeness in a</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">person. These factors are informal factors and formal factors. Informal factors related to parenting styles and formal factors related to the school environment in a structured manner (Gusnawaty (2021:13-14). Then, Brown and Levinson (1987) divided politeness strategies into five categories, namely without a strategy (bald-on record strategy), positive politeness strategy (positive politeness strategy), negative/formal politeness strategy (negative politeness strategy), indirect/ covered strategy (off-record politeness strategy), and silent strategy (don't FTA). included because they did not perform speech acts. This study will be focused on positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Brown and Levinson (1987) say that positive politeness strategies are used to show intimacy to the interlocutor who is not someone close to the speaker. To facilitate the interaction, the speaker tries to give the impression of having the same fate and seems to have the same desire as the interlocutor, and is considered a shared desire which is wanted together as well. Positive politeness strategies are realized in fifteen ways or actions, namely focusing on the interlocutor, paying more attention, intensifying attention to the interlocutor, using group intimacy markers, finding agreement, avoiding conflict, and equating assumptions into public opinion, joking, adding or agreeing. the opinion of the interlocutor, offering assistance or a promise, being optimistic, involving the speaker and the interlocutor in activities, giving or asking for certain reasons, assuming or displaying similar actions, and giving gifts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Research on language politeness has been previously conducted by Wayan Pageyasa (2015). The research entitled &quot;&nbsp;The Realization of Politeness Principles in Internet Discussions in Three Indonesian Hindu Discussion Groups&quot;. The results of Pageyasa's (2015) research suggest that in the three groups six maxims tend not to be violated, the maxim of humility, the maxim of compatibility, and the maxim of sympathy. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">second relevant research is a study entitled &quot;Politeness Strategy for Talkshow Hosts Kick Andy and Mata Najwa on Metro TV&quot;.The research</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">was conducted by Kumalasari, Rustono, and B. Wahyudi (2018) This study describes the talk show guides Kick Andy and Mata Najwa on Metro TV using four language politeness strategies, namely direct strategies, positive politeness, negative politeness, and indirect strategies. The results showed that the most widely used politeness strategy by the Kick Andy talk show guide was the positive politeness strategy. Positive politeness strategies are used to satisfy the positive face of the interlocutor so that communication between them becomes more polite and communicative.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">This type of research is descriptive qualitative research. Qualitative research is research that can describe in detail the circumstances or symptoms that occur (Koentjaraningrat, 1993:89). This type of research was chosen to describe politeness in language regarding covid-19 in the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717. The population of this research is all Instagram captions @raffinagita regarding Covid-19 uploaded from January 1, 2020, to June 30, 2021. Then the sample of this research is some Instagram captions @raffinagita1717 regarding Covid-19 uploaded from January 1, 2020, to June 30, 2021. The method used is the listen method with the note-taking technique. Listening is done by listening to the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 which discusses Covid-19. After that, record the speech that has been chosen purposively. Then, the data analysis techniques in this study, namely (1) collecting all the recorded data, (2) classifying the data based on Brown and Levinson's politeness strategies, (3) analyzing the data, (4) concluding the data that explains language politeness strategies regarding Covid -19 in the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The results showed that the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 used positive politeness strategies. In the caption, four forms were found, namely paying more attention to the interlocutor,</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">using group intimacy markers, involving speakers and interlocutors in activities, and being optimistic. Here's the explanation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Paying More Attention to the Interlocutor</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The caption in the form of giving more attention to the interlocutor is used by @raffinagita1717 to show his concern for the netizen (the interlocutor) regarding the spread of Covid-19. More attention given through the caption is expected to make the netizens feel cared for so that the purpose of the caption can be conveyed. In addition, this extra attention is also one way to help the government deal with the spread of Covid-19. The form of the positive politeness strategy used by @raffinagita1717 can be seen in the following data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Data (1)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on April 16, 2021 .</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: &nbsp;&nbsp;No Homecoming, Guys ! ! ! ! ! !</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Starting May 6-17 May 2021 &quot;Dirlantas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PMJ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kombespol</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Sambodo&quot; . For our common good.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In data (1), it is clear that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of giving more attention to the interlocutor. This extra attention is indicated by the sentence &quot;No Homecoming, Guys ! !! ! ! ! For our common good&quot;. The sentence is a directive speech that functions to influence the interlocutor to take action. The speaker wants the interlocutor not to go home so that the spread of Covid-19 does not increase. Another example of data that shows more attention to the interlocutor looks like the following.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Data (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on March 23, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: The pandemic isn't over yet. Do not be careless. Continue to protect yourself, and protect your family by always obeying health protocols. Support your favorite basketball team from home! Come on, let's #takecareofeachother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In data (2), it can be seen that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of paying more attention to the interlocutor. This more attention is indicated by the sentence &quot;continue to protect yourself, protect your family by always obeying health protocols &quot;. The sentence is a directive speech that functions to influence the interlocutor to take action. The speaker wants the interlocutor to maintain the health of himself and his family by obeying health protocols to avoid Covid-19. The form of more attention that @raffinagita1717 does can also be seen in the following example.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data (3)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on February 3, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: &nbsp;Mass vaccination for health</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">workers in DKI Jakarta REOPEN 4 FEBRUARY 2021! Don't waste it, ok? Are you a health worker who works at the DKI Jakarta Health Facility but haven't been vaccinated yet? The Indonesian Ministry of Health and the DKI Jakarta Health Office held a MASS VACCINATION FOR HEALTH PERSONNEL! This is for the first dose of injection yes! Keep up the health &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;protocols!</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">#greetingshealthy. See you soon!</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">In data (3) it is clear that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of paying more attention to the interlocutor. This more attention is shown in the sentence &quot;mass vaccination for health workers. Don't waste it.&quot; The attention sentence is a directive sentence that functions to influence the interlocutor to take action. The speaker wants the interlocutor to be vaccinated to avoid Covid-19.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Using Group Familiarity Markers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">Using familiarity markers in communicating aims to make the relationship between the interlocutor and the speaker closer even though they do not know each other. This was also done by @raffinagita1717 in the caption he made. The speaker wants him and the netizen (the interlocutor) to feel close. The social status @raffinagita1717 is a famous artist and an interlocutor is an ordinary person. Speakers want to lower their social status so that they are equal or like friends with the interlocutor. In addition, the marker of intimacy can also create harmonious communication so that the caption message can be conveyed. The following is an example of @raffinagita1717's caption data using a familiarity marker.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Data (4)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on 28 June 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: &nbsp;Hopefully this pandemic will</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">subside soon and we can all return to normal activities, as usual, bun? I hope everyone stays healthy too. Don't forget to always wear a mask and apply health protocols wherever and whenever.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Data (4) it is clear that @raffinagita1717 uses group intimacy markers to create a close relationship or there is no social distance between the speaker and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">interlocutor. The sign of the group's intimacy is marked by the word &quot;bun&quot;. Hai. grid.id (2021) states that the call bun which means mother was originally a greeting to a mother or a woman who already has children. However, now it is a call to other people that accompanies the sentence, both male and female. In this day and age, the bund is a sign of intimacy that is often used by millennials. The use of familiarity markers is done so that the interlocutor obeys the speaker's wishes to continue to follow health protocols to avoid Covid-19. Examples of data that also show the use of familiarity markers are shown below.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data (5)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on May 3, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Kawan</span><span class="font5">, no one knows when this pandemic will end. What will happen after the PSBB is over, will we go back to how we used to be, or will everything change? What is certain is that at this time we all continue to maintain our health by diligently washing our hands, wearing masks, keeping our distance, and exercising regularly. Don't forget to variety. Remember guys, the storm will pass.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Data (5) shows that @raffinagita1717 uses familiarity markers in the captions he makes. The marker of intimacy is shown in the word &quot;kawan&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016), kawan are people who have been known for a long time and often relate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;certain &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;things. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">understanding shows that the speaker wants to reduce his social status as an artist so that he looks equal to a friend to the interlocutor even though they do not know each other before. The use of</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">familiarity markers is intended so that the interlocutor maintains health protocols by using masks, washing hands, and exercising diligently to prevent the transmission of Covid-19. In addition to the sample data, the use of familiarity markers is also seen in the following data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data (6)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on March 24, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: BOX food that will be distributed to medical personnel at Jogja and Solo Hospital..next week we will distribute it. And for </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">teman-teman</span><span class="font5">, who &nbsp;have participated,</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">thank you for your participation. I will continue &nbsp;to report on this</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">development. &nbsp;Insha Allah, the</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">assistance will be distributed in the right portions and needs. Please</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">enter it back to us. link in bio for those who want to participate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Data (6) clearly shows that speakers use group intimacy markers to create close relationships. The marker of intimacy is indicated by the word &quot;teman-teman&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016), teman-teman is someone who does something together. In this data, friends experience a complete reduplication which means many people. This shows that the speaker wants to create a harmonious relationship with the crowd. The use of familiarity marker in the data is used to express gratitude to the interlocutor who has helped provide food to health workers in helping to deal with Covid-19. In addition, the marker of intimacy is also a form of the speaker's gratitude to the interlocutor who has participated.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Involving Speakers and Opponents in Activities</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">A tangible positive politeness strategy involving the speaker and the interlocutor in the activity is a way to show that the speaker wants to build a close relationship with the interlocutor even though they do not know each other before. The caption made by @raffinagita1717 shows that he involves the interlocutor in an activity so that there is no distance between the two parties. The following is an example of positive politeness from data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Data (7)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on January 13, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: Alhamdulillah, today is the Prime Vaccine with Pak Jokowi. Thank you for your trust in Beloved Indonesia, </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Ayo </span><span class="font5">Vaccine. Come on, don't be afraid of vaccines guys!!! May we always be healthy and the evil Covid virus will disappear from this Earth and Indonesia if you have the vaccine, still obey the health protocols on January 13, 2021.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data (7) shows that @raffinagita invites the interlocutor to do the vaccine together. The invitation is marked with the word &quot;ayo&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016), it is an exclamation to invite or give encouragement. In the caption, he tried to involve himself and his interlocutor to carry out a vaccine to avoid Covid-19. In addition, the invitation is one way to help the government in dealing with the spread of Covid-19. Captions containing invitations can also be seen in the following data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Data (8)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita to a netizen on May 14, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: Hi guys, it's been more than a month, isn't it PSBB? Are you sure bored? </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Yuk </span><span class="font5">stop the spread of the coronavirus by always remembering &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;#stopstopser &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stop</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">wandering, stop close and wash your hands frequently.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">From the data (8) it is clear that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">involving speakers and interlocutors in activities. The form of the strategy is marked with the word &quot;yuk&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016), yuk is an exclamation point to invite. The speaker wants to invite the interlocutor to jointly implement health protocols by not wandering, maintaining distance, and washing hands frequently to avoid Covid-19. The call to action can also help the government deal with Covid-19. In addition to these two examples, posts that are in the form of invitations are also seen in the following data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Data (9)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on 19 May 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: Sign Language &quot;Respect&quot;. Cheers to all my friends. </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Mari </span><span class="font5">encourage the medical staff as the front line in fighting the COVID-19 virus by participating in the #ThanksChallenge! The meaning of the movement: is to encourage by expressing our gratitude by giving respect to medical staff.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data (9) shows that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of involving speakers and interlocutors in activities. The form of the strategy is marked by the word &quot;mari&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016), mari is an interjection to express an invitation. The speaker wants to invite the interlocutor together to encourage medical personnel who have handled Covid-19. This enthusiasm can make health workers more active in dealing with the increasing number of Covid-19 cases.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Be Optimistic</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">In the online version of the KBBI (2016), optimists are people who always have good hopes (views) in dealing with everything. Optimism is very necessary for communication. This can be a sign that the speaker is trying to build a close relationship by always having a good view. The caption made by @raffinagita1717 also shows an optimistic attitude in dealing with Covid-19. The speaker wants to build an optimistic attitude</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">towards the interlocutor so that it can affect the body's immune system by always thinking positively. This optimistic attitude shows that there is no distance between the two speakers. In addition, an optimistic attitude can also make the speaker and the interlocutor seem to have a common desire that must be resolved together as well. The following is an example of optimistic attitude data conducted by @raffinagita1717.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Data (10)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to a netizen on September 13, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: &nbsp;Nagita is nervous about taking a</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">SWAB??? Don't worry, as long as there is @swabaja, you can contact them directly. </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Bismillah</span><span class="font5">, everyone is healthy and kept away from evil viruses.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Data (10) shows that @raffinagita1717 uses positive politeness strategies in the form of an optimistic attitude. This optimistic attitude is marked by the word &quot;Bismillah&quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016) bismillah is to say the name of Allah that is said when you are about to start doing something. The word &quot;Bismillah&quot; is used by @raffinagita1717 before saying &quot;all are healthy and kept away from evil viruses&quot;. This means that the speaker hopes that the interlocutor is also healthy and kept away from Covid-19. This shows that hope is a shared desire that is desired together. The following is an example of optimistic attitude data by @raffinagita1717.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>Data (11)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to netizens on May 16, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: Good morning to all... </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">May </span><span class="font5">our beloved erath recover soon.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data (11) shows that @raffinagita is optimistic about dealing with Covid-19. This optimistic attitude is indicated by the word &quot;may&quot;. The online version of the KBBI (2016) hopefully is or should. This means hope for events that will happen in the future. The speaker hopes that Covid-19 will soon end in the world (earth). This hope can make the</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">interlocutor also be optimized so that the impression of the same fate is created. This optimistic attitude can also be seen in the following data.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>Data (12)</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Context: spoken by @raffinagita1717 to citizens on March 29, 2020.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Speech: Face it With a Smile. </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Semoga </span><span class="font5">all the bad things pass quickly, we are all given health, long life, and happiness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">The data (12) shows that @raffinagita1717 has an attitude towards Covid-19. This optimistic attitude is indicated by the word &quot;Semoga &quot;. In the online version of the KBBI (2016) optimism is hopefully or should. The speaker hopes that he and his interlocutor will be kept away from bad things (Covid-19) and given a long life and happiness. This optimistic attitude shows that Covid-19 is a common problem that must be resolved together as well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">Table Positive Politeness Strategies in Captions Instagram @raffinagita1717</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Positive Politeness Strategy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Strategy Form</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Function</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Data Number</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Give more attention to the interlocutor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Directive speech in the form of attention</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Shortening the distance or creating familiarity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">1,2,3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Using group familiarity markers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Using close calls (bun, kawan, dan teman-teman)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Shortening the distance or creating familiarity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4,5,6</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Involving speakers and interlocutors in activities</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Using exclamation points to invite (ayo, yuk, dan mari)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Shortening the distance or creating familiarity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">7,8,9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Be optimistic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Using hope markers (semoga dan bismillah)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Shortening the distance or creating familiarity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">10,11,12</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark38"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark39"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">The results showed that the Instagram caption @raffinagita1717 used positive politeness strategies. The research found four forms of positive politeness strategies. The four forms,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">namely paying more attention to the interlocutor, using markers of group intimacy, involving speakers and interlocutors in activities, and being optimistic. The form of paying more attention to the interlocutor using the form of a directive speech strategy in the form of attention. As for the form of using group intimacy markers, the strategic form is the use of close calls (bun, kawan, dan teman-teman). The form involves the speaker and the interlocutor in the activity using a strategic form of using exclamation points to invite (ayo, yuk, dan mari). Next, be optimistic using the form of a hope marker strategy (semoga dan bismillah</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark40"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark41"></a>5. References</span></h2>
<p><span class="font5">Brown, Penelope dan Stephen Levinson. 1987. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: Some Universals In Language Usage</span><span class="font5">. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Gusnawaty. 2021. Kesantunan </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">dan Konsep Hubungan Sosial dalam Bahasa Bugis: Revitalisasi Lokal Persfektif Global</span><span class="font5">. Makassar: Unhas Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Hai.grid.id. 2021. “Asal Usul dan Maksud Kata Bund yang Sering Muncul di Medsos”. Diakses &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;melalui</span></p>
<p><a href="https://hai.grid.id/read/072572347/asal-usul-dan-maksud-kata-bund-yang-sering-muncul-di-medsos"><span class="font5">https://hai.grid.id/read/072572347/asal-usul-</span></a><span class="font5"></span><a href="https://hai.grid.id/read/072572347/asal-usul-dan-maksud-kata-bund-yang-sering-muncul-di-medsos"><span class="font5">dan-maksud-kata-bund-yang-sering-muncul-</span></a><span class="font5"></span><a href="https://hai.grid.id/read/072572347/asal-usul-dan-maksud-kata-bund-yang-sering-muncul-di-medsos"><span class="font5">di-medsos.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5">Kadarudin. 2020. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cerdas Bermedia Sosial Dari Kaca Mata Hukum Dr. Kadarudin</span><span class="font5">. Semarang: CV. Pilar Nusantara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">KBBI. 2016. “Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia Daring”. Diakses melalui https: //kbbi.kemdi kbud.go.id.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Kompas. 2020. “Timeline Wabah Virus Corona, Terdeteksi pada Desember 2019 Hingga jadi Pandemi &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Global”. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Diakses &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dari</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.kompas.com/tren/re%20ad/2020/03/12/113008565/timeline-wabah-virus-corona-terdeteksi-pada%20desember-2019-hingga-jadi?page=all"><span class="font5">https://www.kompas.com/tren/re</span></a><span class="font5"> </span><a href="https://www.kompas.com/tren/re%20ad/2020/03/12/113008565/timeline-wabah-virus-corona-terdeteksi-pada%20desember-2019-hingga-jadi?page=all"><span class="font5">ad/2020/03/12/113008565/timeline-wabah-</span></a><span class="font5"></span><a href="https://www.kompas.com/tren/re%20ad/2020/03/12/113008565/timeline-wabah-virus-corona-terdeteksi-pada%20desember-2019-hingga-jadi?page=all"><span class="font5">virus-corona-terdeteksi-pada desember-2019-</span></a><span class="font5"></span><a href="https://www.kompas.com/tren/re%20ad/2020/03/12/113008565/timeline-wabah-virus-corona-terdeteksi-pada%20desember-2019-hingga-jadi?page=all"><span class="font5">hingga-jadi?page=all</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font5">Koentjaraningrat. 1993. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Metode-metode Penelitian Masyarakat</span><span class="font5">. Jakarta: PT Gramedia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Kumalasari, Mei Anjar; Rustono; dan B. Wahyudi Joko Santoso. 2018. “Strategi Kesantunan Pemandu Acara Talkshow Kick Andy dan Mata Najwa di Metro Tv”. Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia.Vol. 3, No.1. Hal. 34—43</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Pageyasa, Wayan. 2015. &quot;Realisasi Prinsip Kesantunan dalam Diskusi Internet di Tiga Grup</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Diskusi Hindu Indonesia”. BAHTERA: Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra. Vol. 14, No.1. Hal. 81- 89.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Pramujiono, Agung. 2011. “Representasi Kesantunan Brown dan Levinson dalam Wacana Dialog di Televisi”. Bahastra. Vol. 3, No. 22. Hal. 43--71.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Ratnasari, Ina; Anggi Pasca Arnu; dan Hannie. 2021. Digital Marketing pada Start Up dan UMKM: &nbsp;Praktik Melakukan Pemasaran</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Berbasis Digital Menuju UMKM Tangguh, Kompetitif, dan Unggul DI Era Revolusi Industri 4.0.Yogyakarta: Absolute Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">108</span></p>