---
layout: full_article
title: "Language Mixing in an Indonesian-Balinese Simultaneous  Bilingual Child"
author: "Ni Luh Devi Wimayanti, Ni Luh Putu Sri Adnyani, Ni Komang Arie Suwastini"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91799 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-91799"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91799"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p04"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Language Mixing in an Indonesian-Balinese Simultaneous Bilingual Child</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Ni Luh Devi Wimayanti<sup>1</sup>, Ni Luh Putu Sri Adnyani<sup>2*</sup>, Ni Komang Arie Suwastini<sup>3 123</sup>Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha</span></p>
<p><a href="mailto:niluhdeviwimayanti@gmail.com1"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">niluhdeviwimayanti@gmail.com<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font3">,</span></a><a href="mailto:sri.adnyani@undiksha.ac.id2"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">sri.adnyani@undiksha.ac.id<sup>2</sup></span><span class="font3">,</span></a><a href="mailto:arie.suwastini@undiksha.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">arie.suwastini@undiksha.ac.id</span><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup></span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstract--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">When children get regular and continual exposure to two or more languages, they can develop the competence to use those languages. However, the languages used by the children may include mixing, where features of different languages converge in single language use. The present research investigates the speech of a three-year-old child exposed to Indonesian and Balinese since birth. The study focused on analyzing the language mixing produced by the child. The child was observed for three months. The child was exposed to Indonesian by the parents and Balinese by grandparents and other extended family members. They all lived in the same compound. In collecting the data, diary notes were used, supplemented with video recordings. The result shows that language mixing occurred when the child substituted content words, phrases, and function words in both languages. The language mixing happens due to the salient of the words, the frequent use of the words or phrases in the child's environment, the availability of mixing in the input, and an effort to emphasize meaning. Pragmatically, the result shows that the child can use the two languages appropriately with different interlocutors.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">– language mixing, Indonesian-Balinese, bilingual child</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ketika seorang anak mendapatkan paparan dua atau lebih bahasa secara teratur dan terus-menerus, mereka memiliki kompetensi untuk menggunakan bahasa-bahasa tersebut. Namun, penggunaan bahasa dapat mencakup pencampuran, di mana fitur dari satu bahasa digunakan dalam ujaran bahasa lainnya. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menginvestigasi tuturan anak usia tiga tahun yang diekspos dalam bahasa Indonesia dan Bali sejak lahir. Penelitian difokuskan pada analisis pencampuran bahasa yang dihasilkan oleh anak. Anak diamati selama tiga bulan. Anak diekspos dalam bahasa Indonesia oleh orang tuanya dan bahasa Bali oleh kakek-nenek serta anggota keluarga besar lainnya. Keluarga besar tinggal di kompleks yang sama. Dalam pengumpulan data digunakan catatan harian yang dilengkapi dengan rekaman video. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa pencampuran bahasa terjadi ketika anak mengganti kata-kata konten, frasa, maupun kata-kata tugas dalam kedua bahasa tersebut. Adapun alasan terjadinya percampuran bahasa, yakni istilah yang lebih kentara dalam satu bahasa, frequensi penggunaan kata, percampuran dilakukan oleh orang sekitar, dan penekanan makna. Secara pragmatis, hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa anak dapat menggunakan dua bahasa secara tepat dengan lawan bicara yang berbeda.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Kata kunci </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">– percampuran bahasa, anak bilingual, Indonesia-Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Studies in bilingual children's linguistics' development portray the early circumstances of language production, which is the combination of constituents from every language (Riksem, 2017; Rubin &amp;&nbsp;Toribio, 1996). Researches show that parents guide children's attitudes and play a huge role in raising a bilingual (Hakuta &amp;&nbsp;D' Andrea, 1992; Nakamura, 2019). Parents are believed to foster the children into bilinguals. In a bilingual society, language mixing is a common phenomenon. It characterizes bilingual speakers from monolinguals (Alexiadou &amp;&nbsp;Lohndal, 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meisel (2007) states that language mixing is common in bilingual and multilingual communities. People will be categorized to intend language mixing when a word or an utterance of language A contains the elements of language B (Cantone, 2007). MacSwan (2006) defines language mixing as the production of speech combining lexical items and grammatical features of languages in one utterance. Grammars are assumed to be tightly integrated into the speaker's mind and adapt from one language to another. It can be seen from the blend of two languages, called word-inner level, in a common context. As a result, the question of what the lowest components of language mixing are increased.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Furthermore, language mixing is the act and ability to mix two or more languages in a conversation (Wehler, 2016). Language mixing is unpredictable. Some people may switch their language in a conversation, in a full sentence, or maybe in a single sentence. It happens almost consciously and unconsciously. The factors that might affect the code-switching act are the speaker, the audience, the context, and the speakers' relation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">It was strongly believed that the human brain, especially children's, shall be confused by</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">learning several languages (Jernigan, 2015). However, this myth is not supported by evidence, research, health professionals, or educators. Cognitive control is the part that supports the development of the ability in language mixing, either in bilingual adults or children, has been studied in recent research (Gross &amp;&nbsp;Kaushanskaya, 2015). Meanwhile, other research shows that bilingualism prevents cognitive decline in older age (Bialystok, 2017; Grundy &amp;&nbsp;Anderson, 2017). Various researches have shown that bilingual children have better cognitive development in tasks and can see the matter from different perspectives (Garraffa et al., 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Language mixing does not serve any pragmatic purpose and is considered the same as code-switching and code-mixing (Doğruöz et al., 2021). Concerning parental discourse strategies, the strategy of one-person-one-language appears to give input in the various patterns in developing a child's linguistic mixed utterances in many ways (Juan-Garau &amp;&nbsp;Perez-Vidal, 2001). This strategy of one-person-one-language has become a popular object of child language development studies for many years (Adnyani et al., 2018; Purniawati et al., 2019; Yip &amp;&nbsp;Matthews, 2000). Meisel (1994) claims that bilinguals can differentiate two languages from a very young age, even children. Between the ages of 2 and 3 years, the language mixing frequency shall be decreased (Genesee, 1989; Koppe, 1996). It happens due to children acquiring more lexical and grammatical knowledge. Many simultaneous bilingual language developments have been observed where the strategies used were one-parent-one language. Cases, where bilingual children are raised in one language by the parents and the other by extended family members have rarely been conducted. Therefore, this study focuses on the language mixing that happened to a three-year-old child</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exposed to the bilingual environment of Bahasa Indonesia and Balinese Language. Bahasa Indonesia is exposed by the parents, and Balinese by the extended family members such as the grandmother, the grandfather, the aunties, and other relatives.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>Participants and Linguistic Environments</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This research is a case study of a child using Balinese and Indonesian languages, which is observed using longitudinal observational data. The child lives with his family and extended family members in Bali. Two housekeepers also live with them. The parents used Indonesian dominantly to the child. The parents speak Balinese to one another. The extended family members, however, spoke Balinese mostly. One of the housekeepers communicates with the child in Indonesian, and the other housekeeper communicates in Balinese with the child.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">The Data Collection</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data was collected for three months and followed the child between 3;3 (39 months) and 3;6 (42 months). The data was collected from conversational text or speech based on spontaneous interactions amongst family members in daily notes and video recordings of the interactions and conversations in unset situations, mostly in the house environment. The parents converse with the child using Indonesian while the extended family members speak Balinese. The child's language use was observed daily. The videos were taken at a minimum one-hour recording every week.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Transcription and analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The speech produced by the child was segmented based on utterances, Balinese and Indonesian. Esposito &amp;&nbsp;Aversano (2004) and Gilbert et al. (2021) used this method of segmenting speech to provide automatic speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">recognition in their study about bilingual development. Based on the data, 381 utterances were collected in Indonesian and 142 in Balinese. The data was transcribed orthographically. Moreover, every utterance produced by the child was accompanied by a contextual description and explanation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finding and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">As indicated, this study focuses on the language mixing on simultaneous bilingualism. According to Mayers-Scotton (2006), bilingual child language acquisition is the acquisition of two or more languages at a young age. Meisel (1989) proposed that bilingual first language acquisition refers to children who grow up hearing two languages from the time they are born. In this study, the child hears Balinese and Indonesian since birth in the family environment.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finding</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">As previously mentioned, the data was analyzed by segmenting the child's speech. Every utterance in both Balinese and Indonesian is recorded. Utterances that contain mixing are coded. The findings are shown in the following excerpts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Mixing of Indonesian Elements in Balinese Utterances</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">#1 The conversation between the grandmother and the child</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maem ape</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What did you eat?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Maem be taluh jak yam kal</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘I ate an egg and grilled chicken.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother: A</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">yam ape</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What chicken?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ayam bakar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Grilled chicken’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ooh, Ayam bakar. Dije meli</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Ooh, grilled chicken. Where did you buy it?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Di Warung Ayu</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘At Warung Ayu.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pidan meli? Ajak nyen</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘When did you buy it? With whom?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Petengne, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">isana </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beli</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘In the evening, I bought it there.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Excerpt #1 shows the language mixing in the conversation between the child and the grandmother, whose native language is Balinese. The topic of the conversation was the meal that was had by the child that night. In the conversation, it can be seen that the child inserted the Indonesian phrase [yam kal] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ayam bakar </span><span class="font3">'grilled chicken' into the Balinese conversation initiated by the grandmother. Besides, the child also mixed the Indonesian words [isana] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">di sana </span><span class="font3">'there' and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">beli</span><span class="font3"> 'to buy.' The child mixed the Indonesian words or phrases into Balinese utterances to tell the common object known in Indonesian words rather than Balinese. The child used the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ayam bakar</span><span class="font3"> might be that the child does not know the corresponding phrase in Balinese </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">be siap metunu/be siap mepanggang</span><span class="font3">. Another reason can be that </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ayam bakar</span><span class="font3"> in Indonesian is more frequently used in the child's environment. Thus, the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ayam bakar</span><span class="font3"> is more salient in the child's linguistic environment. This finding corroborates the previous study by Grimstad et al. (2018) and Goral et al. (2019), which found that language mixing happened to emphasize the lexical item in the other language used by the speakers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a># 2 The conversation between the great grandmother and the child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Engken batis umpik to</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What happened to great grandmother's foot?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Great grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Batis pik kene tiuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘My foot was cut by a knife.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Getih to</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Is that blood?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Great grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ae. Nak metatu kan pesu getihne ye</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Yes. The foot is cut, so it is bleeding.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Be misi obat to Umpik</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Have you put medicine on it, Great grand?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Great grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ne be misi lidah buaya </span><span class="font3">‘I put aloe vera on it already.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Banyak </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">misi </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lidah buaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That is a lot of aloe vera added.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation happened when the child’s great-grandmother accidentally got her foot cut. The main language used was Balinese. The Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">obat</span><span class="font3"> 'medicine' was inserted into the Balinese utterance in the conversation. Another mixing was found in the use of the Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">banyak</span><span class="font3"> 'much'. The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lidah buaya </span><span class="font3">happens to be Indonesian and Balinese words to refer to 'aloe vera'. The reason of the mixing is because the child is more salient with the Indonesian word to say the object and also the fact that the great-grandmother was using the same word to refer the same object previously before the child did. Yip (2013) found that it is common for the parents in this case the great-grandmother, to language mixing their utterance even though they were intentionally used only one language at a time. Language mixing could be unavoidable.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a># 3 The Conversation Between GrandfatherChild</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Nyen lah to </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">motornya </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kakek</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Who owns that motor, Grandpa?’ Grandfather: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To madan MotoGP</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That is called MotoGp.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Obing </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ape to kakek</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What kind of car is that, grandpa?’ Grandfather: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To mobil patroli adanne</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That’s called a patrol car.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Siapa </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lah </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">obingnya itu</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Who owns that car?’ Grandfather: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">To nak di TV to lahen</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That belongs to the person in that TV.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This conversation occurred when the child watched MotoGP on the TV with his grandfather. In the conversation, the language used by the child when talking to the grandfather was Balinese, yet the child switched the word from Balinese to Indonesian in the middle of the conversation. The child used the word [obing] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mobil</span><span class="font3"> 'car', an Indonesian word in Balinese utterance to point the object car. Besides, the child mixed the Balinese utterance with the Indonesian word by saying the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">siapa</span><span class="font3"> 'who', and </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">itu</span><span class="font3"> 'that.' The Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">siapa</span><span class="font3"> was inserted in the Balinese utterance to ask for the ownership of a certain object, that was a car. The word [lah] is a Balinese word, a shortened form of the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ngelah</span><span class="font3"> 'have/own.' Thus, the Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">siapa</span><span class="font3"> is combined with </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ngelah</span><span class="font3"> 'to have' in Balinese to utter who owns.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a># 4 The conversation between grandmother – child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mamak! Orin </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">masuk </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kuluk nek</span><span class="font3">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Mama! Tell the dog to get in, Grandma!’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Masuk kije orin kuluke</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Where do you want the dog to get into?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Keme orin kuluk e </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">masuk</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kandang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ditu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Tell the dog to get into the cage there.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sing engken John. Be peteng masih jani. Pang ye disisian ‘</span><span class="font3">That is okay, John. It is already night. Let him be outside.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Uujan belus nyen </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">itu </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kuluk</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">‘</span><span class="font3">It is raining. The dog will get wet.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kan bise ye be meneken ke bale e</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">‘</span><span class="font3">He can come up to the house then.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation happened when the child saw his dog was outside the cage one evening while it was raining. Some language mixings happened in this excerpt #4. First, the language mixing happened where the child mixed the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Balinese utterance with the Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">masuk </span><span class="font3">'to get in.' Second, the language mixing of Indonesian phrases could be seen from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">masuk kandang</span><span class="font3"> ‘get into the cage’. The language mixing also happened in the sentence &quot;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">uujan belus nyen itu kuluknya”</span><span class="font3">. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">itu</span><span class="font3"> 'that' is used to point to something in Indonesian. Although the conversation was in Balinese, the child switched the language in the middle of the conversation between the grandmother and the child.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Moreover, there was a mix of the Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kuluk</span><span class="font3"> 'dog' with the Indonesian suffix -</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nya </span><span class="font3">(possessive) in the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kuluknya</span><span class="font3"> 'the dog.' The child might mix languages because he knows that his grandmother could understand his utterance despite being in Indonesian or Balinese. It deals with the listener's perceptions of the conversation (Gonzales et al., 2019).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a># 5 The conversation between grandfather – child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Grandfather : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Adah! John ne! Metulihen nak e John yen kel nendang</span><span class="font3">!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Adah! John! Please have a look, John, if you want to kick the ball!’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hahaha</span><span class="font3"> (laughing)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandfather : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yih kok kedek John orin kakek?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kene murai nyen, opak je John ajak Bapak John-ne!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Yih, why did you laugh, John, when I told you that? What if the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">murai</span><span class="font3"> got hitten, you would be scolded by your father John!’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sing ngopak Bapak kek. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ndak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boleh </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ngopak Bapake</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘He is not angry, Grandfather. He is not allowed to be angry, my father’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandfather : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Nah makane de ngawag nendang bola</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Therefore, do not kick the ball carelessly.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation happened between the child and his grandfather when he played with a soccer</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ball in the middle of the house's yard. The child kicked the ball randomly, and it almost hit the bird's cage at the house. The child's grandfather tried to warn him not to kick randomly, or else the birds' cage might get hit that time, and the child would get scolded by his father. The language mixing happened in the child's utterance of excerpt #5, of which the child mixed the Indonesian phrase in Balinese utterance. The child said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ndak boleh ngopak Bapak</span><span class="font3"> 'He is not allowed to be angry, my father.' The phrase '</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ndak boleh’</span><span class="font3"> is 'not allowed’ in Indonesian. The child switched his language from Balinese to Indonesian even though he spoke in Balinese with his grandfather. The reason for the mixing of the language is to emphasize the meaning of the idea to his grandfather. Similar to this finding is the study conducted by Riksem et al. (2019) about the American-Norwegian language mixing found the probability of the mixing due to the need to emphasize the idea of an utterance in the other language.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a># 6 The conversation between grandmother – child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John minum obat malu ajak nenek nyak John?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘John, will you drink your medicine with me, John?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ndak mau, Nenek</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. John sing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nyak </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">minum obat </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ajak nenek</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'I do not want to, grandmother. I don't want to drink the medicine with you'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yih men terus sing nyak minum obat kan sing seger-seger John nyen. Nyak ajak mama minum obat nah?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Yih, if you keep saying no to drink your medicine, you will not be healthy, John. Drink it with your mother, okay?'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">John mau sama mama minum</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">obat</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Sing </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mau </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ajak nenek </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">minum obat.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'John wants to drink the medicine with mother. I don't</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">want to drink it with grandmother.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grandmother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Nah ajak mama se minum obat nae.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'Okay. Please drink the medicine with your mother then.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This conversation happened between the child and the grandmother when the child was ill of cough and flu. He needed to drink the medicine, but he refused to drink it with his grandmother and preferred to have it with his mother instead. The child said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ndak mau nenek</span><span class="font3"> ‘I don't want it, grandmother’ to refuse his grandmother's offer. It was an Indonesian statement that occurred in the conversation of the Balinese language. Besides, the child said </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John mau sama mama minum obat, </span><span class="font3">which means he wants to drink the medicine with his mother in a full Indonesian utterance. However, the next utterance was followed by a Balinese utterance</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, 'John sing nyak minum obat ajak nenek </span><span class="font3">‘John does not want to drink the medicine with grandmother’. The verb phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">minum obat</span><span class="font3"> are the Indonesian to say 'drink the medicine.' In this situation, the phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">minum obat</span><span class="font3"> is used in Balinese utterance. People usually do not change the language into Balinese even though they are talking in Balinese linguistic environment. Riksem et al. (2019) found an indication of bilinguals to insert the verbs and nouns of the other language to the other language because of the common sense of using the language in a social environment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Mixing of Balinese Elements in Indonesian Utterances</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"># 7 The conversation between mother-child</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mau beli ini</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'I want to buy this.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dimana mau beli?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Where do you want to buy it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Ditu </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">di Badung beli</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘There, buy it in Badung.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sama siapa kesana?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Whom will you go with?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sama Mama, bapak, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ajak </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Nenek.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'With mother, father, and grandma.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred when the child saw his aunt's eyes-blindfold in his aunt's bedroom. Two language mixings occurred in the conversation. The child mixed Indonesian with Balinese to indicate where he wanted to buy the blindfold. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ditu</span><span class="font3"> is a Balinese word to say 'there', and the rest of the sentence is Indonesian. Besides, the child inserted the Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ajak</span><span class="font3"> 'and' to connect the sentence. The mixes happened directly and subconsciously done by the child. The language mixing was that the child lacked vocabulary knowledge in Indonesian to say prepositions. According to Montanari et al. (2019), this is the usage of language mixing to fill the utterance's vocabulary gaps.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a># 8 The conversation between Mother-Child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ma, mau yang ini ya. Mau beli</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(pointing at his mother’s earing) 'Ma, I want this, okay. I want to buy this.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ndak boleh dong! John kan cowo, ganteng. Kalo mama cantik, pakai anting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Of course not! John, you are a boy, handsome. Mama is beautiful, so I wear earrings.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mau beli gelang buat </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boong</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">-nya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'I want to buy a bracelet for the neck.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Itu kalung namanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'That is called necklace.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ndak. Gelang itu, kalung buat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">boong</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nya</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'No. that is a bracelet, the necklace is for the neck.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation between the child and his mother happened when the child tried to ask his mother to buy a necklace for him, mistakenly saying different things to refer to the necklace. The child started the sentence by using the Indonesian language and at the end, it directly switched to</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Balinese. The child produced intra-sentential codemixing once the topic of accessories with the mother that was illustrated by excerpt #8 (Poplack, 1980). The italic word constituted of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">boongnya</span><span class="font3"> ‘the neck’, a Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">boong</span><span class="font3"> ‘neck’ and Indonesian suffix -</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nya</span><span class="font3"> (possessive) ‘it’s’ or ‘the.’ The mother needs to emphasize and explain the meaning and function of the word ‘bracelet’ by referring to where it was going to be worn on the body, which is on the neck. Riksem et al. (2019) found that it is very commonly found in bilinguals to add suffixes from the other language to another language and this is considered to be the ability of bilinguals to acknowledge the syntactical structures of both languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a># 9 The Conversation Between Father-Child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Child : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bapak </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kel baang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">jangklik </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kedis</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nya</span><span class="font3">? ‘Father, will you give the cricket to the bird?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Father : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ini jangkrik buat dikasi burung murainya di rumah ya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘This cricket is for the Murai bird at home, okay.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bulung murai apa</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What is </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">murai</span><span class="font3"> bird?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Father : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Itu yang kandangnya paling besar</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That bird in the biggest cage.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This conversation occurred when the father was taking the child to a kiosk that sells food for pets. At the beginning of the conversation, the sentence uttered by the child was started with the Balinese language and ended up with Indonesian. The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kel baang</span><span class="font3"> in Balinese means ‘will give.’ Moreover, the child mixed the Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kedis</span><span class="font3"> ‘bird’ and the Indonesian suffix -</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">nya </span><span class="font3">‘the’ to say ‘the bird.’ Riksem et al. (2019) found similar data of bilinguals to mix the language in terms of verbs and nouns in conversations. Besides, the young bilinguals might do this language mixing to fill the vocabulary gaps in their utterances (Montanari et al., 2019).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"># 10 The Conversation Between Mother-Child</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mama, caliin itu ulal. John mau</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">liat ular</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Mama, look for the snake. I want to see the snake.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ular apa</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What snake?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Itu ulal yang </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lantang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">itu mamak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Situ</span><span class="font3"> (pointing at the TV). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mamak cariin ya</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘That the long snake, Mama. There (pointing at the TV). You search it, okay.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Iya sekarang mama cariin John.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Okay, now Mama search it for you, John.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mak, mau cali ulal. Uullaar</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Ma, I want to look for the snake. Snaaaakee’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred when the child wanted to watch the movie Rio 2, which happened to have a scene that showed a snake. However, the situation was before the mother turned the tv on. So the mother got a little confused with the sudden request of the snake. The child tried to explain where to find the snake by pointing at the TV therefore, the mother understood that he meant the snake in the movie. The language mixing happened in the sentence </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">itu ulal yang </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lantang </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">itu Mama. </span><span class="font3">The child mispronounced the word [ulal] </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ular </span><span class="font3">'snake'. The language used by the child with his mother was Indonesian. However, in the sentence, the child inserted the Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lantang</span><span class="font3"> ‘long’ to show the snake's size in the middle of the Indonesian utterance. The sentence still made sense because the Balinese word only emphasizes the snake's size or shape. The child tried to tell the mother that the snake was long. Based on Riksem et al. (2019), this belongs to the ability of young bilinguals to switch the adjective from one language to the other language to emphasize the description within an object.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>#11 The Conversation Between Father-Mother-Child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Father &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John bikin apa itu?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">‘</span><span class="font3">John, what are you making?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ndak, ini, isi handuk ini, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ajak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mamak</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'No, this is, is this towel? Is she wearing a towel, Mother?'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Apa? John bilang apa?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘What? John, what did you say?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Apa ini? </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Mama misi ape ne</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">? Misi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">handuk?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'What is this? Mother, what is this? Is it a towel?' (pointing to the performance)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Father &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Gelungan namanya itu John.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Orang nari itu</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'It is called </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Gelungan</span><span class="font3"> John (headpiece in Balinese culture). It is used when somebody is dancing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bukan, ini handuk namanya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">‘</span><span class="font3">No, that is called towel.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Father &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ngapain pakai handuk disitu?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Topengnya nari, coba John nari, bisa?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'Why do I need to wear a towel there? The mask is dancing, try to dance, John, can you?'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ndak mau John nari.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">'No, I do not want to dance.'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This conversation occurred when the father, mother, and the child and the child's brother were playing and relaxing in the bedroom while watching a performance of masks on the television. The child was curious about the headpiece on top of the masked performer and considered it a towel. The language mixing of Balinese words in Indonesian utterances happened in excerpt #11. John was trying to explain the situation to his father by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ndak ini, isi handuk ini, ajak mamak?</span><span class="font3"> 'No, this is, is this a towel, with mama?' In English, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ajak</span><span class="font3"> is a Balinese word to say 'with'. The utterance used Indonesian while the child added one Balinese word in the middle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Besides, the switch from Indonesian to Balinese in one utterance as </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Apa ini? Mama misi ape ne? Misi handuk?</span><span class="font3"> 'What is this? Mama what is she wearing? It has a towel?’ The phrase </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">apa ini?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘what is this' is Indonesian. The other two sentences were in the Balinese language. This mixing emphasized the meaning of the question, which was using Indonesian at first and then switched to Balinese after. It supports the finding of the previous research by Hoff et al. (2018) about the English-Spanish language mixing, whose language mixing shows children's proficiency in using both languages, especially for the expressive domain.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>#12 The Conversation Between Mother-Child</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mother : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John kemana hari ini?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">‘</span><span class="font3">John where did you go today?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">John </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">melali </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">naik mobil, berenang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘John travelled by car, swimming.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Berenang</span><span class="font3">?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Swimming?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Iya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Yes.’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mother &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sama siapa berenangnya?</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘Whom did you swim with?’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Child &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sama nenek </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ajak </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kakek</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">‘With &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;grandmother &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">grandfather’</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between the child and the mother when the child was about to sleep at night. The child just came back from traveling with his grandfather and grandmother. The language used in the conversation is Indonesian; however, the child mixed Balinese words in Indonesian utterances to tell the activity he had done. The Indonesian word is probably not yet familiar to him. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">melali</span><span class="font3"> is the Balinese word to say </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bepergian</span><span class="font3"> ‘travelling’ in Indonesian. Besides, the language mixing also occurred in the last utterance, with the Balinese word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ajak</span><span class="font3"> ‘with.’ This occurred simply because the child subconsciously switched the language from Indonesian to Balinese. The child is familiar with the Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">sama</span><span class="font3"> ‘with’, the shorter version of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">bersama</span><span class="font3"> in Indonesian, which was said earlier in the same utterance. The data supports Bosma &amp;&nbsp;Blom (2018) about language switching to fill the vocabulary gaps. Riksem et al. (2019)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">found that children switch nouns and verbs in their utterance using data from children acquiring American and Norwegian languages.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The natural tendency of bilingual children is to mix their languages, which means they use both languages in a single sentence. Child bilingualism involves borrowing and code-switching (Grosjean, 2013). The child frequently mixed the languages of Bahasa Indonesia into Balinese and vice versa. These were also documented in the previous study of English-Spanish language mixing of pre-school children (Montanari et al., 2019). However, from observation and data analysis, the child can differentiate the two languages appropriately depending on the interlocutors. For instance, when the child talks to his grandmother, grandfather, and great-grandmother, he uses Balinese Balinese in his utterances instead of Indonesian. Meanwhile, during his interaction with his parents, the child uses Bahasa Indonesia more than the Balinese.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In terms of language mixing, it happened for several reasons. First, the child does not know the corresponding words or phrases in the other language or lacks lexical entry in the appropriate language. Second, the words or phrases inserted are more familiar in the child's ears. In other words, they are used more frequently in the child's environment, as confirmed by Lindholm &amp;&nbsp;Padilla (1978). Third, the child is mixing languages because the adults do language mixings, such as the parents and other family members. Thus, mixing is available in the input. In the conversation between the grandmother and the child, for example, in Balinese utterance, the grandmother inserted the Indonesian word </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">obat</span><span class="font3"> to the Balinese conversation instead of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ubad</span><span class="font3">, a Balinese word. Yip (2013) stated that even parents who claim not to mix themselves are unlikely to avoid it consistently. Fourth, language mixing emphasizes the meaning of the idea or the child's intention by clarifying the words in the other language corroborating the finding of Martiana (2013). In this study, the child often switches the word from Balinese to Indonesian and from Indonesian to</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Balinese, implying that the child can use both languages in different contexts (Gonzales et al., 2019).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">On the other hand, this implies quite the opposite, which can also mean that the child was still learning the vocabularies of Indonesian and Balinese. According to Bosma &amp;&nbsp;Blom (2018), children tend to code-switch their language as a strategy to replace unknown words and fill the gaps in linguistic knowledge. Now, even though the language mixing can be the lack of vocabulary or as the strategy to fill the gaps, according to Green &amp;&nbsp;Wei (2014), this proves that children involve cognitive control while doing it. Halmari (2005) also confirms that language mixing in young bilinguals is not necessarily evidence of attrition of a weaker language or failure of inhibitory control.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study concludes that language mixing occurs in the language production of a child simultaneously exposed in Balinese and Indonesian from birth. The child inserted content words, phrases as well as function words. This study also proves that the bilingual child can differentiate two linguistic systems from a very young age. It is shown where the child can communicate using different languages appropriately to different interlocutors. The child can communicate in Bahasa Indonesia to the parents and Balinese to the extended family members. The language mixing happens due to the salient of the words in the other language, the frequent use of the words or phrases in the child's environment, the availability of mixing in the input, and an effort to emphasize meaning. The study's findings are applicable to the subject at hand. Additional research involving children growing up in similar language environments is necessary.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Adnyani, N. L., Beratha, N. L., Pastika, I. W., &amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suparwa, I. N. (2018). The development of verbal morphology and word order in an</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Indonesian-German Bilingual child: a case study. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Topics in Linguistics</span><span class="font3">, 19(1), pp 33- 53.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alexiadou, A. (2017). Building verbs in language mixing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;varieties</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zeitschrift &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Für</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sprachwissenschaft</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;36(1), pp 165-192,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doi:10.1515/zfs-2017-0008</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alexiadou, A. &amp;&nbsp;Lohndal, T. (2018). Units of Language Mixing: &nbsp;A Cross Linguistic</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Perspective</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Frontiers in Psychology, </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01719"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01719</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Atmadja, A. R., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Purwarianti, A. (2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Comparison on the rule-based method and statistical based method on emotion classification for Indonesian Twitter text. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Conference on Information Technology Systems and Innovation (ICITSI)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bialystok, E. (2017). The Bilingual Adaptation: How Minds Accommodate Experience. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychological Bulletin</span><span class="font3">, 143(3), pp 233–262. </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000099"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000099</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bosma, E. &amp;&nbsp;Blom, E. (2018). A code-switching asymmetry in bilingual children: Codeswitching from Dutch to Frisian requires more cognitive control than code-switching from Frisian to Dutch. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Bilingualism</span><span class="font3">, Vol. 23(6) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1431-1447</span><a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1367006918798972"><span class="font3">,</span></a></p>
<p><a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1367006918798972"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1367006918798972"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">1367006918798972</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cantone, K. F. (2007). Code Switching in Bilingual Children. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Studies in Theoretical Psycholinguistics,</span><span class="font3"> 37, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Springer:</span><span class="font3">Netherlands ISBN 978-1-4020-5783-0</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Doğruöz, A. S., Sitaram, S., Bullock, B. E., &amp;&nbsp;Toribio, A. J. (2021). A survey of codeswitching: linguistic and social perspectives for language technologies</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;54, pp.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">1654–166</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.131"><span class="font3">6</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.131"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.131</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eichler, N., Hager, M., &amp;&nbsp;Muller, N. (2012). Code Switching Within Determiner Phrases in Bilingual Children-French, Italian, Spanish, German. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Zeitschrift für französische Sprache und &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literatur,</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298410287"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2984</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298410287"><span class="font3">10287</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Esposito, A., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Aversano, G. (2004). Text</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Independent Methods &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Speech</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Segmentation. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Research Gate,</span><span class="font3"> pp 261-290, DOI: 10.1007/11520153_12</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Garraffa, M., Obregon, M., &amp;&nbsp;Sorace, A. (2018). Linguistic and Cognitive Effects of Bilingualism with Regional Minority Languages: A Study of Sardinian–Italian Adult Speakers. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frontiers in &nbsp;Psychology</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;8,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01907</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Genesee, F. (1989). Early bilingual development: one language or two? </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Child Language</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;16(1), pp 161-179 DOI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">10.1017/S0305000900013490</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gilbert, A. C., et al. (2021). Spoken Word Segmentation in First and Second Language: When ERP and Behavioural Measures Diverge. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frontiers in Psychology,</span><span class="font3"> doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.705668</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gonzales, K., Byers-Heinlein, K., &amp;&nbsp;Lotto, A. J. (2019). How bilinguals perceive speech depends on which language they think they’re hearing. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cognition,</span><span class="font3"> 182, pp 318-33</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.021"><span class="font3">0</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.021"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.02</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.021"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">1</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Goral, M., Norvik, M., &amp;&nbsp;Jensen, B. U. (2019). Variation in language mixing in multilingual aphasia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Clinical Linguistics &amp;&nbsp;Phonetics, </span><span class="font3">DOI: 10.1080/02699206.2019.1584646</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Green, D. W., &amp;&nbsp;Wei, L. (2014). A control process model of code-switching. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,</span><span class="font3"> 29(4), pp 499511</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grimstad, M. B., Riksem, B. R., Lohndal, T., &amp;&nbsp;Afarli, T. A. (2018). Lexicalist vs. exoskeletal approaches to language mixing. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Linguistic Review</span><span class="font3">, </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1515/tlr-2017-0022"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1515/tlr-2017-0022</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grosjean, F. (2013). Bilingualism: A Short Introduction. In François, G., &amp;&nbsp;Ping, L. (Ed). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Psycholinguistics of Bilingualism</span><span class="font3"> (pp. 612). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gross, M., &amp;&nbsp;Kaushanskaya, M. (2015). Voluntary Languange switching in English-Spanish bilingual &nbsp;children</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. &nbsp;Journal of Cognitive</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychology</span><span class="font3">, 27(8), pp 992-1013</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Grundy, J. G., &amp;&nbsp;Anderson, J. A. E. (2017). Commentary: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Relationship of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bilingualism Compared to Monolingualism to the Risk of Cognitive Decline or Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience,</span><span class="font3"> 9, doi:10.3389/fnagi.2017.00344</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Habtoor, H. A., &amp;&nbsp;Almutlagah, G. F. (2018). Intra-Sentential Code-Switching among Bilingual Saudis on Twitter</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. International Journal of Linguistics</span><span class="font3">, 2(1), pp 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hakuta, K., &amp;&nbsp;D’Andrea, D. (1992). Some</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Properties of Bilingual Maintenance and Loss in Mexican Background High-School Students. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Applied Linguistics</span><span class="font3">, 13(1), pp 72–99</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/13.1.72"><span class="font3">,</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/13.1.72"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/13.1.72</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halmari H. (2005). “I’m forgetting both”: L1 maintenance and code-switching in Finnish-English language contact. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Bilingualism,</span><span class="font3"> 9(3-4), pp. 397-433. doi:10.1177/13670069050090030601</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hoff, E., Quinn, J. M., &amp;&nbsp;Giguere, D. (2018). What explains the correlation between growth in vocabulary and grammar? New evidence from latent change score analyses of simultaneous bilingual development. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Developmental Science</span><span class="font3">, 21(2). doi:10.1111/desc.12536</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jernigan, C. (2015). Guiding parents towards raising bilingual children</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> 255: 159–165</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Juan-Garau, M. &amp;&nbsp;Perez-Vidal, C. (2001). Mixing and Pragmatic Parental Strategies in Early Bilingual Acquisition. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cambridge University Press,</span><span class="font3"> 28, pp 59-86, UK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Koban, D. (2013). Intra-sentential and inter-sentential code-switching in Turkish-English bilinguals in New York City, U.S. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences</span><span class="font3">, pp 1174 – 1179</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Köppe, R. (1996). Language differentiation in bilingual children: The development of grammatical and pragmatic competence</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">. Linguistics</span><span class="font3">, 34(5), pp 927-954</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Koronkiewicz, B. (2018). Acquiring L1-English L2-Spanish Code-Switching: The Role of Exposure to Language Mixing. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Languages</span><span class="font3">, 3(3), 26. doi:10.3390/languages3030026</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lindholm, K. J., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Padilla, A. M. (1978).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Language Mixing in Bilingual Children. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Child Language</span><span class="font3">, pp. 327-335</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MacSwan, J. (2006). Code Switching and Grammatical Theory. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Handbook of Bilingualism</span><span class="font3">, Vol. 10.1002/97, pp 282–311. doi:10.1002/9780470756997.ch11</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Martiana, T. (2013). Examining Code-Switching Practices in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Hilman Hariwijaya’s Makhluk Manis dalam Bis and Bunga untuk Poppi</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Passage:</span><span class="font3"> 1(1), pp 9-20</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meisel, J. (1989). Early Differentiation of Languages in Bilingual Children. In K. Hyltenstam &amp;&nbsp;L. K. Obler (Ed). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Bilingualism Across the Lifespan: Aspects of Acquisition, Maturity, and Loss.</span><span class="font3"> (pp. 13-40). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meisel, J. M. (Ed.). (1994). Bilingual first language acquisition: French and German grammatical development. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meisel, J. M. (2007). The Bilingual Child: Chapter 3 The Handbook of Bilingualism Blackwell Handbooks in Linguistics. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Department of Romance Languages &amp;&nbsp;Research Center on Multilingualism:</span><span class="font3"> University of Hamburg</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Montanari, S., Ochoa, W., &amp;&nbsp;Subrahmanyam, K. (2019). A longitudinal investigation of language mixing in Spanish–English dual language learners: the role of language proficiency, variability, and sociolinguistic factors. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Child Language</span><span class="font3">, 46, pp 913–937 doi:10.1017/S0305000919000278</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Myers-Scotton, C. (2006). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Multiple Voices: An Introduction to Bilingualism.</span><span class="font3"> UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nakamura, J. (2019). Parents’ Impact Belief in Raising Bilingual and Biliterate Children in Japan. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psychology of Language and Communication</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;23(1), DOI: 10.2478/plc-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">2019-0007</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Novedo &amp;&nbsp;Linuwih, E. R. (2018). Code Switching and Code Mixing Used by Sarah Sechan and Cinta Laura in Sarah Sechan Talk Show. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Seminar International Ilmu Terapan,</span><span class="font3"> 1(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Poeste, M., Müller, N., &amp;&nbsp;Gil, L. A. (2019). Codemixing and language dominance: bilingual,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">trilingual and multilingual children compared. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Multilingualism</span><span class="font3">, DOI: 10.1080/14790718.2019.1569017</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Purniawati, S. A. P. A., Artini, L. P., &amp;&nbsp;Adnyani, N. L. P. S. (2019). Code Switching in An Indonesian-French Mixed Married Family. P-ISSN: 0854 – 9125 E-ISSN: 2599 – 2678, Vol 26(2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ridwan, H., Umar, M., &amp;&nbsp;Muhammad, Y. (2021). Code-Switching &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lecturer-Students'</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Interaction in Thesis Examination: A Case Study in Indonesia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Instruction</span><span class="font3">, 14(1), pp 445-458</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Riksem, B. R. (2017). Language Mixing and Diachronic Change: American Norwegian Noun Phrases Then and Now. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Languages</span><span class="font3">, 2(2), 3, doi:10.3390/languages2020003</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Riksem, B. R., Grimstad, M. B., Lohndal, T., &amp;&nbsp;Afarli, T. A. (2019). Language mixing within verbs and nouns in American Norwegian. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics</span><span class="font3">, 22(5), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pp &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;189–209,</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10828-019-09109-6"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1007/s10828-019-09109-6</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rubin, E. J., &amp;&nbsp;Toribio, A. J. (1996). The role of functional categories in bilingual children’s language mixing and differentiation. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">World Englishes</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15(3), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;385–393.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">doi:10.1111/j.1467-971x.1996.tb00125.x</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wehler, M. &nbsp;(2016). &nbsp;Introduction &nbsp;to Code</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Switching</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Retrieved &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aH0NZZX05v0"><span class="font3">:</span></a></p>
<p><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aH0NZZX05v0"><span class="font3">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aH0NZZX</span></a><span class="font3"> </span><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aH0NZZX05v0"><span class="font3">05v0</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yip, V. (2013). Simultaneous Language Acquisition. In François, G., &amp;&nbsp;Ping, L. (Ed). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Psycholinguistics of Bilingualism.</span><span class="font3"> (pp. 119-137). West Sussex: Blackwell Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yusuf, C. I. (2012). Hausa-English Code-switching in Kanywood Films. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Linguistics</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yusuf, Y. Q., Fata, I. A., &amp;&nbsp;Chyntia. (2018). Types of Indonesian-English code-switching employed in a novel. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kasetsart Journal of Social Sciences</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">120</span></p>