---
layout: full_article
title: "Politeness Maxims in Dialogue Toy Story 4 Movie"
author: "Bagus Teresna Binaning Artha, I Nyoman Udayana, I Nyoman Sedeng"
categories: stilistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85876 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/id-85876"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85876"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4">ISSN: 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Vol. 02, No.01: Oktober 2022, pp-89-99.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">STILISTIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Journal of Indonesian Language and Literature</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>POLITENESS MAXIMS IN DIALOGUE </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TOY STORY 4</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Bagus Teresna Binaning Artha</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1*</sup></span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">,</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I Nyoman Udayana <sup>2</sup>,I Nyoman Sedeng<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>*</sup>Surel:</span><a href="mailto:bagusteresna17@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">bagusteresna17@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2022.v02.i01.p08"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2022.v02.i01.p08</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Artikel dikirim: 29 Mei 2022; diterima: 20 Juni 2022</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>POLITENESS MAXIMS IN DIALOGUE </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">TOY STORY 4</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract. </span><span class="font1">This study is entitled Politeness Maxims in Dialogue Toy Story 4 Movie. This study aimed to observe the types of politeness maxims and the functions of politeness maxims applied in the movie. The Toy Story 4 Movie uses a data source in this study because there had been conversations related to politeness expressions with all characters. This study uses the documentation method and note-taking technique in collecting the data. The data of this study were analyzed using the descriptive qualitative method and using the theory of pragmatics by Leech (1983). However, this study only focuses on four maxims as Generosity maxim, Approbation maxim, Agreement maxim, and Sympathy maxim to facilitate research. Based on the analysis, the results show that all four maxims can be found in this study. The most dominant maxim which was used in this study is Generosity maxim and Agreement maxim while the most functions applied in each politeness maxims is Irony.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: politeness; maxims; movie; toy story 4</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">In our daily lives, while doing conversation with other people, the speaker should pay attention to several rules or factors in order to achieve the goal of conversation and also to establish a meaningful conversation. To achieve meaningful conversation between the speaker and the hearer is one of the accomplishment that must be realized to get maximum results in the topic of conversation, not many people realize it but it has a big impact on both parties. But on the other side, conversation is not only discovered in our lives but we can find it in several applications such as movies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Movies are the best motion picture that is already made by humans which produce visual information that carries a conversation with other characters. Basically, conversation is one of the important elements that exist in the movie, so that the audience knows the meaning that is directed. Likewise, the characters can establish close relationships with the other characters in order to create the desired atmosphere. On the other hand, every conversation has rules that we need to pay attention to, i.e. to speak politely to each other. If we can speak politely, people will respect us and if</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">we do not speak politely, people will be offended. Speaking politely is the most significant thing we can do to demonstrate that we are civilized people and will not be labelled as rude people with bad manners. It can be realized by speaking politely in order to make others feel comfortable. Thus, they must pay attention to others’ expectations which means that the speaker must behave politely. Talking about politeness, there is a principle in pragmatics called politeness that is reflected through maxims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The politeness principle is a set of maxims proposed by Leech as to how politeness should be practiced in our daily lives. Leech (1983) proposes that there are six types of politeness maxims such as Tact maxim, Approbation maxim, Generosity maxim, Agreement maxim, Modesty maxim, and Sympathy maxim. When doing conversation, the politeness principle can be considered as the best way for some people to practice or express good manners. Nowadays, many people still cannot use the language of politeness with different ages, and different genders. Everyone has a different level of politeness depending on their culture and where they live. For example, some people in Asia have different cultures than those in Europe, and their levels of politeness may differ.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Although, politeness maxims are not only found in our daily lives but they can also be found in movies, novels, talk shows, etc. This study is dedicated to analysing the politeness maxims in the literary works in order to figure out the types of politeness maxims and the functions of politeness maxims used by all characters in Dialogue Toy Story 4 Movie, since this movie had conversations to politeness expressions. Hopefully, people who read this study get more knowledge about politeness, since politeness has been with us when we were born. Being polite should be regarded by several functions in the conversation such as Irony, Banter, Hyperbole, and Litotes. If we pay attention, some of these functions have their own meaning in each conversation between the speaker and the hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Review of Literature in this study uses 3 undergraduate theses and 2 international articles. The first undergraduate thesis to be reviewed was written by Bhuana (2019) entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Politeness Maxims in The Movie Finding Dory</span><span class="font2">. There are two problems discussed in this paper, they are types of politeness maxims that were applied by the characters in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Finding Dory</span><span class="font2"> and the factors that influence politeness maxims that are applied by the characters in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Finding Dory,</span><span class="font2"> The second undergraduate thesis to be reviewed was written by Pramiwidari (2018) entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Maxims in The Motive the Forest,</span><span class="font2"> this research focuses on two problems such as what types and functions of politeness maxims are mostly used in</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">the motive </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Forest</span><span class="font2"> and the factors that affect different usages of politeness maxims in different settings in the motive </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Forest.</span><span class="font2"> The third undergraduate thesis to be reviewed was written by Maulina and Erni (2018) entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Maxims of Politeness on Alice in Wonderland Movie,</span><span class="font2"> the aims of this research are to identify and to analyse maxim of politeness in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Alice in Wonderland</span><span class="font2"> movie. The first international article reviewed was written by WANG Jie, WEI Feifei (2016) entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Politeness Principle in the Analysis of Drama: Take Teahouse as an Example,</span><span class="font2"> this paper analysed the dialogues in the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Teahouse</span><span class="font2"> which is written by Lao She under Leech’s politeness principle. The second international article reviewed was written by Mahmood and Huda (2020) entitled </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Leech’s Politeness Maxims in Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice,</span><span class="font2"> this research will look at Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice through the lens of Leech’s politeness maxims.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study used the theory of pragmatics by Leech (1983) to analyze the data. Documentation method and note-taking technique were applied in collecting data. The data in this study is the form of conversation between characters in this movie. Furthermore, this study used a qualitative method to analyze the types of politeness maxims and the functions of politeness maxims used by all characters in this movie. And also, the data in this study were analysed descriptively, the way to analyze is to examine the data to understand as clearly as possible. Likewise, this study applies the informal method in presenting the data. This method presents the results of the analysis using words and sentences. The results of the analysis were descriptively analysed based on theory of pragmatics by Leech (1983). Then, all of the conversation of Toy Story 4 Movie which contains politeness maxims and the functions of politeness maxims used by all characters there are Irony, Banter, Hyperbole, and Banter are presented in bold. The reason why the data presented in bold because to make it clear with the context from the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Generosity Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Generosity Maxim is a maxim that requires the speaker to minimize benefits to self and maximizes cost to self. There are some conversations which are categorized into Generosity Maxim:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mr. Clock : Hmm, that is the third time you have not been picked this week. Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I don't know, I don't keep count.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Mr. Clock &nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Oh, you don't have to, I will do it for you.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Okay, okay, okay, I get it. It is been a while.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mr. Clock : Oh, looky there, you got your first dust bunny.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation above occurs between Woody and Mr. Clock. When Woody in the closet is getting ready to play with Bonnie, he feels excited and was not ready about that. Unexpectedly, she was not picking up Woody to be a part of her daily activities. Woody who saw that directly cannot say anything and feels disappointed to Bonnie if she does it that again to him. From the conversation above, Mr. Clock as a speaker applies the Generosity Maxim to maximize cost to himself by saying ”Oh, you don't have to. I will do it for you”. It can be seen if Mr. Clock offers himself to remind Woody how many times he has not selected by Bonnie and also he sincerely wants to help Woody without hesitation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Generosity maxim above applies Irony, which is clearly seen from Mr. Clock’s utterances by saying “Oh, you don't have to. I'll do it for you”. He said those utterances to make Woody realize that he would know not only he was not chosen by Bonnie but there were many toys in the closet including Mr. Clock itself. From his utterances, it looks polite but if we look at the context of the conversation, he covers impolite words so that Woody quickly realizes it.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark7"></a>[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Buzz &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Want me to take the next watch? I will keep an eye on Forky.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No, no. I need to do this, which little voice inside me would never leave</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">me alone if I gave up.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Buzz &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Huh.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The conversation has occured between Buzz and Woody when they were taking a rest in RV. While Woody sitting by the shelf and doing his job to guard Forky, immediately Buzz approached him to ensure if he was doing okay, it is because Buzz sees his best friend in the distance feeling tired and sleepy. After that, Buzz without further ado gladly offered his willingness for Woody to replace him to keep an eye for Forky, he wanted Woody to take a break for a while and keep his health. However, Woody did not need to be replaced by Buzz because Woody wanted to do that by himself and follows his inner voice. In the conversation above, Buzz applies Generosity maxim to maximize cost to himself and minimizes benefits to himself to take care of each other.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Generosity maxim above applies Irony which is clearly seen from Buzz’s utterances. It can be seen Buzz saying “Want me to take the next watch? I will keep an eye on Forky” to Woody, in this situation Buzz did look polite and offered himself to Woody but on the other hand, Buzz indirectly wanted Woody to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">stop keeping an eye on Forky, also Buzz assumes that Woody doing this would get him nothing even all he got was exhaustion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bonnie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Please be honest with me, was it wonderful as it sounds?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yes, it was.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Just leave me Forky because Bonnie needs him.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, Woody applies Generosity maxim to maximize cost to himself. Woody accepted her conditions because in exchange he was willing to give his voice box to Gabby, which was the only thing Woody could do to save Forky. The function of Generosity maxim above applies Irony, which is seen in Woody taking his chance to save Forky from Gabby. His utterances show that Woody disguises his impoliteness because factually Bonnie previously had been done something unpleasant to Woody. Meanwhile, Forky was also a valuable toy for Bonnie, if he did not save him, Bonnie would be upset and indirectly Bonnie did not expect Woody as her toy anymore. That is why Woody should have been more concerned with Forky than with himself.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Guys, I have a kid</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Ducky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You got a kid?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bunny &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Like a kid kid?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ducky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Like a human kid, not a baby goat?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah, now let go of Buzz and come with me. I will take you to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Bonnie</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, it can be seen Woody’s utterances expressed with Generosity maxim which means he maximizes cost for himself and also minimizes the benefits for himself because he doesn’t hesitate to invite new toys like Bunny and Ducky to be fully a part of Bonnie’s toys. Woody stated that if he had a child named Bonnie, he would persuade them to be a toy for Bonnie. Knowing that information, Bunny and Ducky were joyful and rushed to find Bonnie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Generosity maxim above applies to Banter. Obviously, Woody’s utterances sound like gags to Ducky and Bonnie because of the fact that he wanted to bring them to Bonnie. Although Woody seemed to be joking, so they did not punch Buzz anymore. It can be seen Woody as a speaker tells the truth which means that Woody is polite to Bunny and Ducky as hearers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Approbation Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Approbation Maxim is a maxim that requires the speaker to minimize dispraise of others and maximizes praise of others. There are some conversations which are categorized into Approbation Maxim:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bonnie’s Mom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Bonnie? What are you doing back there? Come on, we</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">have to go. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">That is my big girl</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bonnie’s Dad &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Come on. We got to hurry, okay? Don’t forget your</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">backpack</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bonnie’s Mom &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: You’re going to have so much fun.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the utterances above, Bonnie’s Mom used the expressions of Approbation maxim to maximize praise to Bonnie because she was supposed to support her daughter in various conditions rather than she ignored her. It is one of the duties of a mother who wants to see her daughter not to be sad all of the time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Approbation maxim applies Hyperbole. It can be seen from Bonnie’s Mom utterances praising his daughter with the words “Big girl” which means where he reveals that her beloved daughter is starting to face a complicated situation for herself. That word includes exaggeration to make her daughter raised from her sadness, also she tries to motivate Bonnie to attend her kindergarten orientation without any hesitation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dolly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Everyone, listen. I thought I told you when Mom quickly cleans</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">the bedroom like that expect to be put in the closet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rex &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: How much longer?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Keep it dull a roar, Rex.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: Deep breaths, Jessie. Deep breaths!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Settle down, Slink, and sit. Good boy!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In these utterances, Woody uses Approbation maxim, which means he maximizes praise to Slink and also minimizes the dispraise. Through his utterances, it shows Woody is being impressed to Slink about he can control his nervousness while the situation is not comfortable yet by saying “Good boy!” moreover, Slink obeys orders from Woody.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Approbation maxim contains Hyperbole, which can be seen from Woody’s utterances showing if he praises Slink with pleasant things because he is fascinated at the way Slink can ease his nervousness with a single word from him. The word “Good boy” is used especially to praise a child or animal for obeying. It is that same as Slink who willingly obeys Woody’s order.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2"><a name="bookmark9"></a>[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">It will be fine, Duke is the best.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Yeah at crashing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this conversation, Bo used the expressions of Approbation maxim because she minimizes dispraise and maximizes praise to Duke, which means indirectly she knows that Duke can make the jump without remembering his dark past about his owner named Rejean and she also tries to get Woody to trust Duke that he won’t do anything wrong by saying “It will be fine, Duke’s the best”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Approbation maxim above applies Irony, it can be seen from Bo’s utterances if she tried to calm down Woody with the compliment by saying “It’ll be fine, Duke’s the best”. She has a reason why she said those utterances because she never knows what will happen to Woody onward, whether Duke succeeds in jumpi ng or failing. In the context above whereby Woody will jump into the shelf that a fairly high with Duke. Likewise, Bo’s utterances are just reassuring sentences for Woody. It’s clear that Bo is trying to coffer her impoliteness to Woody so he can conveniently believe in Duke anyway.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Agreement Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Agreement Maxim is a maxim that requires the speaker to minimize disagreement between self and others and maximizes agreement between self and others. There are some conversations which are categorized into Agreement Maxim:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Look, I know this is a little strange, but you got to trust me on</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">this. Forky is the most important toy to Bonnie right now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Pricklepants : Important? He is a Spork.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Yes, yeah, I know but this Spork, i mean this toy is crucial to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Bonnie getting adjusted to kindergarten.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this conversation, Woody partially agrees with Pricklepants’s statement because he knows this toy is a Spork, furthermore Forky is being a most important toy to Bonnie, and also he has been included as part of Bonnie’s toys.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Agreement maxim above conceives Banter, which clearly seen from the context of the conversation, Woody and Pricklepants argue that actually they are making a joke because they argue about Forky which is actually made from forks and is considered the most important toy for Bonnie. It’s strange to admit for Pricklepants but it’s a truth that Forky isn’t trash anymore, moreover Forky is becoming a precious toy for someone right now. Woody tries to make Pricklepants</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">believe this phenomenon, Woody only tells the truth to all of his friends and says in a polite way which means that it is true.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Forky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: No, no, no. Big girl scary!</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Like I said before, Bonnie is not scary. She loves you and you</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">need to</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody argues his statement by saying “Like I said before, Bonnie’s not scary” because he proves that Forky's statement is totally wrong, even Forky is not too close to know Bonnie yet, he was supposed not to state that statement while on the other hand, Woody says “She loves you and you need to” which shows minimizes disagreement with himself and Forky. It clearly shows that Woody applies Agreement maxim, however in his first utterances he added disagreement to Forky.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Agreement maxim above applies Irony. Woody’s utterances actually show if he criticizes Forky with those utterances even though he uses polite words. On the other hand, Woody also asserts that Bonnie is not as terrible as Forky himself imagined, indeed in this situation above he is saying politely but Woody also tries to enclose the words that he should not say to Forky. It is because he speaks the truth and does not lie to Forky that Bonnie is really a good kid with her toys. Woody should have done to establish Forky trust in Bonnie as the new owner for him.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Forky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Woody? Aren't we going to Bonnie?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: I know, I know. But my friend might be in there.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Friend?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh a friend? Uh well, a friend is…Well a friend is like you and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Trash?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Trash? Yes. And I’m very worried that she might be lost.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forky &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: But, Woody. Bonnie’s right there</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Yeah, we will have you back before she wakes up. Come on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, it can be seen Woody used the expressions of Agreement maxim to minimize disagreement between himself and Forky, his first utterance says “Yeah” indirectly disagreeing with Forky’s statement because he knows that in a little bit more he will be able to bring back Forky to Bonnie’s arms but Woody also has other interests although this is out of context to Forky.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Agreement maxim above contains Irony which is clearly seen from Woody’s utterances showing that indirectly through his sentences about he puts</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Forky at risk because he may not be able to return it to Bonnie as soon as possible before she wakes up from her sleep, moreover he entered the store that he had never been to and meet before. Woody really did that for his own sake instead of matters about Forky somehow.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sympathy Maxim</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sympathy Maxim is a maxim that requires the speaker to minimize antipathy between self and others and maximizes sympathy between self and others. There are some conversations which are categorized into Sympathy maxim:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[10]</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Buzz &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">You all right, Woody? I'm sure she will pick you next time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh, come on, I'm fine. No problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jessie &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Hey Woody here is your badges.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Woody &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh thanks, Jessie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Buzz &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">We are here for you, buddy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversation above, Buzz used the expressions of Sympathy maxim to minimize antipathy between himself and Woody, also maximizes sympathy between himself and Woody because Buzz tries to cheer and does not leave his best friend Woody in the various situations and conditions, he always tries to be by Woody side by saying “You all right, Woody? I’m sure she’ll pick you next time” and “We are here for you buddy”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The function of Sympathy maxim above is categorized into Irony. Buzz’s utterances are described he expresses to Woody that he more deserves to play with Bonnie rather than Buzz because he also does not know what will happen to Woody, nor he can help Woody as often as he did before. Indirectly, Buzz stated his negative meanings to Woody but at the same time, he concealed it through polite or firm words. As a true friend, Buzz was willing to do that for Woody no matter what happened.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the results of the analysis and discussion, the following point can be shown as a conclusion. Firstly, the types of politeness maxims which mostly applied by all the characters in the movie is Generosity maxim and Agreement maxim. Generosity maxim became mostly uttered because of the situation that has occurred in the movie, most of the characters have generous behaviour towards each character starting from them to maximize cost to self and minimizing benefits to self. Agreement maxim becomes mostly applied because there are some scenes in the movie that required</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">utterances such as negotiation or arguing with each character, their characters launch arguing with different topics, which make sense or does not make sense in their every conversation in the movie. The type of maxim that is the fewest applied by all characters in the movie is Sympathy maxim because the characters have little sympathy or antipathy in every scene in the movie and also most of the characters are dominant in carrying out the action than drama though.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Secondly, the functions of politeness maxims that are applied by all characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Toy Story 4”</span><span class="font2"> Movie were Irony, Banter, Hyperbole, and Litotes. The function which mostly applied for each of the politeness maxims was Irony. It is because the all of characters try to hide their impoliteness to do criticism with every character in the movie, it is as if they are saying politely but on the other hand, there is a hidden meaning so the characters do not know those meanings themselves. The function that the fewest applied for each of the politeness maxims was Hyperbole, it can be seen that each scene in the movie, the characters do not want to exaggerate their words to praise other characters. And, the one function that has not been mentioned previously is Litotes. Litotes is not present at all in every conversation because each character does not understate themselves to other characters in the movie.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>BIBLIOGRAPHY</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Bayu. 2019. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Politeness Maxims in the Movie Finding Dory</span><span class="font2">. Udayana University, Faculty of Arts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Budiartha. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ngurah Adi. 2018. Politeness in Adit Sopo Jarwo Animation</span><span class="font2">. Warmadewa University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Chapman. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. University of Newcastle. England, UK.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Geoffrey Leech. 1983. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles in Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. London. Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Geoffrey Leech. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Pragmatics of Politeness</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press. Grundy. P. 2000. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Doing Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hilman. Herman. Widya. 2019. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Politeness Principle Maxims Found in Big Hero 6 Movie.</span><span class="font2"> HKPB Nommensen of University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Istvan Kenesei. Robert. 2001. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Perspectives on Semantics, Pragmatics, and Discourse</span><span class="font2">. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Microsoft Encarta. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dies after Long Battle with Wikipedia</span><span class="font2">. The New York Times.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Maulana. Erni. 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Maxims of Politeness on Alice in Wonderland Movie</span><span class="font2">. Gunadarma University, Faculty of Letters and Culture.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mahmood. Huda. 2020. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Leech’s Politeness Maxims in Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice. (Indonesian Journal of English Language Studies).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Stephen F. 2004. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dialogue as a Means of Collective Communication</span><span class="font2">. New York. Kluwer Academic Publisher.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Turner, V. 1969. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Ritual Process. Structure and Anti-Structure.</span><span class="font2"> Brunswick and London: Aldine Transaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ni Wayan Pramiwidari. 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Maxims in the Motive the Forest</span><span class="font2">. Udayana University, Faculty of Arts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wang Jia. Wei FeiFei. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Application of Politeness Principle in the Analysis of Drama: Take Teahouse as an Example</span><span class="font2">. Shandong Normal University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wardaugh, 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. Blackwell Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Volosinov. 1986</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language</span><span class="font2">. Seminar Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, G. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>AUTHOR PROFILE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Bagus Teresna Binaning Artha </span><span class="font2">is a 2018 English Department student of Udayana University. During his college, he tried to take a part in several committee activities to increase relations with other people, and the results were quite satisfactory. And now in 2022, he is scrambles to finish his undergraduate studies at the beloved campus in Faculty of Humanities.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">99</span></p>